Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CAX: C ELLULAR AUTOMATA ACCELERATED IN JAX
 Maxence Faldor                                       Antoine Cully
 Department of Computing                              Department of Computing
 Imperial College London                              Imperial College London
 London, United Kingdom                               London, United Kingdom
 m.faldor22@imperial.ac.uk                            a.cully@imperial.ac.uk



                                           A BSTRACT
         Cellular automata have become a cornerstone for investigating emergence and
         self-organization across diverse scientific disciplines. However, the absence of
         a hardware-accelerated cellular automata library limits the exploration of new re-
         search directions, hinders collaboration, and impedes reproducibility. In this work,
         we introduce CAX (Cellular Automata Accelerated in JAX), a high-performance
         and flexible open-source library designed to accelerate cellular automata research.
         CAX delivers cutting-edge performance through hardware acceleration while
         maintaining flexibility through its modular architecture, intuitive API, and support
         for both discrete and continuous cellular automata in arbitrary dimensions. We
         demonstrate CAX’s performance and flexibility through a wide range of bench-
         marks and applications. From classic models like elementary cellular automata
         and Conway’s Game of Life to advanced applications such as growing neural cel-
         lular automata and self-classifying MNIST digits, CAX speeds up simulations up
         to 2,000 times faster. Furthermore, we demonstrate CAX’s potential to accelerate
         research by presenting a collection of three novel cellular automata experiments,
         each implemented in just a few lines of code thanks to the library’s modular archi-
         tecture. Notably, we show that a simple one-dimensional cellular automaton can
         outperform GPT-4 on the 1D-ARC challenge.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Emergence is a fundamental concept that has captivated thinkers across various fields of human
inquiry, including philosophy, science and art (Holland, 2000). This fascinating phenomenon oc-
curs when a complex entity exhibits properties that its constituent parts do not possess individually.
From the collective intelligence of ant colonies to the formation of snowflakes, self-organization
and emergence manifest in myriad ways. The study of self-organization and emergence holds the
promise to unravel deep mysteries, from the origin of life to the development of conciousness.
Cellular Automata (CA) are models of computation that exemplify how complex patterns and so-
phisticated behaviors can arise from simple components interacting through basic rules. Originating
from the work of Ulam and von Neumann in the 1940s (Neumann & Burks, 1966), these systems
gained prominence with Conway’s Game of Life in the 1970s (Gardner, 1970) and Wolfram’s sys-
tematic studies in the 1980s (Wolfram, 2002). The discovery that even elementary cellular automata
can be Turing-complete underscores their expressiveness (Cook, 2004). CAs serve as a powerful
abstraction for investigating self-organization and emergence, offering insights into complex phe-
nomena across scientific domains, from physics and biology to computer science and artificial life.
In recent years, the integration of machine learning techniques with cellular automata has opened
new avenues for research in morphogenesis (Mordvintsev et al., 2020) and self-organization (Ran-
dazzo et al., 2020; 2021; Najarro et al., 2022). Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) represent a key ad-
vancement in this field, using differentiable neural networks to learn update rules through gradient-
based optimization rather than relying on manual design. Recent works have combined NCA with
advanced architectures like Convolutional Neural Networks (Pajouheshgar et al., 2023), Graph Neu-
ral Networks (Grattarola et al., 2021) and Vision Transformers (Tesfaldet et al., 2022). The conver-
gence of machine learning and cellular automata research not only deepened our understanding of
complex systems but also underscored the growing computational demands of CA experiments.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Discrete Cellular Automata       Continuous Cellular Automata    Neural Cellular Automata


                         Figure 1: Cellular Automata types supported in CAX.

Despite their conceptual simplicity, cellular automata simulations can be computationally intensive,
especially when scaling to higher dimensions with large numbers of cells or implementing backprop-
agation through time for NCAs. Moreover, the implementation of CA in research settings has often
been fragmented, with individual researchers frequently reimplementing basic functionalities, cre-
ating custom implementations across various deep learning frameworks such as TensorFlow, JAX,
and PyTorch. As the field continues to grow and attract increasing interest, there is a pressing need
for a unified, robust library that facilitates collaboration, reproducibility, fast experimentation and
exploration of new research directions.
In response to these challenges and opportunities, we present CAX: Cellular Automata Accelerated
in JAX, an open-source library with cutting-edge performance, designed to provide a flexible and
efficient framework for cellular automata research. CAX is built on JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018),
a high-performance numerical computing library, enabling to speed up cellular automata simula-
tions through massive parallelization across various hardware accelerators such as CPUs, GPUs, and
TPUs. CAX is flexible and supports both discrete and continuous cellular automata with any num-
ber of dimensions, accommodating classic models like elementary cellular automata and Conway’s
Game of Life, as well as modern variants such as Lenia and Neural Cellular Automata (Figure 1).
JAX offers efficient vectorization of CA rules, enabling millions of cell updates to be processed
simultaneously. It also provides automatic differentiation capabilities to backpropagate through
time efficiently, facilitating the training of Neural Cellular Automata. CAX can run experiments
with millions of cell updates in minutes, reducing computation times by up to 2,000 times compared
to traditional implementations in our benchmark. This performance boost opens up new possibilities
for large-scale CA experiments that were previously computationally prohibitive.
CAX’s flexibility and potential to accelerate research is showcased through three novel cellular
automata experiments. Thanks to CAX’s modular architecture, each of these experiments is imple-
mented in just a few lines of code, significantly reducing the barrier to entry for cellular automata
research. Notably, we show that a simple one-dimensional cellular automaton implemented with
CAX outperforms GPT-4 on the 1D-ARC challenge (Xu et al., 2024), see Section 5.3. Finally, to
support users and facilitate adoption, CAX comes with high-quality, diverse examples and compre-
hensive documentation. The list of implemented CAs is detailed in Table 1.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   C ELLULAR AUTOMATA

A cellular automaton is a simple model of computation consisting of a regular grid of cells, each in
a particular state. The grid can be in any finite number of dimensions. For each cell, a set of cells
called its neighborhood is defined relative to the specified cell. The grid is updated at discrete time
steps according to a fixed rule that determines the new state of each cell based on its current state
and the states of the cells in its neighborhood.
A CA is defined by a tuple (L, S, N , ϕ), where L is the d-dimensional lattice or grid with c channels,
S is the cell state set, N ⊂ L is the neighborhood of the origin, and ϕ : S N → S is the local rule.
A mapping from the grid to the cell state set S : L → S is called a configuration or pattern. In
this work, we will simply refer to it by the state of the CA. S(x) represents the state of a cell
x ∈ L. Additionally, we denote the neighborhood of a cell x ∈ L by Nx = {x + n, n ∈ N }, and
S(Nx ) = {S(n), n ∈ Nx }.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The global rule Φ : S L → S L applies the local rule uniformly to all cells in the lattice and is defined
such that, for all x in L, Φ(S)(x) = ϕ(S(Nx )). A cellular automaton is initialized with a state S0 .
Then, the state is updated according to the global rule Φ at each discrete time step t ∈ N, to give,
                                    S1 = Φ(S0 ), S2 = Φ(S1 ), . . .

The close connection between CA and recurrent convolutional neural networks has been observed
by numerous researchers (Gilpin, 2019; Wulff & Hertz, 1992; Mordvintsev et al., 2020; Chan, 2020).
For example, the general NCA architecture introduced by Mordvintsev et al. (2020) can be concep-
tualized as a “recurrent residual convolutional neural network with per-cell dropout”.

2.2   C ONTROLLABLE C ELLULAR AUTOMATA

A controllable cellular automaton (CCA) is a generalization of CA that incorporates the ability to
accept external inputs at each time step. CCAs formalize the concept of Goal-Guided NCA that has
been introduced in the literature by Sudhakaran et al. (2022). The external inputs can modify the
behavior of CCAs, offering the possibility to respond dynamically to changing conditions or control
signals while maintaining the fundamental principles of cellular automata.
A CCA is defined by a tuple (L, S, I, N , ϕ), where I is the input set and ϕ : S N × I N → S is the
controllable local rule. A mapping from the grid to the input set I : L → I is called the input. I(x)
represents the input of a cell x ∈ L. Similarly to the state, we denote I(Nx ) = {I(n), n ∈ Nx }.
The controllable global rule Φ : S L × I L → S L is defined such that, for all x in L, Φ(S, I)(x) =
ϕ(S(Nx ), I(Nx )). A controllable cellular automaton is initialized with an initial state S0 . Then, the
state is updated according to the controllable global rule Φ and a sequence of input (It )t≥0 at each
discrete time step t ∈ N, to give,
                                S1 = Φ(S0 , I0 ), S2 = Φ(S1 , I1 ), . . .

As discussed in Section 2.1, CAs can be conceptualized as recurrent convolutional neural networks.
However, traditional CAs lack the ability to take external inputs at each time step. CCAs extend
the capabilities of traditional CAs by making them responsive to external inputs, akin to recurrent
neural networks processing sequential data. CCAs bridge the gap between recurrent convolutional
neural networks and cellular automata, opening up new possibilities for modeling complex systems
that exhibit both autonomous emergent behavior and responsiveness to external control.

2.3   R ELATED W ORK

The field of CA has spawned numerous tools and libraries to support research and experimentation,
with CellPyLib (Antunes, 2021) emerging as one of the most popular and versatile options. This
Python library offers a simple yet powerful interface for working with 1- and 2-dimensional CA,
supporting both discrete and continuous states, making it an ideal baseline for comparative studies
and further development. While it provides implementations of classic CA models like Conway’s
Game of Life and Wireworld, CellPyLib is not hardware-accelerated and does not support the train-
ing of neural cellular automata. Golly is a cross-platform application for exploring Conway’s Game
of Life and many other types of cellular automata. Golly’s features include 3D CA rules, custom
rule loading, and scripting via Lua or Python. While powerful and versatile for traditional CA, Golly
is not designed for hardware acceleration or integration with modern machine learning frameworks.
The recent surge in artificial intelligence has increased the availability of computational resources,
and encouraged the development of sophisticated tools such as JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018), a high-
performance numerical computing library with automatic differentiation and JIT compilation. A
rich ecosystem of specialized libraries has emerged around JAX, such as Flax (Heek et al., 2024)
for neural networks, RLax (DeepMind et al., 2020) for reinforcement learning, and EvoSax (Lange,
2022), EvoJax (Tang et al., 2022) and QDax (Chalumeau et al., 2023) for evolutionary algorithms.
In the realm of cellular automata, there have been efforts to implement specific CA models using
JAX. For instance, EvoJax (Tang et al., 2022) and Leniax (Giraud, 2022) both provide a hardware-
accelerated Lenia implementation. Biomaker CA (Randazzo & Mordvintsev, 2023), a specific CA
model focusing on biological pattern formation, further demonstrates the potential of JAX in CA


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            State
       Step N                                                                                           Step N+1
                                  Perceive                         Update


                   Neighborhood              Kernel
                                                      Perception                            New State
                                                        Vector

                                                                                    Input


Figure 2: High-level architecture of CAX, illustrating the modular design with perceive and update
modules. This flexible structure supports various CA types across multiple dimensions. (Adapted
from Mordvintsev et al. (2020) under CC-BY 4.0 license.)


research. Finally, various GitHub repositories replicate results from neural cellular automata pa-
pers, but these implementations are typically narrow in focus. Recent advancements in continuous
cellular automata research have also benefited from JAX-based implementations. These include
Lenia (Chan, 2020) and Leniabreeder (Faldor & Cully, 2024), which have enabled large-scale sim-
ulations of open-ended evolution in continuous cellular automata (Chan, 2023).
While existing implementations demonstrate JAX’s potential in CA research, they also reveal sig-
nificant gaps in the field. Current tools are often specialized for specific CA types (e.g., discrete, 1-
and 2-dimensional), narrow in focus (e.g., replicating specific neural CA papers), or lack hardware
acceleration. This limitation underscores the need for a comprehensive, flexible, and efficient library
that can handle a broad spectrum of CA types while leveraging hardware acceleration. CAX aims
to address this gap by providing a versatile, JAX-based tool to accelerate progress across the entire
landscape of cellular automata research.

3     CAX: C ELLULAR AUTOMATA ACCELERATED IN JAX
CAX is a high-performance and flexible open-source library designed to accelerate cellular automata
research. In this section, we detail CAX’s architecture, design and key features. At its core, CAX
leverages JAX and Flax (Heek et al., 2024), capitalizing on the well-established connection between
CA and recurrent convolutional neural networks. This synergy, discussed in Section 2, allows CAX
to harness advancements in machine learning to accelerate CA research. CAX offers a modular and
intuitive design through a user-friendly interface, supporting both discrete and continuous cellular
automata across any number of dimensions. This flexibility enables researchers to seamlessly tran-
sition between different CA within a single, unified framework (Table 1). We invite readers to ex-
perience CAX’s capabilities firsthand by accessing our examples as interactive notebooks in Google
Colab, conveniently linked in the README of the repository https://github.com/maxencefaldor/cax.

3.1   A RCHITECTURE AND D ESIGN

CAX introduces a unifying framework for all cellular automata types. This flexible architecture is
built upon two key components: the perceive module and the update module, see Figure 2. To-
gether, these modules define the local rule of the CA. At each time step, this local rule is applied
uniformly to all cells in the grid, generating the next global state of the system, as explained in Sec-
tion 2.1. This modular approach not only provides a clear separation of concerns but also facilitates
easy experimentation and extension of existing CA models.
Building on the controllable CA framework introduced in Section 2.2, our architecture generalizes
the neural cellular automata approach to recurrent convolutional neural architectures, enabling seam-
less integration of external inputs and control signals. By implementing both modules using standard
machine learning components from Flax, CAX makes it straightforward to experiment with various
neural architectures while maintaining the cellular automata paradigm - from simple convolutional
layers to sophisticated attention mechanisms.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                @nnx.jit
                                def step(self, state: State, input: Input | None = None) -> State:
                                    """Perform a single step of the CA.

                                       Args:
                                           state: Current state.
                                           input: Optional input.

                                       Returns:
                                           Updated state.

                                       """
                                       perception = self.perceive(state)
                                       state = self.update(state, perception, input)
                                       return state

The architecture of CAX allows for easy composition of different perceive and update modules,
enabling the creation of a wide variety of cellular automata models. This modular design also
facilitates experimentation with new types of cellular automata by allowing users to define custom
perceive and update modules while leveraging the existing infrastructure provided by the library.

3.1.1                                  P ERCEIVE MODULE

The perceive module in CAX is responsible for gathering information from the neighborhood of each
cell. This information is then used by the update module to determine the cell’s next state. CAX
provides several perception mechanisms, including Convolutional Perception, Depthwise Convolu-
tional Perception and Fast Fourier Transform Perception. The perceive modules are designed to be
flexible and can be customized for different types of cellular automata.

3.1.2                                  U PDATE MODULE

The update module in CAX is responsible for determining the next state of each cell based on its
current state and the information gathered by the perceive module. CAX provides several update
mechanisms, including MLP Update, Residual Update and Neural Cellular Automata Update. Like
the perceive modules, the update modules are designed to be flexible and can be customized for
different cellular automata models.

3.2                                   F EATURES

3.2.1                                  P ERFORMANCE

                                                 Cellular Automata Simulation                                                                             Neural Cellular Automata Training
                                                                                                                                          140
                                105                                                CAX                                                               CAX
                                                                                                    Training steps per second (steps/s)


                                                                                   CellPyLib                                              120        TensorFlow
Steps per second (log step/s)


                                104
                                                                                                                                          100


                                103                                                                                                        80

                                                                                                                                           60
                                102
                                                                                                                                           40
                                101
                                                                                                                                           20

                                100                                                                                                         0
                                       Conway's Game of Life     Elementary Cellular Automata                                                Growing Neural Cellular Automata   Self-classifying MNIST Digits



Figure 3: Performance benchmarks of CAX. Left: Simulation speed comparison between CAX and
CellPyLib for classical cellular automata. CAX demonstrates a 1,400x speed-up for Elementary
Cellular Automata and a 2,000x speed-up for Conway’s Game of Life. Right: Training speed
comparison between CAX and the official TensorFlow implementation for neural cellular automata
experiments. CAX achieves a 1.5x speed-up on the Self-classifying MNIST Digits task.


                                                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CAX leverages JAX’s powerful vectorization and scan capabilities to achieve remarkable speed im-
provements over existing implementations. Our benchmarks, conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX
A6000 GPU, demonstrate significant performance gains across various cellular automata models.
For Elementary Cellular Automata, CAX achieves a 1,400x speed-up compared to CellPyLib. In
simulations of Conway’s Game of Life, a 2,000x speed-up is observed relative to CellPyLib.
Furthermore, in the domain of Neural Cellular Automata, specifically the Self-classifying MNIST
Digits experiment, CAX demonstrates a 1.5x speed-up over the official TensorFlow implementation.
These performance improvements, illustrated in Figure 3, are made possible by JAX’s efficient
vectorization and the use of its scan operation for iterative computations. The following code snippet
exemplifies how CAX utilizes JAX’s scan function to optimize multiple CA steps:
    def step(carry: tuple[CA, State], input: Input | None) -> tuple[tuple
        [CA, State], State]:
        ca, state = carry
        state = ca.step(state, input)
        return (ca, state), state if all_steps else None

    (_, state), states = nnx.scan(
        step,
        in_axes=(nnx.Carry, input_in_axis),
        length=num_steps,
    )((self, state), input)

This optimized approach allows for rapid execution of complex CA simulations, opening new pos-
sibilities for large-scale experiments and real-time applications.

3.2.2   U TILITIES

CAX offers a rich set of utility functions to support various aspects of cellular automata research. A
high-quality implementation of the sampling pool technique is provided, which is crucial for training
stable growing neural cellular automata (Mordvintsev et al., 2020). To facilitate the training of unsu-
pervised neural cellular automata and enable generative modeling within the CA framework, CAX
incorporates a variational autoencoder implementation. Additionally, the library provides utilities
for handling image and emoji inputs, allowing for diverse and visually engaging CA experiments.
These utilities are designed to streamline common tasks in CA research, allowing researchers to
focus on their specific experiments rather than reimplementing standard components.

3.2.3   D OCUMENTATION AND E XAMPLES

CAX prioritizes user experience and ease of adoption through comprehensive documentation and ex-
amples. The entire library is thoroughly documented, with typed classes and functions accompanied
by descriptive docstrings. This ensures users have access to detailed information about CAX’s func-
tionality and promotes clear, type-safe code. To help users get started and showcase advanced usage,
CAX offers a collection of tutorial-style interactive Colab notebooks. These notebooks demonstrate
various applications of the library and can be run directly in a web browser without any prior setup,
making it easy for new users to explore CAX’s capabilities.
For easy access and integration into existing projects, CAX can be installed directly via PyPI, al-
lowing users to quickly incorporate it into their Python environments. The library maintains high
standards of code quality, with extensive unit tests covering a significant portion of the codebase.
Continuous Integration (CI) pipelines ensure that all code changes are thoroughly tested and linted
before integration. These features collectively make CAX not just a powerful tool for cellular au-
tomata research, but also an accessible and user-friendly library suitable for both novice and experi-
enced researchers in the field.


4    I MPLEMENTED C ELLULAR AUTOMATA AND E XPERIMENTS

To showcase the versatility and capabilities of the library, we show that CAX supports a wide array
of cellular automata, ranging from classical discrete models to advanced continuous CAs and in-


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cluding neural implementations. In this section, we provide an overview of these implementations,
demonstrating the library’s flexibility in handling various dimensions and types (Table 1).
We begin with three classic models that highlight CAX’s ability to support both discrete and con-
tinuous systems across different dimensions. The Elementary CA, a foundational one-dimensional
discrete model studied extensively by Wolfram (2002), demonstrates CAX’s efficiency in handling
simple discrete systems. Conway’s Game of Life (Gardner, 1970), a well-known two-dimensional
model, showcases CAX’s capability in simulating complex emergent behaviors in discrete space.
Lenia (Chan, 2019), a continuous, multi-dimensional model, illustrates CAX’s flexibility in sup-
porting more complex, continuous systems in arbitrary dimensions.
Furthermore, we have replicated four prominent NCA experiments that have gained significant at-
tention in the field. The Growing NCA (Mordvintsev et al., 2020) demonstrates CAX’s ability to
handle complex growing patterns and showcases the implementation of the sampling pool technique,
crucial for stable growth and regeneration. The Growing Conditional NCA (Sudhakaran et al., 2022)
utilizes CAX’s Controllable CA capabilities, as introduced in Section 2.2 allowing for targeted pat-
tern generation. The Growing Unsupervised NCA (Palm et al., 2021) highlights CAX’s versatility
in incorporating advanced machine learning techniques, specifically the use of a Variational Au-
toencoder within the NCA framework. The Self-classifying MNIST Digits (Randazzo et al., 2020)
showcases CAX’s capacity for self-organizing systems with global coordination via local interac-
tions, contrasting with growth-based tasks.
These implementations not only validate CAX’s performance and flexibility but also serve as valu-
able resources for researchers looking to build upon or extend these models. We complement these
implementations with three novel experiments, which will be detailed in the following section.

                     Table 1: Overview of Cellular Automata implemented in CAX

 Cellular Automata                                 Reference                   Type         Dimensions
 Elementary Cellular Automata                      Wolfram (2002)              Discrete     1D
 Conway’s Game of Life                             Gardner (1970)              Discrete     2D
 Lenia                                             Chan (2019)                 Continuous   ND
 Growing Neural Cellular Automata                  Mordvintsev et al. (2020)   Neural       2D
 Growing Conditional Neural Cellular Automata      Sudhakaran et al. (2022)    Neural       2D
 Growing Unsupervised Neural Cellular Automata     Palm et al. (2021)          Neural       2D
 Self-classifying MNIST Digits                     Randazzo et al. (2020)      Neural       2D
 Diffusing Neural Cellular Automata                Section 5.1                 Neural       2D
 Self-autoencoding MNIST Digits                    Section 5.2                 Neural       3D
 1D-ARC Neural Cellular Automata                   Section 5.3                 Neural       1D


5     N OVEL N EURAL C ELLULAR AUTOMATA E XPERIMENTS

5.1   D IFFUSING N EURAL C ELLULAR AUTOMATA

In this experiment, we introduce a novel training procedure for NCA, inspired by diffusion models.
Traditionally, NCAs have predominantly relied on growth-based training paradigms, where the state
is initialized with a single alive cell and trained to grow towards a target pattern (Sudhakaran et al.,
2022; Mordvintsev et al., 2020; Palm et al., 2021). However, this approach often faces challenges in
maintaining stability and achieving consistent results (Mordvintsev et al., 2020). The conventional


Figure 4: Inspired by diffusion models, the NCA learns to denoise images over a fixed number of
steps. The process evolves from pure noise (left) to a target pattern (right).


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


NCA training method typically employs a “sample pool” strategy to address stability issues and en-
courage the formation of attractors. This approach involves maintaining a diverse pool of interme-
diate states, sampling from this pool for training, and periodically updating it with newly generated
states. By exposing the NCA to various intermediate configurations and consistently guiding them
towards the target pattern, the sample pool method helps shape the system’s dynamics, making the
desired pattern a more robust attractor in the state space.
Our proposed diffusion-inspired approach offers several advantages over the traditional growing
mechanism. First, unlike the growing mechanism, our diffusion-based approach does not require
a sample pool, which simplifies the training process and reduces memory requirements, making it
more efficient and scalable. Second, our diffusion-inspired approach naturally guides the NCA to-
wards more stable dynamics, effectively creating a stronger attractor basin around the target pattern.
In Figure 5, we compare the regeneration capabilities of growing NCAs with diffusing NCAs. We
create an artificial damage by cutting the tail of the gecko and observe that diffusing NCA demon-
strate emergent regenerating capabilities.


                    Growing NCA                                        Diffusing NCA


Figure 5: Diffusing NCAs demonstrate emergent regenerating capabilities compared to growing
NCAs that are unstable if not trained explicitely to regenerate and recover from damage.



5.2   S ELF - AUTOENCODING MNIST D IGITS

In this experiment, we draw inspiration from
Randazzo et al. (2020) where an NCA is trained
to classify MNIST digits through local inter-
actions. In their work, each cell (pixel) of an
MNIST digit learns to output the correct digit
label through local communication with neigh-
boring cells. The NCA demonstrates the abil-
ity to reach global consensus on digit classi-
fication, maintain this classification over time,
and adapt to perturbations or mutations of the
digit shape. Their model showcases emergent         Figure 6: The 3D NCA is initialized with an
behavior, where simple local rules lead to com-     MNIST digit (left). The NCA learns to recon-
plex global patterns, analogous to biological       struct the digit on the opposite red face (right).
systems achieving anatomical homeostasis.
Building upon this concept, we propose a novel experiment that could be termed “Self-autoencoding
MNIST Digits”. In this setup, we utilize a three-dimensional NCA initialized with an MNIST digit
on one face, see Figure 6. The objective of the NCA is to learn a rule that will replicate the MNIST
digit on its opposite face (red face). However, we introduce a critical constraint: in the middle of the
NCA, there is a mask where cells cannot be updated, effectively preventing direct communication
between the two faces. Crucially, we allow for a single-cell wide hole in the center of this mask,
creating a minimal channel for information transfer.
To successfully replicate the MNIST digit on the opposite face, the NCA must develop a sophis-
ticated rule set that accomplishes two key tasks. First, it must encode the MNIST image into a
compressed form that can pass through the single-cell hole. Second, it must then decode this infor-
mation on the other side to accurately reconstruct the original digit. A notable aspect of this result is
that each cell in the NCA performs an identical local update rule, contributing to the system’s over-
all emergent behavior. As shown in Figure 7, the NCA successfully reconstructs MNIST digits on


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the red face, demonstrating its ability to encode, transmit, and decode complex visual information
through a minimal channel. This experiment highlights the power of NCAs in learning complex
information processing tasks using simple, uniform rules, while demonstrating CAX’s ability to
support sophisticated 3-dimensional CA rules.


Figure 7: The top row shows the original digits from the test set, while the bottom row displays the
corresponding reconstructions on the red face of the NCA.


5.3   1D-ARC N EURAL C ELLULAR AUTOMATA

In this experiment, we train a one-dimensional NCA on the 1D-ARC dataset (Xu et al., 2024). The
1D-ARC dataset is a novel adaptation of the original Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (Chollet,
2019) (ARC), designed to simplify and streamline research in artificial intelligence and language
models. By reducing the dimensionality of input and output images to a single row of pixels, 1D-
ARC maintains the core knowledge priors of ARC while significantly reducing task complexity. For
example, the tasks in 1D-ARC include “Static movement by 3 pixels”, “Fill”, and “Recolor by Size
Comparison”. For a full description of the dataset, see the project page. Our experiment focuses on
training an NCA to solve the 1D-ARC tasks. Each input sample consists of a single row of colored
pixels and a corresponding target row. The NCA’s objective is to transform the input into the target
through successive applications of its rule. We consider a task successful if all pixels in the NCA’s
output match the target pixels after a predetermined fixed number of steps.


                                                         Move           Move 2
        Move 1          Move 2          Move 3                                            Fill
                                                        Dynamic         Towards


        Padded                                                                         Denoise
                        Hollow            Flip            Mirror        Denoise
          Fill                                                                         Multicolor


        Pattern       Pattern Copy     Recolor by       Recolor by   Recolor by Size
                                                                                        Scaling
         Copy          Multicolor      Odd Even           Size        Comparison



Figure 8: 1D-ARC NCA space-time diagrams for each task. The top row of pixels in each image is
the input. Subsequent rows of pixels show the NCA’s intermediate steps as it attempts to transform
the input into the target. The bottom row of pixels represents the NCA’s final output after a fixed
number of steps, which is compared to the target for task completion.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The primary goal of this experiment is for the     Table 2: GPT-4 and NCA accuracy in percentage on
NCA to learn a generalizable rule from the         all tasks from the 1D-ARC test set. The GPT-4 val-
training set, enabling it to solve unseen ex-      ues are direct-grid approach, directly taken from Xu
amples in the test sets. This challenge tests      et al. (2024).
the NCA’s ability to infer abstract patterns and
apply them to new situations, a key aspect of       Task                            GPT-4     NCA
human-like reasoning. Figure 8 illustrates the
NCA’s “reasoning” on all 1D-ARC tasks. The          Move 1                          66        100
visualization shows the input at the top, in-       Move 2                          26        100
termediate steps, and final output of the NCA       Move 3                          24        100
at the bottom of each image, and is called a        Move Dynamic                    22        12
space-time diagram.                                 Move 2 Towards                  34        98
                                                    Fill                            66        66
To evaluate the NCA’s performance, we com-          Padded Fill                     26        28
pare it to GPT-4, a state-of-the-art language       Hollow                          56        98
model, on the 1D-ARC test set. Table 2              Flip                            70        28
presents the accuracy of the NCA and GPT-           Mirror                          20        6
4 across 18 different task types. The GPT-          Denoise                         36        100
4 values are direct-grid results, directly taken    Denoise Multicolor              60        58
from Xu et al. (2024). Notably, the NCA out-        Pattern Copy                    36        100
performs GPT-4 on several tasks, particularly       Pattern Copy Multicolor         38        100
those involving movement, pattern copying,          Recolor by Odd Even             32        0
and denoising. Overall, the NCA achieves a          Recolor by Size                 28        0
total accuracy of 60.12% compared to GPT-           Recolor by Size Comparison      20        0
4’s 41.56%, as reported by Xu et al. (2024).        Scaling                         88        88
These results demonstrate the potential of    Total                           41.56     60.12
NCAs in solving abstract reasoning tasks,
even outperforming sophisticated language models in certain domains. The NCA’s success in tasks
like “Move 3” and “Pattern Copy Multicolor” showcases its ability to learn complex spatial trans-
formations and apply them consistently.
However, the NCA struggles with tasks involving more abstract concepts like odd-even distinctions
or size comparisons. This limitation suggests areas for future improvement, possibly through the
integration of additional priors or more sophisticated architectures. While the average of NCA
outperforms GPT4, it is interesting to note that GPT4 performs equally in every task, while NCA
completely fails on some of them (0% accuracy). This opens interesting questions for future work.
This experiment not only highlights the capabilities of NCAs in abstract reasoning tasks but also
demonstrates CAX’s flexibility in implementing and training NCA models for diverse applications.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce CAX: Cellular Automata Accelerated in JAX, an open-source library,
designed to provide a high-performance and flexible framework to accelerate cellular automata re-
search. CAX provides substantial speed improvements over existing implementations, enabling
researchers to run complex simulations and experiments more efficiently.
CAX’s flexible architecture supports a wide range of cellular automata types across multiple di-
mensions, from classic discrete models to advanced continuous and neural variants. Its modular
design, based on customizable perceive and update components, facilitates rapid experimentation
and development of novel CA models, enabling efficient exploration of new ideas.
CAX’s comprehensive documentation, example notebooks, and seamless integration with machine
learning workflows not only lower the barrier to entry but also promote reproducibility and collabo-
ration in cellular automata research. We hope this accessibility will accelerate the pace of discovery
by attracting new researchers.
In the future, we envision several exciting directions, such as expanding the model zoo to implement
and optimize a wider range of cellular automata models, and exploring synergies between cellular
automata and other approaches, such as reinforcement learning or evolutionary algorithms.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Gabriel Béna and Arthur Braida for insightful discussions and feedback. We also ac-
knowledge the financial support provided by a grant from G-Research.

R EFERENCES
Luis M. Antunes. Cellpylib: A python library for working with cellular automata. Journal of Open
  Source Software, 6(67):3608, 2021. doi: 10.21105/joss.03608. URL https://doi.org/10.
  21105/joss.03608.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/jax-ml/jax.
Felix Chalumeau, Bryan Lim, Raphael Boige, Maxime Allard, Luca Grillotti, Manon Flageat,
  Valentin Macé, Arthur Flajolet, Thomas Pierrot, and Antoine Cully. QDax: A Library for Quality-
  Diversity and Population-based Algorithms with Hardware Acceleration, August 2023. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03665. arXiv:2308.03665 [cs].
Bert Wang-Chak Chan. Lenia - Biology of Artificial Life. Complex Systems, 28(3):251–286,
  October 2019. ISSN 08912513. doi: 10.25088/ComplexSystems.28.3.251. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1812.05433. arXiv:1812.05433 [nlin].
Bert Wang-Chak Chan. Lenia and Expanded Universe. In The 2020 Conference on Artificial Life, pp.
  221–229, 2020. doi: 10.1162/isal a 00297. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.03742.
  arXiv:2005.03742 [nlin].
Bert Wang-Chak Chan. Towards Large-Scale Simulations of Open-Ended Evolution in Con-
  tinuous Cellular Automata, April 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05639.
  arXiv:2304.05639 [nlin].
François Chollet. On the Measure of Intelligence, November 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1911.01547. arXiv:1911.01547 [cs].
Matthew Cook. Universality in Elementary Cellular Automata. Complex Systems, 15(1):1–40,
 March 2004. ISSN 08912513. doi: 10.25088/ComplexSystems.15.1.1. URL https://www.
 complex-systems.com/abstracts/v15_i01_a01/.
DeepMind, Igor Babuschkin, Kate Baumli, Alison Bell, Surya Bhupatiraju, Jake Bruce, Peter
  Buchlovsky, David Budden, Trevor Cai, Aidan Clark, Ivo Danihelka, Antoine Dedieu, Clau-
  dio Fantacci, Jonathan Godwin, Chris Jones, Ross Hemsley, Tom Hennigan, Matteo Hessel,
  Shaobo Hou, Steven Kapturowski, Thomas Keck, Iurii Kemaev, Michael King, Markus Kunesch,
  Lena Martens, Hamza Merzic, Vladimir Mikulik, Tamara Norman, George Papamakarios, John
  Quan, Roman Ring, Francisco Ruiz, Alvaro Sanchez, Laurent Sartran, Rosalia Schneider, Eren
  Sezener, Stephen Spencer, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Miloš Stanojević, Wojciech Stokowiec, Luyu
  Wang, Guangyao Zhou, and Fabio Viola. The DeepMind JAX Ecosystem, 2020. URL http:
  //github.com/deepmind.
Maxence Faldor and Antoine Cully. Toward artificial open-ended evolution within lenia using
 quality-diversity. Artificial Life, 2024.
Martin Gardner. Mathematical games. Scientific American, 223(4):120–123, 1970. ISSN 00368733,
 19467087. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/24927642.
William Gilpin. Cellular automata as convolutional neural networks. Physical Review E, 100(3):
 032402, September 2019. ISSN 2470-0045, 2470-0053. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.100.032402.
 URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02942. arXiv:1809.02942 [cond-mat, physics:nlin,
 physics:physics].
Morgan Giraud. Leniax: efficient and differentiable lenia simulator, 2022.       URL http://
 github.com/morgangiraud/leniax.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Daniele Grattarola, Lorenzo Livi, and Cesare Alippi. Learning Graph Cellular Automata. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 20983–20994. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  af87f7cdcda223c41c3f3ef05a3aaeea-Abstract.html.
Jonathan Heek, Anselm Levskaya, Avital Oliver, Marvin Ritter, Bertrand Rondepierre, Andreas
  Steiner, and Marc van Zee. Flax: A neural network library and ecosystem for JAX, 2024. URL
  http://github.com/google/flax.
J.H. Holland. Emergence: From Chaos to Order. Popular science / Oxford University Press. Oxford
   University Press, 2000. ISBN 9780192862112. URL https://books.google.co.uk/
   books?id=VjKtpujRGuAC.
Robert Tjarko Lange. evosax: JAX-based Evolution Strategies, December 2022. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2212.04180. arXiv:2212.04180 [cs].
Alexander Mordvintsev, Ettore Randazzo, Eyvind Niklasson, and Michael Levin. Growing neural
  cellular automata. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00023. https://distill.pub/2020/growing-ca.
Elias Najarro, Shyam Sudhakaran, Claire Glanois, and Sebastian Risi. HyperNCA: Growing Devel-
  opmental Networks with Neural Cellular Automata, April 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2204.11674. arXiv:2204.11674 [cs].
John Von Neumann and Arthur W. Burks. Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata. University of
  Illinois Press, USA, 1966.
Ehsan Pajouheshgar, Yitao Xu, Tong Zhang, and Sabine Süsstrunk. DyNCA: Real-Time Dynamic
  Texture Synthesis Using Neural Cellular Automata. In 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 20742–20751, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June
  2023. IEEE. ISBN 9798350301298. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.01987. URL https:
  //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10204488/.
Rasmus Berg Palm, Miguel González Duque, Shyam Sudhakaran, and Sebastian Risi. Variational
  Neural Cellular Automata. October 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  7fFO4cMBx_9.
Ettore Randazzo and Alexander Mordvintsev. Biomaker CA: a Biome Maker project using Cellular
  Automata, July 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09320. arXiv:2307.09320
  [cs].
Ettore Randazzo, Alexander Mordvintsev, Eyvind Niklasson, Michael Levin, and Sam Grey-
  danus.      Self-classifying mnist digits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00027.002.
  https://distill.pub/2020/selforg/mnist.
Ettore Randazzo, Alexander Mordvintsev, Eyvind Niklasson, and Michael Levin. Adversarial
  reprogramming of neural cellular automata. Distill, 2021. doi: 10.23915/distill.00027.004.
  https://distill.pub/selforg/2021/adversarial.
Shyam Sudhakaran, Elias Najarro, and Sebastian Risi. Goal-Guided Neural Cellular Automata:
  Learning to Control Self-Organising Systems, April 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2205.06806. arXiv:2205.06806 [cs].
Yujin Tang, Yingtao Tian, and David Ha. EvoJAX: Hardware-Accelerated Neuroevolution. In
  Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pp. 308–311,
  July 2022. doi: 10.1145/3520304.3528770. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05008.
  arXiv:2202.05008 [cs].
Mattie Tesfaldet, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Chris Pal. Attention-based Neural Cellular
 Automata. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8174–8186, Decem-
 ber 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
 hash/361e5112d2eca09513bbd266e4b2d2be-Abstract-Conference.html.
Stephen Wolfram. A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media, 2002. ISBN 1579550088. URL
  https://www.wolframscience.com.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N. Wulff and J A Hertz.    Learning Cellular Automaton Dynamics with Neural Net-
  works.   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 5. Morgan-
  Kaufmann, 1992. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/1992/hash/
  d6c651ddcd97183b2e40bc464231c962-Abstract.html.
Yudong Xu, Wenhao Li, Pashootan Vaezipoor, Scott Sanner, and Elias B. Khalil. LLMs and
  the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus: Successes, Failures, and the Importance of Object-
  based Representations, February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18354.
  arXiv:2305.18354 [cs].


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    H YPERPARAMETERS
This appendix provides detailed hyperparameters for the three novel neural cellular automata
(NCA) experiments introduced in Section 5. These hyperparameters govern the architecture,
training process, and simulation dynamics of each experiment. For further details on the
experimental setup, refer to the respective subsections in Section 5 or to the notebooks on
https://github.com/maxencefaldor/cax.

       Table 3: Hyperparameters for Diffusing Neural Cellular Automata (see Section 5.1)

                                Parameter              Value
                                Spatial dimensions     (72, 72)
                                Channel size           64
                                Number of kernels      3
                                Hidden size            256
                                Cell dropout rate      0.5
                                Batch size             8
                                Number of steps        64
                                Learning rate          0.001


        Table 4: Hyperparameters for Self-autoencoding MNIST Digits (see Section 5.2)

                               Parameter              Value
                               Spatial dimensions     (16, 16, 32)
                               Channel size           32
                               Number of kernels      4
                               Hidden size            256
                               Cell dropout rate      0.5
                               Batch size             8
                               Number of steps        96
                               Learning rate          0.001
                               Pool size              1,024


       Table 5: Hyperparameters for 1D-ARC Neural Cellular Automata (see Section 5.3)

                                 Parameter              Value
                                 Spatial dimensions     (96)
                                 Channel size           64
                                 Number of kernels      2
                                 Hidden size            256
                                 Cell dropout rate      0.5
                                 Batch size             8
                                 Number of steps        64
                                 Learning rate          0.001


                                               14
