Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G EOMETRY-AWARE A PPROACHES FOR BALANCING
P ERFORMANCE AND T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES IN
L INEAR BANDITS
 Yuwei Luo, Mohsen Bayati
 Graduate School of Business, Stanford University
 {yuweiluo,bayati}@stanford.edu



                                           A BSTRACT

         This paper is motivated by recent research in the d-dimensional stochastic linear
         bandit literature, which has revealed an unsettling discrepancy: algorithms like
         Thompson sampling and Greedy demonstrate promising empirical performance,
         yet this contrasts with their pessimistic theoretical regret bounds. The challenge
         arises from the fact that while these algorithms may perform poorly in certain
         problem instances, they generally excel in typical instances. To address this, we
         propose a new data-driven technique that tracks the geometric properties of the
         uncertainty ellipsoid around the main problem parameter. This methodology en-
         ables us to formulate a data-driven frequentist regret bound, which incorporates
         the geometric information, for a broad class of base algorithms, including Greedy,
         OFUL, and Thompson sampling. This result allows us to identify and “course-
         correct” problem instances in which the base algorithms perform poorly. √The
         course-corrected algorithms achieve the minimax optimal regret of order O(de    T)
         for a T -period decision-making scenario, effectively maintaining the desirable at-
         tributes of the base algorithms, including their empirical efficacy. We present
         simulation results to validate our findings using synthetic and real data.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Multi-armed bandits (MABs) provide a framework for studying the exploration-exploitation trade-
off in sequential decision-making, where a decision-maker selects actions and observes uncertain
rewards. This extends to contextual bandits with features or covariates, as shown in numerous
applications (Langford & Zhang, 2008; Li et al., 2010; Tewari & Murphy, 2017; Zhou et al., 2020;
Villar et al., 2015; Bastani & Bayati, 2020; Cohen et al., 2020). This paper focuses on a well-
studied class of models that captures both MABs and contextual bandits as special cases while
being amenable to theoretical analysis: the stochastic linear bandit (LB) problem. In this model,
the problem parameter θ⋆ represents an unknown vector in Rd , while the actions, also vectors in
Rd , yield noisy rewards with a mean equal to the inner product of θ⋆ and the chosen action. The
objective of a policy is to maximize the cumulative reward based on the observed data up to the
decision time. The policy’s performance is measured by the cumulative regret, which quantifies the
difference between the total expected rewards achieved by the policy and the maximum achievable
expected reward.
Achieving this objective necessitates striking a balance between exploration and exploitation. In the
context of LB, this entails selecting actions that aid in estimating the true parameter θ⋆ accurately
while obtaining optimal rewards. Various algorithms based on the optimism principle have been
developed to address this challenge, wherein the optimal action is chosen based on the upper con-
fidence bound (UCB) (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Auer, 2002; Dani et al., 2008; Rusmevichientong &
Tsitsiklis, 2010). Another popular strategy is Thompson sampling (TS), a Bayesian heuristic intro-
duced by Thompson (1933) that employs randomization to select actions according to the posterior
distribution of reward functions. Additionally, the Greedy policy that selects the myopically best
action is shown to be effective in contextual bandits (Kannan et al., 2018; Raghavan et al., 2018;
Hao et al., 2020; Bastani et al., 2021).


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the linear bandit setting, two regret types are considered. Bayesian regret treats parameter θ⋆ as
a random variable with a prior distribution, averaging regret over noise, algorithm randomness, and
parameter randomness, measuring expected performance across√parameter realizations. Russo &
Van Roy (2014) and Dong & Van Roy (2018) establish an O(d     e    T ) upper bound for the Bayesian
regret of the Thompson Sampling (TS) heuristic, referred to as LinTS, matching the minimax opti-
mal bound by Dani et al. (2008). Here, O   e denotes asymptotic order up to polylogarithmic factors.
Frequentist regret assumes fixed unknown parameter θ⋆ , averaging only over noise and algorithm √
randomness. The OFUL algorithm (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) achieves an optimal O(d        e     T)
frequentist regret bound.√However, TS-Freq, a frequentist LinTS variant with inflated posterior vari-
ance, only achieves O(d
√
                      e     dT ) (Agrawal & Goyal, 2013; Abeille et al., 2017), suboptimal by factor
  d. Hamidi & Bayati (2020a) confirms this inflation is necessary and LinTS’s frequentist regret
cannot be improved. The Greedy algorithm lacks theoretical guarantees for linear bandit problems
(Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2017), suggesting both LinTS and Greedy may perform suboptimally.
Despite the theoretical gaps, LinTS demonstrates strong empirical performance (Russo et al., 2018),
suggesting posterior distribution inflation may be unnecessary in most scenarios. Similarly, the
Greedy algorithm performs well in typical cases (Bietti et al., 2021). While optimism-based al-
gorithms are computationally expensive (generally NP-hard (Dani et al., 2008; Russo & Van Roy,
2014; Agrawal, 2019)), LinTS and Greedy maintain computational efficiency. This disparity be-
tween theoretical, computational, and empirical performance prompts two questions: Can we iden-
tify problematic instances for LinTS and Greedy in a data-driven way and apply ”course-correction”
to ensure competitive frequentist regret bounds? Can this be achieved while preserving their empir-
ical performance and computational efficiency? In this paper, we provide positive answers to both
questions. Specifically, we make the following contributions.
1. We develop a real-time geometric analysis technique for the d-dimensional confidence ellipsoid
surrounding θ⋆ . This method is crucial for maximizing the use of historical data, advancing be-
yond methods that capture only limited information from the confidence ellipsoid, such as a single
numerical value. Consequently, this facilitates a more precise “course-correction”.
2. We introduce a comprehensive family of algorithms, termed POFUL (encompassing OFUL,
LinTS, TS-Freq, and Greedy as specific instances), and derive a general, data-driven frequentist
regret bound for them. This bound is efficiently computable using data observed from previous
decision epochs.
3. We introduce course-corrected variants of LinTS and Greedy that achieve minimax optimal fre-
quentist regret. These adaptations maintain most of the desirable characteristics of the original
algorithms.

1.1   OTHER R ELATED L ITERATURE

Our work is closely related to three main research streams: methodological foundations of lin-
ear bandits, bandit algorithms utilizing spectral properties, and data-driven exploration techniques.
While these works share some similarities with our approach, we highlight the key differences and
the unique aspects of our methodology.
From a methodological perspective, our regret analysis builds upon the foundations laid by Abbasi-
Yadkori et al. (2011), Agrawal & Goyal (2013), and Abeille et al. (2017). However, a key distin-
guishing factor is that our approach does not rely on optimistic samples, which is a departure from
previous methods. This means that the algorithms we study do not always choose actions that are
expected to perform better than the true optimal action. By allowing non-optimistic samples, we
avoid the need to inflate the posterior distribution, a requirement in the works of Agrawal & Goyal
(2013) and Abeille et al. (2017).
Our use of spectral information in bandit algorithms bears some resemblance to the study of Spec-
tral Bandits (Valko et al., 2014; Kocák et al., 2014; Kocák et al., 2020; Kocák & Garivier, 2020).
These works represent arm rewards as smooth functions on a graph, leveraging low-rank structures
to improve algorithmic performance and obtain regret guarantees independent of the number of ac-
tions. In contrast, our approach exploits the spectral properties of the action covariance matrix,
which is distinct from graph spectral analysis. Moreover, our research tackles the broader context of
stochastic linear bandits without assuming any low-rank structure.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our work also shares conceptual similarities with research on exploration strategies (Russo &
Van Roy, 2016; Kirschner & Krause, 2018) and data-driven exploration reduction (Bastani et al.,
2021; Pacchiano et al., 2020; Hamidi & Bayati, 2020a;b). However, our methodology and data uti-
lization differ significantly. For instance, Bastani et al. (2021) focuses on the minimum eigenvalue
of the covariance matrix, a single-parameter summary of the observed data, while Hamidi & Bayati
(2020b) uses information from one-dimensional reward confidence intervals. The work of Hamidi
& Bayati (2020a) is more closely related to ours, as it employs spectral information to improve the
performance of Thompson Sampling in linear bandits. They use a single summary statistic called
the thinness coefficient to decide whether to inflate the posterior. In contrast, our approach leverages
the full geometric details of the d-dimensional confidence ellipsoid, harnessing richer geometric
information.

2     S ETUP AND P RELIMINARIES
Notations. We use ∥ · ∥ to denote the Euclidean 2-norm.√For a symmetric positive definite matrix
A and a vector x of proper dimension, we let ∥x∥A := x⊤ Ax be the weighted 2-norm (or the
A-norm). We let ⟨·, ·⟩ denote the inner product in Euclidean space such that ⟨x, y⟩ = x⊤ y. For a
d-dimensional matrix V , we let λ1 (V ) ≥ λ2 (V ) ≥ · · · ≥ λd (V ) be the eigenvalues of V arranged
in decreasing order. We let Bd denote the unit ball in Rd , and Sd−1 = {x ∈ Rd : ∥x∥ = 1} denote
the unit hypersphere in Rd . For an interger N ≥ 1, we let [N ] denote the set {1, 2, . . . , N }. We use
the O(·) notation to suppress problem-dependent constants, and the O(·)
                                                                      e notation further suppresses
polylog factors.

Problem formulation and assumptions. We consider the stochastic linear bandit problem. Let
θ⋆ ∈ Rd be a fixed but unknown parameter. At each time t ∈ [T ], a policy π selects action xt from
a set of action Xt ⊂ Rd according to the past observations and receives a reward rt = ⟨xt , θ⋆ ⟩ + εt ,
where εt is mean-zero noise with a distribution specified in Assumption 3 below. We measure the
                                                                           PT
performance of π with the cumulative expected regret R(T ) = t=1 ⟨x⋆t , θ⋆ ⟩ − ⟨xt , θ⋆ ⟩ , where
x⋆t is the best action at time t, i.e., x⋆t = arg maxx∈Xt ⟨x, θ⋆ ⟩ . Let Ft be a σ-algebra generated by
the history (x1 , r1 , . . . , xt , rt ) and the prior knowledge, F0 . Therefore, {Ft }t≥0 forms a filteration
such that each Ft encodes all the information up to the end of period t.
We make the following assumptions that are standard in the relevant literature.
Assumption 1 (Bounded parameter). The unknown parameter θ⋆ is bounded as ∥θ⋆ ∥ ≤ S, where
S > 0 is known.
Assumption 2 (Bounded action sets). The action sets {Xt } are uniformly bounded and closed
subsets of Rd , such that ∥x∥ ≤ Xt for all x ∈ Xt and all t ∈ [T ], where Xt ’s are known and
supt≥1 {Xt } < ∞.
Assumption 3 (Subgaussian reward noise). The noise sequence {εt }t≥1 is conditionally
                                                                                    λε mean-

zero and R-subgaussian,
                           where R is known. Formally, for all real valued λ, E e t |Ft ≤
exp λ2 R2 /2 . This condition implies that E [εt |Ft ] = 0 for all t ≥ 1.

2.1   R EGULARIZED L EAST S QUARE AND C ONFIDENCE E LLIPSOID

In this subsection, we review the useful frequentist tools developed by Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011)
for estimating the unknown parameter θ∗ in linear bandit (LB) problems.
Consider an arbitrary sequence of actions (x1 , . . . , xt ) and their corresponding rewards (r1 , . . . , rt ).
In LB problems, the parameter θ∗ is typically estimated using the regularized least squares (RLS)
estimator. Let λreg be a fixed regularization parameter. The sample covariance matrix Vt and the
RLS estimate θbt are defined as follows:
                                         X t                           X t
                          Vt = λreg Id +     xs x⊤     ,    bt = V −1
                                                            θ              xs rs .                          (1)
                                                    s              t
                                             s=1                        s=1


The following proposition from Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011) establishes that the RLS estimate θbt
concentrates around the true parameter θ∗ with high probability.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 1 (Theorem 2 in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011)). Let δ ∈ (0, 1) be a fixed confidence
level. Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds for all x ∈ Rd that
                      ∥θbt − θ⋆ ∥Vt ≤ βt,δ,λ
                                       RLS
                                            reg
                                                ,   |⟨x, θbt − θ⋆ ⟩| ≤ ∥x∥V −1 βt,δ,λ
                                                                                RLS
                                                                                     reg
                                                                             t

                            RLS
where the confidence bound βt,δ,λreg
                                     is defined as
                                       q
                         RLS                                −d/2      p
                        βt,δ,λreg
                                  =R    2 log(λreg + t)d/2 λreg δ −1 + λreg S.                           (2)

Proposition 1 enables us to construct the following sequence of confidence ellipsoids.
Definition 1. Fix δ ∈ (0, 1). We define the RLS confidence ellipsoid as
                              RLS
                             Et,δ,λreg
                                       = {θ ∈ Rd : ∥θ − θbt ∥Vt ≤ βt,δ,λ
                                                                   RLS
                                                                        reg
                                                                            }.

The next proposition, known as the elliptical potential lemma, plays a central role in bounding
the regret. This proposition provides the key element in the work of Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011),
showing that the cumulative prediction error incurred by the action sequence used to estimate θ∗ is
small.
Proposition 2 (Lemma 11 in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011)). If λreg > 1, for an arbitrary sequence
                                 Pt        2
(x1 , . . . , xt ), it holds that s=1 ∥xs ∥Vs−1 ≤ 2 log det(V t+1 )               t
                                                        det(λreg I) ≤ 2d log(1 + λreg ) .


3    POFUL A LGORITHMS
In this section, we introduce POFUL (Pivot OFUL), a generalized framework of OFUL. This frame-
work enables a unified analysis of frequentist regret for common algorithms.
At a high level, POFUL is designed to encompass the exploration mechanism of OFUL and LinTS.
POFUL takes as input a sequence of inflation parameters {ιt }t∈[T ] , feasible (randomized) pivots
{θet }t∈[T ] and optimism parameters {τt }t∈[T ] . The inflation parameters are used to construct confi-
dence ellipsoids that contain {θet }t∈[T ] with high probability. This is formalized in the next defini-
tion.
Definition 2. Fix δ ∈ (0, 1) and δ ′ = δ/2T . Given the inflation parameters {ιt }t∈[T ] , we call
                                                                            PV T                  ′
random variables {θet }t∈[T ] feasible pivots if for all t ∈ [T ], P[θet ∈ Et,δ ′ ,λ |Ft ] ≥ 1 − δ , where we
                                                                                    reg

define the “pivot ellipsoid” as E P V T := {θ ∈ Rd : ∥θ − θbt ∥V ≤ ιt β RLS }.
                                   t,δ,λreg                           t          t,δ,λreg

At each time t, POFUL chooses the action that maximizes the optimistic reward
                                                                   RLS
                              et = arg max ⟨x, θet ⟩ + τt ∥x∥V −1 βt,δ
                              x                                        ′ ,λ
                                                                            reg
                                                                                ,                        (3)
                                                                  t
                                       x∈Xt

as shown in a pseudocode representation in Algorithm 1 and illustrated in Figure 1a.
                                                                                        RLS
Recall OFUL encourages exploration by introducing the uncertainty term τt ∥x∥V −1 βt,δ    ′ ,λ
                                                                                              reg
                                                                                                  in the
                                                                                   t
reward, while LinTS explores through random sampling within the confidence ellipsoid. We let
                                                             PV T
POFUL select an arbitrary pivot (which can be random) from Et,δ ′ ,λ
                                                                     reg
                                                                          and maximize the optimistic
                                                             PV T
reward to encompass arbitrary exploration mechanisms within Et,δ ′ ,λ .
                                                                      reg

We demonstrate that POFUL encompasses OFUL, LinTS, TS-Freq, and Greedy as special cases, as
illustrated in Figure 1b.
Example 1 (OFUL). For stochastic linear bandit problems, OFUL chooses actions by solving the
                                                    RLS
optimization problem maxx∈Xt ⟨x, θbt ⟩ + ∥x∥V −1 βt,δ ′ ,λ . Therefore, OFUL is a specially case of
                                                          reg
                                               t

POFUL where ιt = 0, τt = 1 and θet = θbt , the center of the confidence ellipsoid, for all t ∈ [T ].

Before describing how TS can be derived as an instance of POFUL, we introduce a definition.
Definition 3. Let δ ∈ (0, 1). We define DSA (δ) as a distribution satisfying Pη∼DSA (δ) [∥η∥ ≤ 1] ≥
1 − δ.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 POFUL
Require: T , δ, λreg , {ιt }t∈[T ] , {τt }t∈[T ]
  Initialize V0 ← λreg Id , θb1 ← 0, δ ′ ← δ/2T
  for t = 0, 1, . . . , T do
     Sample a feasible pivot θet with respect to ιt according to Definition 2
                                                   RLS
     xet ← arg maxx∈Xt ⟨x, θet ⟩ + τt ∥x∥V −1 βt,δ  ′ ,λ
                                                         reg
                                                 t
     Observe reward rt
     Vt+1 ← Vt + x         e⊤
                        et x t
                  −1    P t
     θbt+1 ← Vt+1 s=1 x        es rs .
  end for


Example 2 (TS). Linear Thompson Sampling (LinTS) algorithm is a generic randomized algorithm
that samples from a distribution constructed from the RLS estimate at each step. At time t, LinTS
                                               −1/2
samples as θet = θbt + ιTt S βt,δ
                              RLS
                                  ′ ,λ Vt
                                       reg
                                                    ηt , where δ ′ = δ/2T , ιTt S is inflation parameter controlling
the scale of the sampling range, and ηt is a random sample from a normalized sampling distribution
DSA (δ ′ ) that concentrates with high probability. LinTS is a special case of POFUL where ιt = ιTt S ,
                                                −1/2
τt = 0 and θet = θbt + ιTt S βt,δRLS
                                      ′ ,λ Vt         ηt . Setting ιt = O(1)
                                                                         e       corresponds to the original LinTS
                                             √
                                           reg

algorithm, while setting ιt = O( d) corresponds to the frequentist variant of LinTS studied in
                                         e
Agrawal & Goyal (2013); Abeille     √ et al. (2017), namely TS-Freq. This means TS-Freq inflates the
posterior by a factor of order d.
Example 3 (Greedy). Greedy is a special case of POFUL with ιt = τt = 0, θet = θbt , ∀t.


4     F REQUENTIST R EGRET A NALYSIS OF POFUL

In this section, we present the frequentist regret analysis of POFUL algorithms. Details of the
proofs are deferred to the longer version of the paper Luo & Bayati (2023). We first introduce
high-probability concentration events.
Definition 4. Fix δ ∈ (0, 1) and δ ′ = δ/2T . We define βt,δ
                                                         PV T
                                                             ′ ,λ
                                                                 reg
                                                                            RLS
                                                                     := ιt βt,δ ′ ,λ , At := {∀s ≤ t :
                                                                                    reg
                                                                                        b
∥θbt − θ⋆ ∥V ≤ β RLS
             t     ′  }, Aet := {∀s ≤ t : ∥θet − θbt ∥V ≤ β P V′ T }, and At := Abt ∩ Aet .
                         t,δ ,λreg                                                         t           t,δ ,λreg

Proposition 3. Under Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 , we have P [AT ] ≥ 1 − δ.

4.1    A N DATA -D RIVEN R EGRET B OUND FOR POFUL

In the following, we condition on the event AT which holds with probability 1 − δ. The following
proposition bounds the instantaneous regret of POFUL.


                                                                        POFUL
             θet
                                                 ⟨θet , x⟩                RLS
                                                             2τt ∥x∥Vt−1 βt,δ ′ ,λ
                                                                                                                   ⟨θet , x⟩         TS
                                                                                   reg

                   θbt                                                                                      OFUL
                                                 ⟨θbt , x⟩                                                                                                 Greedy
                                  PV T                                                         ⟨θbt , x⟩           ⟨θbt , x⟩         ⟨θet , x⟩=⟨θbt , x⟩
                                 Et,δ ′ ,λ
                                           reg
                                                                            RLS
                                                               2ιt ∥x∥Vt−1 βt,δ ′ ,λ
                                                                                     reg


             Parameter                               Reward
             space: Rd                              space: R
O

                              (a)                                                                                              (b)

Figure 1: (a) POFUL algorithms illustration for general ιt and τt . (b) Special cases: OFUL (ιt = 0,
τt = 1), TS (τt = 0), and Greedy (ιt = τt = 0).


                                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 4. Suppose θ⋆ ∈ Et,δ
                             RLS
                                 ′ ,λ
                                      reg
                                                     PV T
                                          and θet ∈ Et,δ ′ ,λ , it holds that
                                                             reg


       ⟨x⋆t , θ⋆ ⟩ − ⟨e
                      xt , θ⋆ ⟩ ≤ (1 + ιt − τt )∥x⋆t ∥V −1 βt,δ
                                                            RLS
                                                                ′ ,λ
                                                                    reg
                                                                        + (1 + ιt + τt )∥e         RLS
                                                                                         xt ∥V −1 βt,δ ′ ,λ .
                                                                                                           reg
                                                                                                                 (4)
                                                        t                                       t



Note that this upper bound is different from what’s used in the optimism-based methods (Abbasi-
Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal & Goyal, 2013; Abeille et al., 2017), we reproduce their upper bound
and discuss the relationship of our method and theirs in the longer version of the paper Luo & Bayati
(2023).
On the right-hand side of equation 4, since the oracle optimal action sequence {x⋆t }t∈[T ] is unknown
to the algorithm and is different from the action sequence {e  xt }t∈[T ] played by POFUL, one cannot
                                                PT          2
apply Proposition 2 to bound the summation t=1 ∥e       xt ∥V −1 and get an upperbound of the regret.
                                                                     t
                                           xt }t∈[T ] and {x⋆t }t∈[T ] with Vt−1 -norm. This motivates
To address this, the key point to connect {e
the following definition.
Definition 5. For each t ≥ 1, let x et and x⋆t respectively denote the action chosen by POFUL and
the optimal action. We define the uncertainty ratio at time t as αt := ∥x⋆t ∥V −1 /∥e xt ∥V −1 . We also
                                                                                t          t
define the (instantaneous) regret proxy at time t as µt := αt (1 + ιt − τt ) + 1 + ιt + τt .

Note that ⟨x, θbt − θ⋆ ⟩ ≤ ∥x∥V −1 βt,δ
                                     RLS
                                        ′ ,λ
                                            reg
                                                holds with high probability, we have that ∥x∥V −1 essen-
                                t                                                             t
tially determines the length of the confidence interval of the reward ⟨x, θ⋆ ⟩. Hence, αt serves as the
ratio of uncertainty degrees of the reward obtained by the optimal action x⋆t and the chosen action
x
et .
The intuition behind the definition for µt is constructing a regret upper bound similar to that of
OFUL. Specifically, Proposition 4 indicates ⟨x⋆t , θ⋆ ⟩ − ⟨e
                                                           xt , θ⋆ ⟩ ≤ µt ∥e          RLS
                                                                            xt ∥V −1 βt,δ ′ ,λ , and we can
                                                                                              reg
                                                                                 t
                                                           ⋆ ⋆              ⋆                     RLS
check that the instantaneous regret of OFUL satisfies ⟨xt , θ ⟩ − ⟨e  xt , θ ⟩ ≤ 2∥e  xt ∥V −1 βt,δ ′ ,λ . In
                                                                                                        reg
                                                                                              t
this sense, µt is a proxy of the instantaneous regret incurred by POFUL at time t. Moreover, OFUL
can be regarded as a POFUL algorithm whose µt is fixed at 2, and we could extend the definition of
αt to OFUL by solving µt = αt (1 + ιt − τt ) + 1 + ιt + τt and set αt = 1 for all t ∈ [T ] for OFUL
(recall that in OFUL, ιt = 0 and τt = 1 for all t ∈ [T ]).
The following Theorem connects {µt }t∈[T ] and R(T ). It provides an oracle but general frequentist
regret upper bound for all POFUL algorithms.
Theorem 1 (Oracle frequentist regret bound for POFUL). Fix δ ∈ (0, 1) and let δ ′ = δ/2T . Under
Assumptions 1, 2 and 3, with probability 1 − δ, POFUL achieves a regret of
                                v               !
                                u         T
                                u       X                 T      RLS
                       R(T ) ≤ t2d           µ2t log 1 +       βT,δ ′ ,λ    .                (5)
                                         t=1
                                                         λreg
                                                                        reg


Remark 1. We call Theorem 1 an oracle regret bound as {µt }t∈[T ] for general POFUL depends
on the unknown system parameter θ⋆ . In general, they cannot be calculated by the decision-maker.
Nevertheless, note that ιt and τt are chosen by the decision-maker, when we have computable upper
bounds {bαt }t∈[T ] for {αt }t∈[T ] , using µ2t ≤ 2αt2 (1 + ιt − τt )2 + 2(1 + ιt + τt )2 , we could calculate
upper bounds for {µt }t∈[T ] as well. Consequently, Theorem 1 instantly turns into a data-driven
regret bound for POFUL and could be utilized later for course correction, which will be the aim
of the next section. When we additionally know that 1 + ιt − τt is non-negative, we would use the
equality µt = αt (1 + ιt − τt ) + 1 + ιt + τt directly for the bound.
Remark 2. In the Discussion section of Abeille et al. (2017), the authors introduce a concept similar
to the reciprocal of our αt . They suggest that the necessity of proving LinTS samples are optimistic
could be bypassed if for some α > 0 LinTS samples θet such that ∥x⋆ (θet )∥V −1 ≥ α∥x⋆ (θt⋆ )∥V −1
                                                                                  t                  t

with constant probability, where x⋆ (θet ) and x⋆ (θt⋆ ) represent the optimal actions corresponding to
θet and θt⋆ , respectively. They pose this as an open question regarding the possibility of relaxing the
requirement of inflating the posterior. In the following section, we provide a positive answer to this
question by studying the reciprocal of their α using geometric arguments. This investigation offers
an explanation for the empirical success of LinTS without the need for posterior inflation.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5     A DATA -D RIVEN A PPROACH

In this section, we present the main contribution of this work which provides a data-driven approach
to calibrating POFUL. Note that ιt and τt are parameters of POFUL that can be controlled by
a decision-maker, the essential point is to find a computable, non-trivial upper bound α     bt for the
uncertainty ratio αt , which turns into an upper bound µbt for the regret proxy µt that’s deeply related
to the frequentist regret of POFUL.
We focus on scenarios where τt = 0 for all t ∈ [T ]. These include LinTS and variants such as
TS-Freq, as well as Greedy - standard algorithms still lacking theoretical regret guarantees. Below,
we construct upper bounds {b αt }t∈[T ] for the continuous-action scenario. Bounds for discrete-action
scenarios appear in the longer version of the paper Luo & Bayati (2023).

5.1    C ONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE

Our strategy capitalizes on geometric insights related to the properties of the confidence ellipsoids,
providing upper bounds that can be computed efficiently. For the sake of a better illustration, we
consider Xt = Sd−1 for all t ∈ [T ] for this scenario, where Sd−1 = x ∈ Rd : ∥x∥ = 1 is the
unit hypersphere in Rd . This is a standard example of continuous action space, and is the same as
the setting considered in Abeille et al. (2017). We remark that for this specific setting, the problem
is still hard. This is because we don’t have a closed-form solution for the set of potentially optimal
actions.
In this setting, the optimal action x⋆t (θ) := arg maxx∈Xt ⟨x, θ⟩ takes the form x⋆t (θ) = θ/∥θ∥. To
upper bound αt , we consider respectively the smallest and largest value of ∥x⋆t (θ)∥V −1 for θ in the
                                                                                        t
                                        RLS            PV T
confidence ellipsoids of θ, namely, Et,δ  ′ ,λ
                                              reg
                                                  and Et,δ ′ ,λ . Specifically, we have
                                                               reg


                                             supθ∈E RLS
                                                      ′
                                                                  ∥x⋆t (θ)∥V −1
                                                      t,δ ,λreg             t
                                   αt ≤                                           .                     (6)
                                             inf θ∈E P V′ T       ∥x⋆t (θ)∥V −1
                                                     t,δ ,λreg              t


As is illustrated in Figure 2, the set of potentially optimal actions Ct is the projection of the confi-
dence ellipsoid Et onto Sd−1 . It’s hard to get a closed-form expression for Ct , so we cannot directly
calculate the range of Vt−1 -norm of actions in Ct . Nevertheless, when POFUL has implemented suf-
ficient exploration so that Et is small enough, Ct concentrates accordingly to a small cap on Sd−1 .
Therefore, it is possible to estimate the range of the Vt -norm by employing geometric reasoning.
Subsequently, this estimated range will be utilized to ascertain the range of the Vt−1 -norm.


                                       (a)                                 (b)

Figure 2: Illustration of potentially optimal actions set Ct in R2 . (a): Ct is Et ’s projection onto Sd−1 .
(b): As more data is collected, Et shrinks (colors show exploration levels). Potentially optimal
actions point in similar directions, determining their Vt -norm. This suggests their Vt -norm range
could be estimated geometrically.

The main theorem derives an upper bound for αt based on this idea.
Theorem 2. Suppose Xt = Sd−1 for all t ∈ [T ]. Define mt = (∥θbt ∥2Vt − (βt,δ      RLS        2
                                                                                      ′ ,λ ) )/(∥θt ∥ +
                                                                                          reg
                                                                                                 b
β RLS
   ′  /λd (Vt ))2 , Mt = ∥θbt ∥2 2 /(∥θbt ∥2 − (β P V′ T )2 ). Let k ∈ [d] be the integer that satisfies
 t,δ ,λreg                        Vt          Vt         t,δ ,λreg


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  PV T               RLS
λk (V ) ≤ Mt ≤ λk+1 (V ). Define βt,δ ′ ,λ
                                          reg
                                              := ιt βt,δ ′ ,λ
                                                             reg
                                                                 and
                 ( −1                                        1
                  (λ1 (Vt ) + λ−1            −1      −1
                               d (Vt ) − mt λ1 (Vt )λd (Vt )) ,
                                                             2                         RLS
                                                                        if ∥θbt ∥Vt ≥ βt,δ ′ ,λ
                                                                                               reg
          Φt =      −1                                                                 RLS
                                                                                                   ,
                   λd 2 (Vt ),                                          if ∥θt ∥V < β ′
                                                                             b
                                                                                  t      t,δ ,λreg
              ( −1                                            1
               (λk (Vt ) + λ−1              −1      −1        2       b         PV T
                            k+1 (Vt ) − Mt λk (Vt )λk+1 (Vt )) , if ∥θt ∥Vt ≥ βt,δ ′ ,λreg
         Ψt =   −21                                                                        .
               λ (Vt ),
                    1                                            if ∥θbt ∥V < β P V′ T
                                                                                 t       t,δ ,λreg


Then for all t ∈ [T ], conditioned on Abt ∩ Aet , it holds for all s ≤ t that αs ≤ α
                                                                                   bs := Φs /Ψs .

To better understand what Theorem 2 implies, we discuss some special cases and provide empirical
validations for them in the longer version of the paper Luo & Bayati (2023).


6     A M ETA -A LGORITHM FOR C OURSE -C ORRECTION

This section demonstrates how the data-driven regret bound can enhance standard bandit algorithms.
We propose a meta-algorithm that creates course-corrected variants of base algorithms, achieving
minimax-optimal frequentist regret guarantees while preserving most original characteristics, in-
cluding computational efficiency and typically low regret.
We take LinTS as an example of the base algorithm, and propose the algorithm Linear Thompson
Sampling with Maximum Regret (Proxy) (TS-MR). The idea is to measure the performance of
LinTS using µbt and avoid bad LinTS actions by switching to OFUL actions. Specifically, at each
time t, TS-MR calculates the upper bound µ
                                         bt and compares it with a preset threshold µ. If µ
                                                                                          bt > µ,
LinTS might be problematic and TS-MR takes an OFUL action to ensure a low instantaneous regret;
   bt ≤ µ, TS-MR takes the LinTS action. We remark that setting ιt = 0 for all t ∈ [T ] yields the
if µ
corresponding Greedy-MR algorithm. The pseudocode is presented in the longer version of the
paper Luo & Bayati (2023).
Remark 3. Computing µ     t primarily requires SVD decomposition of the sample covariance matrix
                         bP
                             t
Vt . Since Vt = λreg Id + s=1 xs x⊤  s is updated via rank-one matrices, its SVD can be efficiently
updated (Gandhi & Rajgor, 2017), preventing computational bottlenecks.

By design, course-corrected algorithms ensure that µt ≤ max{µ, 2} for all t ∈ [T ]. Substituting
this upper bound into Theorem 1 establishes that these algorithms achieve optimal frequentist regret,
up to a constant factor.
                                                                                     √
Corollary 1. TS-MR and Greedy-MR achieve a frequentist regret of O(max{µ,
                                                                      e         2}d T ).

In high-risk settings where LinTS and Greedy may fail, a small µ ensures TS-MR and Greedy-
MR select more OFUL actions, promoting sufficient exploration. Conversely, in low-risk settings
where the original algorithms perform well, a large µ favors TS and greedy actions, minimizing
unnecessary exploration and reducing computational cost. In the longer version of the paper Luo
& Bayati (2023), we show how µ impacts the fraction of OFUL actions in TS-MR and Greedy-MR
and their performance. Results indicate that course-corrected algorithms maintain robustness across
a range of moderate µ values, suggesting that the precise selection of µ is unlikely to present a
significant practical concern.


7     S IMULATIONS

We aim to compare TS-MR, Greedy-MR, and key baseline algorithms, via simulation.

7.1   S YNTHETIC DATASETS

We conduct simulations on three representative synthetic examples. We average simulation results
over 100 independent runs for each of the examples. The results are shown in Figure 3.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example 1. Stochastic linear bandit with uniformly and independently distributed actions.
We fix d = 50, and sample θ⋆ ∼ Unif({θ ∈ Rd |∥θ∥ = 10}) on a sphere with fixed norm. At
each time t, we generate 100 i.i.d. random actions sampled from Unif(Sd−1 ) to form Xt . This is a
basic example of standard stochastic linear bandit problems without any extra structure. We set the
threshold µ = 8 for TS-MR and Greedy-MR. TS-Freq shows pessimistic regret due to the inflation
of the posterior, while other algorithms in general perform well.

Example 2. Contextual bandits embedded in the linear bandit problem (Abbasi-Yadkori,
2013). We fix d = 50, and sample θ⋆ ∼ Unif({θ ∈ Rd |∥θ∥ = 70}). At each time t, we first
generate a random vector ut ∼ N (0, I5 ) and let xt,i ∈ R50 be the vector whose i-th block of size
5 is a copy of ut , and other components are 0. Then Xt = {xt,i }i∈[10] is an action set of size 10,
sharing the same feature ut in different blocks. This problem is equivalent to a 10-armed contextual
bandit. We set µ = 12 for TS-MR and Greedy-MR. In this setting, Greedy performs suboptimally
due to a lack of exploration for some arms. Nevertheless, Greedy-MR outperforms both Greedy and
OFUL by adaptively choosing OFUL actions only when it detects large regret proxy µ    bt .

Example 3. Prior mean mismatch (Hamidi & Bayati, 2020a). This is an example in which
LinTS is shown to incur linear Bayesian regret. We sample θ⋆ ∼ N      √(m13d , I3d ) and fix the√action
                                                            Pd                        P3d
set Xt = {0, xa , xb } for all t ∈ [T ], where xa = − i=1 ei / 3d, xb =                 i=11 ei 3d −
Pd         √
   i=1 ei / 3d. It is shown in Hamidi & Bayati (2020a) that, when LinTS takes a wrong prior mean
as input, it has a large probability to choose x
                                               e2 = 0, conditioned on x
                                                                      e1 = xa . Note that choosing the
zero action brings no information update to LinTS, it suffers a linear Bayesian regret when trying
to escape from the zero action. We let m = 10 and set d = 10, so the problem is a 30-dimensional
linear bandit. We set µ = 12 for TS-MR and Greedy-MR. We see both LinTS and Greedy incur
linear regrets as expected, while TS-MR and Greedy-MR, switch to OFUL adaptively to tackle this
hard problem and achieve sublinear regret.


           (a) example 1                     (b) example 2                    (c) example 3


           (d) example 1                     (e) example 2                    (f) example 3

Figure 3: Simulation results on synthetic data. (a) - (c): Cumulative regret of TS-MR and Greedy-
MR versus baseline algorithms. Shaded regions show ±2 SE of mean regret. (d) - (f): Fraction of
OFUL actions in TS-MR and Greedy-MR.



7.2   R EAL - WORLD DATASETS

We explore the performance of standard POFUL algorithms and the proposed TS-MR and Greedy-
MR algorithms on real-world datasets. We use three classification datasets from O PEN ML: Car-
diotocography, JapaneseVowels, and Segment, representing healthcare, pattern recognition, and
computer vision domains. Following Bietti et al. (2021); Bastani et al. (2021), we convert these
classification tasks to contextual bandit problems and embed them into linear bandit problems as in


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example 2, Section 7.1. Each class becomes an action where the decision-maker receives a binary
reward (1 for correct classification, 0 otherwise) plus Gaussian noise.
We plot the cumulative regret (averaged over 100 runs) for all algorithms. Figure 4 shows that for all
real-world datasets: OFUL and TS-Freq perform poorly due to their conservative exploration; LinTS
and Greedy are achieving empirical success even though they don’t have theoretical guarantees;
TS-MR and Greedy-MR retain the desirable empirical performance of LinTS and Greedy, while
enjoying the minimax optimal frequentist regret bound.


    (a) Cardiotocography dataset      (b) JapaneseVowels dataset           (c) Segment dataset


    (d) Cardiotocography dataset      (e) JapaneseVowels dataset           (f) Segment dataset

Figure 4: Simulation results on real-world datasets. (a) - (c): Cumulative regret of all algorithms.
Shaded regions show the ±2 SE of the mean regret. (d) - (f): Fraction of OFUL actions of TS-MR
and Greedy-MR.

Remark 4. Simulation results in Figures 3 and 4 show OFUL actions are primarily used in the early
stages. This indicates: (1) Greedy-MR and TS-MR implement OFUL actions only when necessary,
maintaining a low OFUL fraction throughout most of the time horizon, substantially reducing com-
putational cost; and (2) limited course-corrected exploration at the beginning efficiently remedies
TS and Greedy in problematic instances.

8   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a data-driven framework to analyze the frequentist regret of POFUL, a fam-
ily of algorithms that includes OFUL, LinTS, TS-Freq, and Greedy as special cases. Our approach
allows for the computation of a data-driven frequentist regret bound for POFUL during implemen-
tation, which subsequently informs the course-correction of the algorithm. Our technique conducts
a novel real-time geometric analysis of the d-dimensional confidence ellipsoid to fully leverage the
historical information and might be of independent interest. As applications, we propose TS-MR
and Greedy-MR algorithms that enjoy provable minimax optimal frequentist regret and demon-
strate their ability to adaptively switch to OFUL when necessary in hard problems where LinTS and
Greedy fail. We hope this work provides a steady step towards bridging the gap between theoretical
guarantees and empirical performance of bandit algorithms such as LinTS and Greedy.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori. Online learning for linearly parametrized control problems. 2013.
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2312–2320, 2011.
Marc Abeille, Alessandro Lazaric, et al. Linear thompson sampling revisited. Electronic Journal of
 Statistics, 11(2):5165–5197, 2017.
Shipra Agrawal. Recent Advances in Multiarmed Bandits for Sequential Decision Making, chapter 7,
  pp. 167–188. 2019. doi: 10.1287/educ.2019.0204. URL https://pubsonline.informs.
  org/doi/abs/10.1287/educ.2019.0204.
Shipra Agrawal and Navin Goyal. Thompson sampling for contextual bandits with linear payoffs.
  In Sanjoy Dasgupta and David McAllester (eds.), Proceedings of the 30th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  127–135, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 17–19 Jun 2013. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v28/agrawal13.html.
Peter Auer. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 3(Nov):397–422, 2002.
Hamsa Bastani and Mohsen Bayati. Online decision making with high-dimensional covariates.
  Operations Research, 68(1):276–294, 2020. doi: 10.1287/opre.2019.1902.
Hamsa Bastani, Mohsen Bayati, and Khashayar Khosravi. Mostly exploration-free algorithms for
  contextual bandits. Management Science, 67(3):1329–1349, 2021. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.2020.3605.
Alberto Bietti, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. A contextual bandit bake-off. Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 22(133):1–49, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  18-863.html.
Maxime C Cohen, Ilan Lobel, and Renato Paes Leme. Feature-based dynamic pricing. Management
 Science, 66(11):5213–5228, 2020. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.2019.3485. URL https://doi.org/
 10.1287/mnsc.2019.3485.
Varsha Dani, Thomas P. Hayes, and Sham M. Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit
  feedback. In COLT, 2008.
Shi Dong and Benjamin Van Roy. An information-theoretic analysis for thompson sampling with
  many actions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4157–4165, 2018.
Ratnik Gandhi and Amoli Rajgor. Updating singular value decomposition for rank one matrix per-
  turbation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.08369, 2017.
Nima Hamidi and Mohsen Bayati. On frequentist regret of linear thompson sampling, 2020a.
Nima Hamidi and Mohsen Bayati. A general theory of the stochastic linear bandit and its applica-
  tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05152, 2020b.
Botao Hao, Tor Lattimore, and Csaba Szepesvari. Adaptive exploration in linear contextual bandit,
  2020.
Sampath Kannan, Jamie H Morgenstern, Aaron Roth, Bo Waggoner, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. A
  smoothed analysis of the greedy algorithm for the linear contextual bandit problem. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2227–2236, 2018.
Johannes Kirschner and Andreas Krause. Information directed sampling and bandits with het-
  eroscedastic noise. In Proc. International Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), July 2018.
Tomáš Kocák, Rémi Munos, Branislav Kveton, Shipra Agrawal, and Michal Valko. Spectral bandits.
  J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(1), jan 2020. ISSN 1532-4435.
Tomáš Kocák and Aurélien Garivier. Best arm identification in spectral bandits, 2020.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tomáš Kocák, Michal Valko, Rémi Munos, and Shipra Agrawal. Spectral Thompson Sampling.
  28(1), 2014. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v28i1.9011. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/
  AAAI/article/view/9011.
Tze Leung Lai and Herbert Robbins. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances
  in applied mathematics, 6(1):4–22, 1985.
John Langford and Tong Zhang. The epoch-greedy algorithm for multi-armed bandits with side
  information. In J. C. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, and S. T. Roweis (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 20, pp. 817–824. Curran Associates, Inc., 2008.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvari. The end of optimism? an asymptotic analysis of finite-armed
  linear bandits. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 728–737. PMLR, 2017.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web, pp. 661–670. ACM, 2010.
Yuwei Luo and Mohsen Bayati. Geometry-aware approaches for balancing performance and theo-
  retical guarantees in linear bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14872, 2023.
Aldo Pacchiano, Christoph Dann, Claudio Gentile, and Peter Bartlett. Regret Bound Balancing
  and Elimination for Model Selection in Bandits and RL. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2012.13045,
  December 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2012.13045.
Manish Raghavan, Aleksandrs Slivkins, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. The
 externalities of exploration and how data diversity helps exploitation, 2018.
Paat Rusmevichientong and John N Tsitsiklis. Linearly parameterized bandits. Mathematics of
  Operations Research, 35(2):395–411, 2010.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Learning to optimize via posterior sampling. Mathematics of
  Operations Research, 39(4):1221–1243, 2014. doi: 10.1287/moor.2014.0650.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. An information-theoretic analysis of thompson sampling. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):2442–2471, 2016.
Daniel J. Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian Osband, and Zheng Wen. A tutorial
  on thompson sampling. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 11(1):1–96, 2018. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000070.
Ambuj Tewari and Susan A Murphy. From ads to interventions: Contextual bandits in mobile health.
 In Mobile Health, pp. 495–517. Springer, 2017.
William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of
 the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3-4):285–294, 1933.
Michal Valko, Remi Munos, Branislav Kveton, and Tomáš Kocák. Spectral bandits for smooth
 graph functions. In Eric P. Xing and Tony Jebara (eds.), Proceedings of the 31st International
 Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
 pp. 46–54, Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
 press/v32/valko14.html.
Sofı́a S Villar, Jack Bowden, and James Wason. Multi-armed bandit models for the optimal design
  of clinical trials: benefits and challenges. Statistical science: a review journal of the Institute of
  Mathematical Statistics, 30(2):199, 2015.
Wenbin Zhou, Lihong Li, and Quanquan Gu. A survey on contextual multi-armed bandits. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2004.13136, 2020.


                                                  12
