Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C OUNTERFACTUAL G ENERATIVE M ODELING WITH
VARIATIONAL C AUSAL I NFERENCE
 Yulun Wu                                 Louie McConnell                 Claudia Iriondo
 University of California, Berkeley       Genentech                       Genentech
 yulun_wu@berkeley.edu                    mcconnl3@gene.com               iriondoc@gene.com



                                             A BSTRACT
         Estimating an individual’s counterfactual outcomes under interventions is a chal-
         lenging task for traditional causal inference and supervised learning approaches
         when the outcome is high-dimensional (e.g. gene expressions, facial images) and
         covariates are relatively limited. In this case, to predict one’s outcomes under
         counterfactual treatments, it is crucial to leverage individual information contained
         in the observed outcome in addition to the covariates. Prior works using variational
         inference in counterfactual generative modeling have been focusing on neural
         adaptations and model variants within the conditional variational autoencoder for-
         mulation, which we argue is fundamentally ill-suited to the notion of counterfactual
         in causal inference. In this work, we present a novel variational Bayesian causal
         inference framework and its theoretical backings to properly handle counterfactual
         generative modeling tasks, through which we are able to conduct counterfactual
         supervision end-to-end during training without any counterfactual samples, and en-
         courage disentangled exogenous noise abduction that aids the correct identification
         of causal effect in counterfactual generations. In experiments, we demonstrate the
         advantage of our framework compared to state-of-the-art models in counterfactual
         generative modeling on multiple benchmarks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In traditional causal inference, heterogeneous treatment effect is typically formulated as the interven-
tional model p(Y |X, do(T )) (or E[Y |X, do(T )]) with outcome Y , covariates X, treatment T , and
estimated by the observed covariate-specific efficacy p(Y |X, T ) under the ignorability assumption
(Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Pearl, 1995). However, in cases such as the single-cell perturbation
datasets (Dixit et al., 2016; Norman et al., 2019; Schmidt et al., 2022) where Y has thousands of
dimensions while X has only two or three categorical features, such model could hardly be relied on
to produce useful individualized results. To construct outcome Y ′ under a counterfactual treatment
T ′ in such high-dimensional outcome scenario, it is important and necessary to learn the individual-
specific efficacy p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ ) conditioning on the factual outcome Y itself, which leverages
the rich information embedded in the factual outcome that cannot be recovered by the handful of
covariates. For example, given a cell with type A549 (X) that received SAHA drug treatment (T ), we
may want to know what its gene expression profile (Y ′ ) would have looked like if it had received Dex
drug treatment (T ′ ) instead. In this case, we would want to take the profiles of other cells with type
A549 that indeed received Dex as reference, such that the counterfactual construction Y ′ exhibits
the treatment characteristics of Dex on A549, but would also want to extract as much individual
information as possible from its own expression profile (Y ) such that the counterfactual construction
could preserve this cell’s individuality such as cell state.
Yet the lack of observability of counterfactual outcome Y ′ makes this objective intractable and hence
presents a major difficulty for supervised learning when Y is taken as an input. In previous works
that involve self-supervised counterfactual generation (Kocaoglu et al., 2017; Louizos et al., 2017;
Yoon et al., 2018; Pawlowski et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021; Lotfollahi et al., 2021;
Sauer & Geiger, 2021; Feng et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2022) based on Variational Autoencoders (VAE)
(Kingma & Welling, 2013) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
there is no counterfactual supervision during training, and hence no explicit regulation on the trade-off
between treatment characteristics and individuality. When such regulation does not exist, there is


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a disconnection between training and counterfactual inference. To see this, consider a conditional
generative model gθ (y, t) that is only supervised on the reconstruction loss with respect to outcome
y during training. In this case, the model is free to ignore the extra treatment t and converge to a
state such that gθ (y, t) = gθ (y, 0) (Chen et al., 2016), hence preserving maximum individuality yet
minimum treatment characteristics in counterfactual construction gθ (y, t′ ) during inference. This
is particularly an issue for high-fidelity counterfactual generation with state-of-the-art Hierarchical
Variational Autoencoders (HVAE) (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Child, 2020), as the bottleneck latent
representations possess much larger number of dimensions compared to the observed outcome y.
In more recent works on counterfactual generative modeling with HVAEs and diffusion models
(Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022; Monteiro et al., 2023; Ribeiro et al., 2023), only Ribeiro et al. (2023)
touched on the issue of counterfactual supervision, yet its proposed method does not have a theoretical
backing in variational inference, nor could it be conducted end-to-end during training. As we will
see in the proceeding sections of this work, there is a fundamental incompatibility of the conditional
VAE formulation with counterfactual generative modeling, which is the root cause of such issue. In
fact, this incompatibility also exhibits itself in another important aspect of counterfactual generative
modeling which is latent disentanglement – the partially abducted exogenous noise (i.e. shallow-level
latent representation) in conditional HVAEs and diffusion models is able to encode individuality better
than traditional VAEs, but at the same time is still heavily entangled with treatment variables and often
result in lingering characteristics of the factual treatment in counterfactual construction (Monteiro
et al., 2023; Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022). More introduction regarding latent disentanglement can be
found in Appendix A.
Our contributions in this work are summarized as follow: 1) we propose a formulation and stochastic
optimization scheme for counterfactual generative modeling by specifically formulating counter-
factual variables and using variational inference to derive the evidence lower bound (ELBO) for
the individual-level likelihood p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ ) – a well-motivated and fitting objective for coun-
terfactual generative modeling instead of the marginal-level (interventional) conditional likelihood
p(Y |X, T ) or even joint likelihood p(Y, X, T ) used by VAE-based prior works. To emphasize, the
contribution here is not to propose another model variant under the conditional VAE formu-
lation such as conditional HVAEs or diffusion models (Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022; Monteiro
et al., 2023; Ribeiro et al., 2023), but to fundamentally change the VAE formulation. We call
this framework Variational Causal Inference (VCI). An explanation to why the conditional VAE
formulation (including diffusion models) is ill-suited to counterfactual generative modeling and a
straightforward comparison between VAE’s formulation and ours can be found in Appendix C. 2)
Our proposed optimization scheme allows us to conduct counterfactual supervision end-to-end
during training alongside self-supervision, even without any counterfactual observations, which has
not been done in prior works to the best of our knowledge. 3) This workflow of constructing and
supervising counterfactual outcomes during training presents us the unique opportunity to naturally
enforce disentangled exogenous noise abduction through distribution alignment on matching pairs
(Shu et al., 2019; Locatello et al., 2020; Brehmer et al., 2022) without having paired data, which has
not been done in counterfactual generative modeling, to the best of our knowledge. 4) We further
propose a robust estimation scheme for high-dimensional marginal causal parameters leveraging this
individual-level counterfactual construction framework. No prior work in counterfactual generative
modeling conducts such asymptotically efficient marginal estimation upon acquiring individual
predictions, to the best of our knowledge. 5) In experiments, our proposed method is evaluated on
datasets with vector outcomes – single cell perturbation datasets, as well as datasets with image
outcomes – facial imaging and handwritten digits datasets, and compared to state-of-the-art models
in the two domains. The results show that ours outperformed state-of-the-arts in both domains with
notable margins. Related work and comparative analysis can be found in Appendix B.

2     P ROPOSED M ETHOD
2.1   F ORMULATION AND I NTUITION

Let Y : Ω → (Y, ΣY ) be the outcome, X : Ω → (X , ΣX ) be the covariates, T : Ω → (T , ΣT )
be the treatments and Z : Ω → (Z, ΣZ ) be a latent feature vector on probability space (Ω, Σ, P ).
Suppose the causal relations between random variables (and random vectors) follow a structural
causal model (SCM) (Pearl, 1995) defined in Figure 1, where we adopt twin networks (Balke &
Pearl, 1994) to formulate counterfactuals Y ′ and T ′ as separate variables apart from Y and T having


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Y            Z                                                    Z                Y
                                                                    UY

                                             Y′                                                        Y′


                                                             UX               UT
                                                 ′
                                             T                                                 T′
             T            X                                              X              T
                   (a) Bayesian network                     (b) Counterfactual view of the Bayesian network

Figure 1: The causal diagram where variables are generated from the following SCM: X = fX (UX );
T = fT (X, UT ), T ′ = fT (X, UT′ ) where UT , UT′ are i.i.d.; Z = fZ (X, UY ); Y = fY (Z, T, ϵY ),
Y ′ = fY (Z, T ′ , ϵ′Y ) where ϵY , ϵ′Y are i.i.d., independent of all U s, and are constants w.p. 1 if the
consistency assumption is assumed. Endogenous variables follow the Bayesian network on the left
under the ignorability assumption, with permissibly one additional edge from either Z or T to X
if UY or UT is dependent of UX . We call O = (X, T, Y ) observed variables, B = (X, T, T ′ , Y )
sample variables (T ′ are sampled for model training and evaluation), D = (X, T, T ′ , Y, Y ′ ) full data
variables and W = (Z, X, T, T ′ , Y, Y ′ ) all variables. White nodes are observed, light grey nodes are
assigned during training and inference, dark grey nodes are unobserved.


a conditional distribution p(Y ′ , T ′ |Z, X) identical to that of its factual counterpart p(Y, T |Z, X).
Different from Vlontzos et al. (2023), we introduce latent Z in high-dimensional outcome settings as
a feature vector of Y such that random factor ϵY does not capture any more uncertainty that can be
retrieved from its counterfactual counterpart, i.e. ϵY ⊥ ⊥ Y ′ and similarly ϵ′Y ⊥  ⊥ Y . The consistency
and ignorability assumptions corresponding to this causal formulation can be found in Appendix
H. Under the consistency assumption (Assumption 2 and Remark 2), ϵY = 0 and there is no more
uncertainty in Y beyond Z, i.e. the shared random factor UY fully captures the exogenous noise
injected to Y and Y ′ . Hence, Z in this setting can be seen as an unobserved summary random vector
of the covariates X and exogenous noise UY . Note that the consistency assumption is not generally
                                                                            ′
required for our subsequent variational inference, but is required for Ydo(T    ′ ) to be formally defined

as the counterfactual of Y under the three-layer causal hierarchy of Pearl (2009). The ignorability
assumption (Assumption 1 and Remark 1) is generally required, under which do(T ′ = t′ ) and
T ′ = t′ result in the same outcome distribution on Y ′ conditioned on X or Z. See Appendix D for
the connection between our formulation and the traditional SCM formulation.

Semi-autoencoding Under this formulation, Z has a posterior distribution p(Z|Y, T, X) given the
observed variables; Y and Y ′ can be constructed by p(Y |Z, T ) and p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ ) respectively with
latent features Z. Similar to prior works in autoencoder (Vincent et al., 2008; Bengio et al., 2014),
we can estimate the latent recognition model (i.e. exogenous noise abduction model) and outcome
construction model with deep neural network encoder qϕ and decoder pθ . Given a sample b =
(x, t, t′ , y), while the reconstruction yθ,ϕ of y is self-supervised, we can only assess the counterfactual
                  ′
construction yθ,ϕ      under t′ by looking at its resemblance to similar individuals that indeed received
                ′
treatment t . Hence, naively, we may conduct counterfactual supervision during training with a
semi-autoencoding (SAE) loss function as follow
                                                                               ′
                              Lθ,ϕ (b) = L2 (yθ,ϕ , y) − ω · ℓp̂(Y ′ |x,t′ ) (yθ,ϕ )                          (1)
where ω is a scaling coefficient and p̂ is the traditional covariate-specific outcome model fit on the
observed variables (X, T, Y ) (notice that p(Y ′ |x, T ′ = t′ ) = p(Y |x, T = t′ )). The intuition is
          ′
that, if yθ,ϕ is indeed one’s outcome under t′ , then the likelihood of yθ,ϕ′
                                                                                  coming from the outcome
distribution of individuals with the same attributes x that factually received treatment t′ should be
high. In practice, we can fit p̂(Y |X, T ) in an end-to-end fashion using a discriminator D(X, T, Y )
on factual triplets (x, t, y) and counterfactual triplets (x, t′ , yθ,ϕ
                                                                    ′
                                                                        ) with the adversarial approach
                                                                                ′
(Goodfellow et al., 2014). Specifically, use discriminator loss LD (b, yθ,ϕ         ) = − log[D(x, t, y)] −
                 ′ ′                                                                ′
log[1 − D(x, t , yθ,ϕ )] to train model D, and use generator loss ℓp̂(Y ′ |x,t′ ) (yθ,ϕ ) = log D(x, t′ , yθ,ϕ
                                                                                                           ′
                                                                                                               )
                                               ′
in Lθ,ϕ (b) (notice that p(X, T ) = p(X, T )). This end-to-end approach prevents (pθ , qϕ ) from
exploiting a pre-trained p̂ model. In cases where covariates are limited and discrete such as the


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Model workflow of the Variational Causal Inference (VCI) framework. In a forward pass,
the encoding model takes outcome y as well as its treatments t and covariates x (if any) as inputs
and attains latent feature z; (z, t) and (z, t′ ) where t′ is the counterfactual treatments are separately
                                                                                                       ′
passed into the decoding model to attain reconstruction yθ,ϕ and counterfactual construction yθ,ϕ         ,
                                                                                        ′
for which reconstruction loss and counterfactual supervision loss are evaluated; yθ,ϕ is then passed
back into the encoding model along with t′ and x to attain z again, which is encouraged to match the
latent feature z previously acquired from encoding the factual outcome y and treatment t through the
latent divergence term. The neural architectures of the latent recognition and outcome construction
models for image generation tasks can be found in Appendix J.


single-cell perturbation datasets, p̂(Y |X, T ) can simply be a smoothed empirical outcome distribution
under treatment T stratified by covariates X. The SAE approach motivates the derivation of our main
theorem presented in the next section, and serves as a baseline comparison to our main algorithm in
the ablation study of the experiments section.

2.2   VARIATIONAL C AUSAL I NFERENCE

Now we present our main result by rigorously formulating the objective, providing a probabilistic
theoretical backing, and specifying an optimization scheme that reflects the intuition described in the
previous section. Suppose we want to optimize p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ ) instead of the traditional outcome
likelihood p(Y |X, T ). The following theorem induces the evidence lower bound (ELBO) and thus
provides a roadmap for stochastic optimization:
Theorem 1. Suppose a collection of random variables W follows a causal structure defined by the
Bayesian network in Figure 1. Then J(D) = log[p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ )] has the following variational
lower bound:
               J(D) ≥ Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log [p(Y |Z, T )] − D [p(Y |X, T ) ∥ p(Y ′ |X, T ′ )]
                      − DKL [p(Z|Y, T, X) ∥ p(Z|Y ′ , T ′ , X)]                                              (2)
where D[p ∥ q] = log p − log q.
Proof of Theorem 1 and proofs of all theoretical results in the following sections can be found in
Appendix I. Theorem 1 suggests that, in order to maximize the counterfactual outcome likelihood
p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ ), we can maximize the following estimated ELBO parameterized with estimating
models pθ and qϕ given each sample b = (x, t, t′ , y):
                                                                          ′
                                                                                   |x, t′ )

                        Jθ,ϕ (b) = Eqϕ (z|y,t,x) log [pθ (y|z, t)] + log p̂(yθ,ϕ
                                                                      ′
                                                                        , t′ , x) ,

                                   − DKL qϕ (z|y, t, x) ∥ qϕ (z|yθ,ϕ                           (3)
         ′
where yθ,ϕ    = Epθ (·|zϕ ,t′ ) Y ′ = Epθ (·|Eqϕ (·|y,t,x) Z,t′ ) Y ′ and p̂ can be estimated with the approaches
described at the end of Section 2.1. Note that p̂(y|x, t) does not impose gradient on (pθ , qϕ ) and is
thus omitted in Jθ,ϕ (b). The stochastic optimization of ELBO is hence conducted on the objective
Jpdata (pθ , qϕ ) = Epdata Jθ,ϕ (b) where t′ ∼ pdata (T |x). A figure demonstrating the workflow of this
stochastic optimization scheme can be found in Figure 2.
As can be seen from Equation 3, the ELBO consists of the individual-specific factual outcome
likelihood Eqϕ (z|y,t,x) log[pθ (y|z, t)] and the covariate-specific counterfactual outcome likelihood


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        ′
log[p(yθ,ϕ |x, t′ )], echoing the intuition highlighted by Equation 1, with an additional divergence
                                     ′
term −DKL [qϕ (z|y, t, x) ∥ qϕ (z|yθ,ϕ   , t′ , x)] that regularizes the similarity across latent distributions
under different potential scenarios. Note that this framework is fundamentally different from VAE
formulations such as CVAE (Sohn et al., 2015) or CEVAE (Louizos et al., 2017), since the variational
lower bound is derived directly from the causal objective and the KL-divergence term serves causal
purposes that are entirely different from the prior latent bounding purpose of VAEs. An interpretation
of this divergence term is given in the paragraph below. A comparison between VCI and conditional
VAE using standard VAE notations is given in Appendix C. A summary of different optional gradient
detaching patterns for training stability is given in Appendix K. An approach to conduct counterfactual
supervision implicitly using traditional variational inference is given in Appendix E.

                                                                                        ′
Divergence Interpretation The divergence term −DKL [qϕ (z|y, t, x) ∥ qϕ (z|yθ,ϕ            , t′ , x)] is the
key of the framework and it serves two purposes. Firstly, it adds robustness to latent encoding
by encouraging the encoding model to recognize individual features contained in both factual and
counterfactual outcomes. In fact, these common features are well disentangled from the treatment
variables, which we will discuss in-depth in the next section. Secondly, it encourages the preservation
of individuality in counterfactual outcome constructions. To see this, notice that if the counterfactual
                                                                                                  ′
outcome construction was only penalized by the covariate-specific likelihood loss − log[p̂(yθ,ϕ      |x, t′ )],
the counterfactual decoding model pθ (Y ′ |zϕ , t′ ) could learn to completely discard the identity of
individual subjects represented in latent features zϕ once it detects a counterfactual treatment t′ ̸= t
in the inputs. Such behavior is regulated by the divergence term, since otherwise we would not be
                                             ′
able to recover a latent distribution qϕ (Z|yθ,ϕ , t′ , x) close to qϕ (Z|y, t, x).

Robust Marginal Estimation Similar to the augmented inverse propensity weighted (AIPW)
estimator in traditional causal inference, the individual-level model predictions acquired by our
                                                                                               ′
framework can also aid the robust estimation of average treatment effect Ψ(p) = Ep [Ydo(T         ′ =α) ] for a

treatment level α of interest if such estimation is desired. Under the formulation in Figure 1, we have
the following robust estimator that is asymptotically efficient under some regularity conditions (Van
Der Laan & Rubin, 2006):
                       n
                    1 X I(tk = α)                      I(tk = α)
         Ψ̂n (o) =                        · yk + 1 −                  · Epθ [Y ′ |zk,ϕ , T ′ = α] ,         (4)
                   n          ê(tk |xk )               ê(tk |xk )
                       k=1

                             iid
where ok = (xk , tk , yk ) ∼ p(x, t, y) is the vector of observed triplet of the k-th individual, zk,ϕ ∼
qϕ (yk , tk , xk ), and ê is an estimation of the propensity score that satisfies the positivity assumption
(Robins, 1986). See Appendix G for the derivation of this estimator. Notice that the regression
adjustment term Epθ [Y ′ |zk,ϕ , T ′ = α] in ours has the ability to vary across different individuals
within the same covariate group, which is not the case for that of the AIPW estimator in traditional
causal formulation. Hence, it is meaningful to conduct the robust estimation of covariate-specific
                                             ′
marginal treatment effect Ξ(p) = Ep [Ydo(X=c,T        ′ =α) ] for a given covariate c of interest, see Appendix

G for details.

2.3   L ATENT I DENTIFIABILITY AND E XOGENOUS N OISE D ISENTANGLEMENT

In any deep probabilistic model, there is a certain degree of freedom and arbitrarity to the learnt latent
distribution, even with latent restrictions. Naturally, one might question the latent identification of our
variational causal framework: when identifying counterfactual Y ′ under T ′ , does the learnt latent Z
inevitably carry over some characteristics of the factual treatment in Y and T ? Ideally, we would like
to aid counterfactual construction by attaining a clean disentanglement between the learnt latent and
the observed treatment, such that the counterfactual generation does not preserve influence from the
factual treatment. Such disentangled exogenous noise abduction fits the semantic of our generating
process (Figure 1), where Z and T are not descendant of each other and Z ⊥        ⊥ T |X, as well as the
semantic of causal identification in the traditional formulation, where the identifiability of Ydo(T )
relies on the ignorability assumption that exogenous noise does not contain unobserved confounders.
In this section, we show that optimizing the VCI framework in fact grants such disentanglement
between Z and T under mild assumptions, leading to a more in-depth understanding of the purpose
and behavior of the latent divergence term in VCI’s optimization scheme.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Similar to Shu et al. (2019), we formally define and measure disentanglement in terms of oracle
consistency and oracle restrictiveness, except that our definitions are generalized to the case of
stochastic models and models with auxiliary attributes. For notation simplicity of the oracle operation
on functions with auxiliary inputs, we use γ ζ(a; b) to denote γ(c, b) where c = ζ(a) if ζ is a
deterministic function and c ∼ ζ(a) if ζ is a probability measure. Denote the true data generating
distribution as p0 . The definitions of oracle consistency, oracle restrictiveness, and disentanglement
are then given in Appendix F.
Consider our model class {(p. , q. ) | p. : Z × T → [0, 1]ΣY , q. : Y × T × X → [0, 1]ΣZ } and
let S := (Z, T ), V := (Y, T ). We regard T as part of the model outputs such that the oracle
operations above are well-defined, i.e. let H = {(p̃. , q̃. ) | p̃. (s) = p. (Y |z, t) × δt (T ), q̃. (v, x) =
q. (Z|y, t, x) × δt (T )} where δt is the Dirac measure (δt (T ) = 1 if T = t else 0). Then we have the
following lemma:
Lemma 1. If q minimizes the latent divergence in Equation 2 over p0 (D), i.e.
                               Ep0 DKL [q(z|y, t, x) ∥ q(z|y ′ , t′ , x)] = 0,                              (5)
then q̃ disentangles Z and T .
Lemma 1 builds a direct connection between the latent divergence term and disentangled abduction
of exogenous noise. Intuitively, it states that if the encoder encodes the same latent representation for
any pair of potential outcomes of the same individual, then the latent must have been disentangled
from the treatment. However, does optimizing the ELBO necessarily imply that the latent divergence
term reaches minimum? We proceed to show that this can be implied under mild assumptions.
Proposition 1. With the true distribution p0 satisfying Assumption 2 in Appendix H and Assumption
3 in Appendix I.2.2, if (p∗ , q∗ ) maximizes the evidence lower bound over p0 (D) and any p̂, i.e.
               (p∗ , q∗ ) ∈ arg maxEp0 Eq. (z|y,t,x) log [p. (y|z, t)] + log [p̂(y ′ |x, t′ )]

                                p. ,q.

                                         −DKL [q. (z|y, t, x) ∥ q. (z|y ′ , t′ , x)]}                      (6)
then q̃∗ disentangles Z and T .
Intuitively, Proposition 1 states that as long as the treatments do not have any unknown side effect
and do not completely wipe out different features in different individuals, the solution to maximizing
the ELBO disentangles Z and T . In practice, we can formulate model class as deterministic functions
(i.e. degenerate distributions) plus noise similar to prior work, and encoder noise as standard normal:
             {p. | g. (Y |z, t) := δEp. (·|z,t) Y , ϵ. (z, t) := p. (Y − Ep. (·|z,t) Y |z, t)       (7)
            {q. | e. (Z|y, t, x) := δEq. (·|y,t,x) Z , q. (Z − Eq. (·|y,t,x) Z|y, t, x) = N (0, 1)      (8)
and learn model e. , g. and ϵ. during training. The following proposition states that disentanglement
under the estimating model’s own oracle can be achieved under this setting by optimizing the VCI
objective in real-world optimizations, where neither the true generating mechanisms nor the true
factual-counterfactual pairs are available.
Proposition 2. Given dataset {(xk , tk , yk )}|nk=1 , let pdata be its empirical distribution and the model
class in Equation 7 and Equation 8 satisfy the following uniqueness conditions:
      1) ∀α ∈ T , we have g. (Y |z, α) ̸= g. (Y |z ′ , α) if z ̸= z ′ ;
      2) ∀x, t, y, t′ : pdata (x, t, y) · pdata (t′ |x) > 0 and y.′ = Eg. (·|z,t′ )e. (z|y,t,x) Y , we have
         pdata (x, t′ , y.′ ) = 0 if (x, t, y) ̸= (x, t′ , y.′ ).
If (p∗ , q∗ ) maximizes the VCI objective in Equation 3 over pdata and any p̂, i.e.
                                     (p∗ , q∗ ) ∈ arg max Jpdata (p. , q. )                                (9)
                                                    p. ,q.
                                                R
then (g̃∗ , q̃∗ ) disentangles Z and T under y e∗ pdata .

We note that uniqueness condition 2) in Proposition 2 is reasonable in high-dimensional outcome
settings: taking the facial imaging dataset as an example, it wouldn’t make sense for a model’s
constructed image for a certain individual to be an exact match of the factual outcome of another
individual in the dataset, as long as the dataset does not contain multiple images of the same individual
in the same environment.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        R 1. Under the same settings and conditions of Proposition 2, (g̃∗ , ẽ∗ ) disentangles Z and
Corollary
T under y e∗ pdata .

Corollary 1 states that the optimal model is guaranteed to disentangle Z and T under the constructed
latent distribution in inference mode without noise injection. In summary, the disentanglement results
in our framework rely on the simple fact that the latent divergence term is established on an individual
level, and does not necessarily compete with outcome supervisions under mild assumptions. Prior
works in VAEs have proposed bounding latent on conditional marginal prior (Sohn et al., 2015;
Khemakhem et al., 2020), and VCI can be seen as a further relaxed form of latent restriction in the
sense that the latent for any given subject need not be restricted to any prior distribution – we only
require the latent distributions of a subject’s different potential outcomes to match each other. More
insights on how the latent divergence term helps the training of VCI in practice can be found in the
ablation study in the experiments section.

3     E XPERIMENTS
We present experiment results of our framework on two datasets with vector outcomes (sci-Plex
dataset from Srivatsan et al. (2020) (Sciplex) and the CRISPRa dataset from Schmidt et al. (2022)
(Marson)) and two datasets with image outcomes: Morpho-MNIST (Castro et al., 2019) and CelebA-
HQ (Karras et al., 2017). Results from the former are compared to state-of-the-art models in
single-cell perturbation prediction and results from the latter are compared to state-of-the-art models
in counterfactual image generation. In both cases, our model exhibited superior performance against
benchmarks. Details of model and dataset settings for each experiment can be found in Appendix M.

3.1     S INGLE - CELL P ERTURBATION DATASETS

Same as Lotfollahi et al. (2021), we evaluate our model and benchmarks on a widely accepted and
biologically meaningful metric — the R2 (coefficient of determination) of the average prediction
against the true average from the out-of-distribution (OOD) set on all genes and differentially-
expressed (DE) genes. Definitions of OOD set and DE genes can be found in Appendix M.1. Results
over five independent runs are shown in Table 1.

Table 1: R¯2 of OOD predictions on single-cell perturbation datasets. AE is a naive baseline adapting
Autoencoder to counterfactual generation, see Appendix L.1. GANITE is GANITE’s counterfactual
block adapting to high-dimensional outcome plus multi-level treatment (see Appendix L.2).

                                                    Sciplex                            Marson
                                        all genes             DE genes     all genes            DE genes
      AE                              0.740 ± 0.043      0.421 ± 0.021   0.804 ± 0.020     0.448 ± 0.009
      CEVAE (Louizos et al., 2017)    0.760 ± 0.019      0.436 ± 0.014   0.795 ± 0.014     0.424 ± 0.015
      GANITE (Yoon et al., 2018)      0.751 ± 0.013      0.417 ± 0.014   0.795 ± 0.017     0.443 ± 0.025
      CPA (Lotfollahi et al., 2021)   0.836 ± 0.002      0.474 ± 0.014   0.876 ± 0.005     0.549 ± 0.019
      VCI                             0.832 ± 0.008      0.496 ± 0.011   0.891 ± 0.007     0.658 ± 0.040

For each perturbation of each covariate level (e.g. each cell type of each donor) in the OOD set, the
R2 (coefficient of determination) is computed with the average outcome predictions for all genes and
DE genes using samples from the validation set against the true empirical average over samples from
the OOD set. The average R2 over all perturbations of all covariate levels is then calculated as the
evaluation metric R¯2 . In these experiments, our variational Bayesian causal inference framework
excelled state-of-the-art models in both experiments, with the largest fractional improvement on DE
genes which are most causally affected by the perturbations. Results of marginal estimation using
the robust estimator can be found in Appendix N.1.

3.2     M ORPHO -MNIST

In an ideal world, we would like to evaluate model performance against benchmarks simply by
measuring the error between the counterfactual prediction and the counterfactual truth for each


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: The errors between counterfactual predictions and counterfactual truths on Morpho-MNIST.
Images are scaled to [0, 1] in evaluations. On top of randomly sampling counterfactual treatment, we
also randomly sample the ratio of modification, which could be any value such that the thickness and
intensity of the counterfactual truth is in range. The standard error of runs and the violin plot of
errors are reported in Appendix N.5.

                                            Image MSE ↓ (·10−2 )       Thickness (th) MAE ↓   Intensity (in) MAE ↓ (·10−1 )
                                        β   do(th) do(in)       mix    do(th) do(in)   mix    do(th) do(in)        mix
 DEAR (Shen et al., 2022)                   6.93    3.21        5.08   0.82    0.74    0.85    6.23    3.39        4.61
 Diff-SCM (Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022)       7.72    4.90        6.30   0.70    0.76    0.73    3.48    2.17        2.80
 CHVAE (Monteiro et al., 2023)          1   4.92    4.81        4.81   0.61    0.66    0.62    3.23    1.88        2.81
 CHVAE (Monteiro et al., 2023)          3   6.93    6.19        6.40   0.71    1.34    0.97    2.37    1.31        1.89
 MED (Ribeiro et al., 2023)             1   2.76    0.54        1.65   0.54    0.35    0.46    1.17    0.43        0.78
 MED (Ribeiro et al., 2023)             3   2.20    0.61        1.39   0.31    0.29    0.33    0.44    0.34        0.40
 SAE (Section 2.1)                          0.67    0.20        0.47   0.32    0.21    0.29    0.52    0.26        0.41
 VCI (Section 2.2)                          0.42    0.13        0.36   0.20    0.14    0.22    0.42    0.22        0.33



individual. When the counterfactual truth is attainable, there is no need to resort to approximation
metrics such as Monteiro et al. (2023); Melistas et al. (2024). For this reason, we specifically chose
the Morpho-MNIST (Castro et al., 2019) dataset to present our main evaluation results because the
counterfactual truth can be directly computed on this dataset based on the intervention (modifying
thickness or modifying intensity of hand-written digits) even with the existence of exogenous noise.
Similar to Ribeiro et al. (2023), we evaluate counterfactual constructions under single modifications
as well as mix of modifications, and compare them to state-of-the-art models on high-fidelity image
counterfactual generation. Contrary to Ribeiro et al. (2023), the magnitude of modification is
randomly sampled, which makes the task significantly harder. The results are shown in Table 2
(standard error in Table 8) which demonstrate that ours beat state-of-the-arts by a wide margin. To
understand why conditional diffusion model such as Diff-SCM (Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022) does
not perform well in counterfactual generative modeling, see Appendix C.1. Note that Ribeiro et al.
(2023) only evaluates mean absolute error (MAE) on the thickness and intensity of counterfactual
constructions, which took treatment characteristics into account but completely left out how much
individuality of the original images has been preserved, whereas mean squared error (MSE) on the
image is a comprehensive metric that takes both factors into account and should be the primary
evaluation metric when the counterfactual truth is available. A model inspection using axiomatic
soundness metrics (Monteiro et al., 2023) can be found in Appendix N.4.
To investigate the impact of counterfactual supervision and latent divergence terms in optimizations,
we present an ablation study below to compare VCI to SAE and hierarchical autoencoder (HAE) with
the same neural architecture.


Figure 3: Ablation Study: the error of counterfactual prediction across epochs during the training
of HAE (VCI without counterfactual supervision and latent divergence), SAE (VCI without latent
divergence) and VCI over five independent runs. Note that VCI with latent divergence but without
counterfactual supervision does not make logical sense, but for the completeness of the ablation study,
we present the results for such setting in Appendix N.2.

As can be seen in Figure 3, incorporating counterfactual supervision alone could greatly accelerate
optimization in the initial epochs of training, and achieves an ideal model state in the early stage. This
is the same phenomenon we observed in the optimization on single-cell perturbation datasets with


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


respect to R¯2 . However, although both SAE and VCI beat HAE convincingly in terms of best result,
SAE is largely unstable in the long-run without the proposed latent divergence restriction, and the full
VCI optimization scheme consistently achieves better performance in terms of best result and final
result. To further help the readers understand how and why the latent divergence term stabilizes VCI
training, we include a discussion below along with some illustrations on do(intensity) in Figure 4.


                             (a) SAE                                  (b) VCI

Figure 4: Illustration of the latent divergence term’s long-term impact. Samples are drawn from the
last epoch of SAE and VCI on do(intensity). The left most image of each set is the original image.
More sampled results from VCI on do(thickness) and do(intensity) can be found in Figure 12.
Results from intervening digit i.e. do(digit) can be found in Figure 13.

In a GAN training scheme, the discriminator is a neural model that could often struggle with out-of-
distribution evaluations. As can be seen from the generated samples by SAE in Figure 4, when the
intervention labels are close to the original label, the counterfactual generations are reasonable. For
intervention labels that are significantly different from the original, the images become nonsensical.
This is because the combination of an intervention label that is far from the original and an image
similar to the original is highly out-of-distribution and rarely present in the observed dataset. In other
words, the discriminator has never encountered an image with the same digit and style as the original
having such extreme intensity variations, so whatever the generator produces, the discriminator cannot
tell if it is real or fake due to the lack of reference. This results in the generator exploiting the neural
discriminator in these out-of-distribution scenarios in the long run. However, the latent divergence
term prevents the generator from producing these nonsensical images because, otherwise, the encoder
would not be able to recover a latent distribution close to that of the original image. An evaluation of
latent disentanglement under the latent divergence term can be found in Appendix N.3.

3.3   C ELEBA-HQ

For any real-world dataset where the counterfactual truth is not available, there is not a definitive
metric to evaluate how good the counterfactual constructions really are. For that reason, facial
imaging datasets are prevailing benchmarks for examining counterfactual goodness because even in
the lack of a quantitative metric, human can judge the quality of counterfactuals without the need for
any domain knowledge. Same as Monteiro et al. (2023), we use the CelebA-HQ (Karras et al., 2017)
dataset on 64×64 resolution to evaluate the model’s capability of counterfactual constructions on two
factors – smiling and glasses. Some sampled results from our model are shown in Figure 5.
While MSE of the counterfactual construction cannot be measured, readers can empirically compare
ours to prior work such as CHVAE (Monteiro et al., 2023) which serves as the backbone for the
state-of-the-art model in high fidelity counterfactual image generation MED (Ribeiro et al., 2023).
Aside from compiling counterfactual credibility across all generation tasks, ours show a strong
capability of disentangling factual treatment from observed images in counterfactual construction,
which can be particularly observed in the task of “removing glasses” as shown in Figure 5d. Note
that contrary to prior works, we construct and supervise counterfactual outcomes during training,
and the reconstruction and counterfactual construction share the same decoding mechanism. Hence,
“reconstruction” is really counterfactual construction with the factual label. This can be most clearly
observed in the third set of comparison in line 2 of Figure 5a, where the original image has a
label of “not smiling” yet the person is really in-between smiling and not smiling. In this case, the
“reconstruction” is really a counterfactual construction with treatment abiding to the original label.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Add smiling. Left: original, middle: not smiling (reconstruction), right: smiling (counterfactual).


    (b) Remove smiling. Left: original, middle: not smiling (counterfactual), right: smiling (reconstruction).


     (c) Add glasses. Left: original, middle: no glasses (reconstruction), right: with glasses (counterfactual).


    (d) Remove glasses. Left: original, middle: no glasses (counterfactual), right: with glasses (reconstruction).

                               Figure 5: Results on the test set of CelebA-HQ.


Lastly, we include a discussion here regarding counterfactual fairness. Note that adding glasses is a
relatively easy engineering task, but relatively hard deep learning task on CelebA-HQ due to the small
sample size of images with glasses. As can be seen from Figure 5c, our model learned to not only
attach glasses at the right position, but also attach glasses according to a person’s style and context.
However, readers may naturally wonder if this could induce any fairness issue, such as attaching
certain type of glasses more frequently on certain demographic. We note that our framework can
reduce spurious or unintended relations between given factors, as long as practitioners measure these
factors during data collection and include them as observed labels for the composed datasets, since the
learnt latent representations of our framework are encouraged to be disentangled from the observed
factors. In the case of CelebA, style of glasses is unmeasured, and the model cannot reasonably tell if
attaching different types of glasses on different demographics is unintended or not.


4      C ONCLUSION

In this work, we introduced a variational Bayesian causal inference framework for estimating high-
dimensional counterfactual outcomes, as well as consequent robust marginal estimators. With this
framework, treatment characteristics and individuality in the predicted outcomes can be explicitly
balanced and optimized, and learnt latent representations are disentangled from the treatments. As for
limitations, the theoretical results of this work are established upon the common causal assumption
that there exists no unobserved confounders, through which causal effects are identifiable. Besides,
when multiple treatments are concerned, this work does not explicitly address the situation where
a causal relation exists between treatments. Thus, a straightforward extension of this work could
be to incorporate explicit modeling of the causal relation among treatment variables and update the
descendants of given counterfactual treatment, similar to Pawlowski et al. (2020), before feeding
them into our counterfactual outcome construction framework.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
Yulun Wu developed the proposed framework, conducted experiments on single-cell perturbation
datasets, Morpho-MNIST and CelebA-HQ, and wrote the manuscript; Louie McConnell conducted
experiments on Morpho-MNIST; Claudia Iriondo reviewed related work and edited the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Cian Eastwood, Toru Shirakawa, Pieter Abbeel, Jason Hartford, Dominik Janzing,
Ivana Malenica, Ahmed M. Alaa, and David E. Heckerman for the insightful discussions. The authors
thank Layne C. Price, Zichen Wang, Robert A. Barton, Vassilis N. Ioannidis, and George Karypis for
their feedback in the early development.

R EFERENCES
Alexander Balke and Judea Pearl. Probabilistic evaluation of counterfactual queries. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 12, 1994.

Yoshua Bengio, Eric Laufer, Guillaume Alain, and Jason Yosinski. Deep generative stochastic
  networks trainable by backprop. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 226–234.
  PMLR, 2014.

Johann Brehmer, Pim De Haan, Phillip Lippe, and Taco S Cohen. Weakly supervised causal
  representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38319–38331,
  2022.

Daniel C Castro, Jeremy Tan, Bernhard Kainz, Ender Konukoglu, and Ben Glocker. Morpho-mnist:
  quantitative assessment and diagnostics for representation learning. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 20(178):1–29, 2019.

Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Info-
  gan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Rewon Child. Very deep vaes generalize autoregressive models and can outperform them on images.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10650, 2020.

Saloni Dash, Vineeth N Balasubramanian, and Amit Sharma. Evaluating and mitigating bias in image
  classifiers: A causal perspective using counterfactuals. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 915–924, 2022.

Atray Dixit, Oren Parnas, Biyu Li, Jenny Chen, Charles P Fulco, Livnat Jerby-Arnon, Nemanja D
  Marjanovic, Danielle Dionne, Tyler Burks, Raktima Raychowdhury, et al. Perturb-seq: dissecting
  molecular circuits with scalable single-cell rna profiling of pooled genetic screens. cell, 167(7):
  1853–1866, 2016.

Ruili Feng, Jie Xiao, Kecheng Zheng, Deli Zhao, Jingren Zhou, Qibin Sun, and Zheng-Jun Zha.
  Principled knowledge extrapolation with gans. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 6447–6464. PMLR, 2022.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.

Luigi Gresele, Julius Von Kügelgen, Vincent Stimper, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Michel Besserve.
  Independent mechanism analysis, a new concept? Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 34:28233–28248, 2021.

Hermanni Hälvä, Sylvain Le Corff, Luc Lehéricy, Jonathan So, Yongjie Zhu, Elisabeth Gassiat, and
  Aapo Hyvarinen. Disentangling identifiable features from noisy data with structured nonlinear ica.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1624–1633, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Aapo Hyvarinen, Hiroaki Sasaki, and Richard Turner. Nonlinear ica using auxiliary variables and
  generalized contrastive learning. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 859–868. PMLR, 2019.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of gans for
  improved quality, stability, and variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196, 2017.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoencoders
   and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
   and Statistics, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.
Hyemi Kim, Seungjae Shin, JoonHo Jang, Kyungwoo Song, Weonyoung Joo, Wanmo Kang, and
  Il-Chul Moon. Counterfactual fairness with disentangled causal effect variational autoencoder. In
 Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 8128–8136, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Murat Kocaoglu, Christopher Snyder, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sriram Vishwanath. Causal-
 gan: Learning causal implicit generative models with adversarial training. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1709.02023, 2017.
Aneesh Komanduri, Yongkai Wu, Feng Chen, and Xintao Wu. Learning causally disentangled repre-
  sentations via the principle of independent causal mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01213,
  2023.
Aneesh Komanduri, Chen Zhao, Feng Chen, and Xintao Wu. Causal diffusion autoencoders: Toward
  counterfactual generation via diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17735,
  2024.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodriguez, Yash Sharma, Katie E Everett, Rémi Le Priol, Alexandre
  Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Disentanglement via mechanism sparsity regularization: A
  new principle for nonlinear ica. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, pp. 428–484.
  PMLR, 2022.
Jonathan Levy. Tutorial: Deriving the efficient influence curve for large models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1903.01706, 2019.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Francesco Locatello, Ben Poole, Gunnar Rätsch, Bernhard Schölkopf, Olivier Bachem, and Michael
  Tschannen. Weakly-supervised disentanglement without compromises. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 6348–6359. PMLR, 2020.
Mohammad Lotfollahi, Anna Klimovskaia Susmelj, Carlo De Donno, Yuge Ji, Ignacio L Ibarra,
 F Alexander Wolf, Nafissa Yakubova, Fabian J Theis, and David Lopez-Paz. Learning interpretable
 cellular responses to complex perturbations in high-throughput screens. bioRxiv, 2021.
Christos Louizos, Uri Shalit, Joris M Mooij, David Sontag, Richard Zemel, and Max Welling. Causal
  effect inference with deep latent-variable models. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Thomas Melistas, Nikos Spyrou, Nefeli Gkouti, Pedro Sanchez, Athanasios Vlontzos, Yannis Pana-
  gakis, Giorgos Papanastasiou, and Sotirios A Tsaftaris. Benchmarking counterfactual image
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20287, 2024.
Miguel Monteiro, Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro, Nick Pawlowski, Daniel C Castro, and Ben Glocker.
 Measuring axiomatic soundness of counterfactual image models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01274,
 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thomas M Norman, Max A Horlbeck, Joseph M Replogle, Alex Y Ge, Albert Xu, Marco Jost,
  Luke A Gilbert, and Jonathan S Weissman. Exploring genetic interaction manifolds constructed
  from rich single-cell phenotypes. Science, 365(6455):786–793, 2019.
Nick Pawlowski, Daniel Coelho de Castro, and Ben Glocker. Deep structural causal models for
  tractable counterfactual inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  857–869, 2020.
Judea Pearl. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan
  kaufmann, 1988.
Judea Pearl. Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika, 82(4):669–688, 1995.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro, Tian Xia, Miguel Monteiro, Nick Pawlowski, and Ben Glocker. High fidelity
  image counterfactuals with probabilistic causal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15764, 2023.
James Robins. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained exposure
  period—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathematical modelling, 7
  (9-12):1393–1512, 1986.
Paul R Rosenbaum and Donald B Rubin. The central role of the propensity score in observational
  studies for causal effects. Biometrika, 70(1):41–55, 1983.
Pedro Sanchez and Sotirios A Tsaftaris. Diffusion causal models for counterfactual estimation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.10166, 2022.
Axel Sauer and Andreas Geiger.           Counterfactual generative networks.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.06046, 2021.
Ralf Schmidt, Zachary Steinhart, Madeline Layeghi, Jacob W Freimer, Raymund Bueno, Vinh Q
  Nguyen, Franziska Blaeschke, Chun Jimmie Ye, and Alexander Marson. Crispr activation and
  interference screens decode stimulation responses in primary human t cells. Science, 375(6580):
  eabj4008, 2022.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Xinwei Shen, Furui Liu, Hanze Dong, Qing Lian, Zhitang Chen, and Tong Zhang. Weakly supervised
  disentangled generative causal representation learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  23(1):10994–11048, 2022.
Rui Shu, Yining Chen, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Weakly supervised
  disentanglement with guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09772, 2019.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep
  conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. MIT
  press, 2000.
Sanjay R Srivatsan, José L McFaline-Figueroa, Vijay Ramani, Lauren Saunders, Junyue Cao, Jonathan
  Packer, Hannah A Pliner, Dana L Jackson, Riza M Daza, Lena Christiansen, et al. Massively
  multiplex chemical transcriptomics at single-cell resolution. Science, 367(6473):45–51, 2020.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:19667–19679, 2020.
Mark J Van Der Laan and Daniel Rubin. Targeted maximum likelihood learning. The international
 journal of biostatistics, 2(1), 2006.
Aad W Van der Vaart. Asymptotic statistics, volume 3. Cambridge university press, 2000.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and
  composing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 25th international
  conference on Machine learning, pp. 1096–1103, 2008.
Athanasios Vlontzos, Bernhard Kainz, and Ciarán M Gilligan-Lee. Estimating categorical counter-
  factuals via deep twin networks. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(2):159–168, 2023.
Julius von Kügelgen, Michel Besserve, Wendong Liang, Luigi Gresele, Armin Kekić, Elias Barein-
  boim, David M Blei, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Nonparametric identifiability of causal representa-
  tions from unknown interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00542, 2023.
Mengyue Yang, Furui Liu, Zhitang Chen, Xinwei Shen, Jianye Hao, and Jun Wang. Causalvae:
 Disentangled representation learning via neural structural causal models. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9593–9602, 2021.
Jinsung Yoon, James Jordon, and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Ganite: Estimation of individualized
   treatment effects using generative adversarial nets. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2018.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      I NTRODUCTION ON L ATENT D ISENTANGLEMENT
The study of latent disentanglement in deep causal modeling has mainly focused on two areas. Most
prior works lie in the first area that is causal representation learning, in which researchers seek to learn
latent variables corresponding to true causal factors and identify the structure of their causal relations
(Yang et al., 2021; Hälvä et al., 2021; Gresele et al., 2021; Lachapelle et al., 2022; Komanduri et al.,
2023), predominantly leveraging recent advances in non-linear independent component analysis
(ICA) (Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020) and identify causal structure up to Markov
equivalence (Spirtes et al., 2000) or graph isomorphism under rather heavy assumptions. The second
area and the area this work is concerned of is counterfactual generative modeling, in which the focus
is to conduct disentangled exogenous noise abduction that aids counterfactual outcome generation
(Lotfollahi et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2022). In this context, the goal is to acquire latent representations
disentangled from the observed treatment to aid the correct identification of the causal effect of
counterfactual treatments.

B      R ELATED W ORK
Key prior works in deep causal generative modeling fall primarily into three categories: variational-
based methods CEVAE (Louizos et al., 2017), DeepSCM (Pawlowski et al., 2020), Diff-SCM
(Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022), CHVAE (Monteiro et al., 2023), MED (Ribeiro et al., 2023); adversarial-
based methods CausalGAN (Kocaoglu et al., 2017), GANITE (Yoon et al., 2018); hybrid method
DEAR (Shen et al., 2022) as well as our framework VCI. A comparative analysis of ours against
these related works can be found in Table 3.
Table 3: A comparative analysis of related work. “Variational Objective Distribution” describes
the objective that the ELBOs are derived for in a variational-based method: “Joint” indicates joint
distributions such as p(y, x, t) or p(y, z) (note that different works could have different notations,
here we use y, x, t, z to represent outcome, covariates, treatment, latent respectively), and “Inter-
ventional” indicates conditional outcome distribution p(y|x, t) or p(y|t). “Marginal Distribution
Alignment” describes whether the stochastic optimization objective involves mechanisms that match
the distribution of outcome constructions with some learnt marginal outcome distribution.

                                Variational     Hierarchical     Marginal                   End-to-End
                                                                                Causal                           Latent
                   Type          Objective        Model         Distribution               Counterfactual
                                                                               Discovery                    Disentanglement
                                Distribution     Structure      Alignment                   Supervision
 CEVAE          Variational        Joint
 CausalGAN      Adversarial          –
 GANITE         Adversarial          –
 CPA            Adversarial          –
               Variational +
 DEAR                              Joint                                                                          *
               Adversarial
 DeepSCM        Variational    Interventional
 Diff-SCM       Variational    Interventional
 CHVAE          Variational    Interventional
 MED            Variational    Interventional
               Variational +
 VCI                           Counterfactual
               Adversarial
    *DEAR learns restrictive representation for latent z (z is disentangled from treatment t when encoding t)
     but does not learn consistent representation for z (t is not disentangled from z when encoding z).

CEVAE uses variational autoencoders (VAEs) to infer latent confounders and estimate individual
treatment effects (ITE). DeepSCM integrates deep learning into SCMs using normalizing flows
and variational inference for counterfactual inference. Diff-SCM leverages generative diffusion
models, using forward and reverse diffusion processes guided by anti-causal predictors to generate
counterfactuals. CHVAE extends VDVAE to a conditional model, performing abduction by encoding
images and parent attributes, and includes a penalty for counterfactual conditioning. MED uses
hierarchical VAEs with deep causal mechanisms, inferring exogenous noise by conditioning on
observed data and parent variables. GANITE uses a counterfactual generator to create proxies for


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           x                                   x                              x
                                                                        ′
                                                                      x                                                       x′


                                                                      c′                                                      c′
             z             c                       z              c                           c             z
                 (a) VAE                                (b) VCI                                   (c) VCI (unfolded)

Figure 6: The data generating formulation of conditional generative modeling under VAE formula-
tion and counterfactual generative modeling under VCI formulation using standard VAE notations.
p(x|z, c) = p(x′ |z, c′ ) for c = c′ . White nodes are observed, light grey nodes are assigned during
training and inference, dark grey nodes are unobserved.

Table 4: The objective and ELBO for conditional generative modeling under the VAE formulation and
counterfactual generative modeling under the VCI formulation, using standard VAE notations. As can
be seen, the difference in motivations between the two objectives manifest themselves in the derived
ELBOs in some meaningful and intuitive ways: VAE does not have the motivation to maximize
counterfactual outcome likelihood, hence no such term log[p̂(x′θ,ϕ |c′ )] to conduct supervision of
counterfactuals; VCI does not have the motivation to denoise or to generate samples from pure noise
duing inference time, hence no such term DKL [qϕ (z|x, c) ∥ pθ (z|c)] to bound latent distribution on
some marginal prior.

                                 VAE                                                          VCI
 Objective                      p(x|c)                                                   p(x′ |x, c, c′ )
                                                                                                                   h               i
              VAE
             Jθ,ϕ (x, c) = Eqϕ (z|x,c) log [pθ (x|z, c)]      VCI
                                                             Jθ,ϕ (x, c, c′ ) = Eqϕ (z|x,c) log [pθ (x|z, c)] + log p̂(x′θ,ϕ |c′ )
 ELBO                              h                     i                              h                              i
                          − DKL qϕ (z|x, c) ∥ pθ (z|c)                         − DKL qϕ (z|x, c) ∥ qϕ (z|x′θ,ϕ , c′ )



unobserved outcomes and an ITE generator to estimate potential outcomes. DEAR combines a
VAE-like generative loss with a supervised loss in a bidirectional generative model, trained with a
GAN algorithm requiring knowledge of the causal graph structure and extra labels for latent factors.
As illustrated in Section 2 and Appendix C, the primary contribution of our framework VCI is
the revolution of VAE formulation which leads to a brand new stochastic optimization scheme that
optimizes the ELBO of an actual counterfactual objective. This brings about end-to-end counterfactual
supervision and exogenous noise disentanglement as presented in Table 3.

C    C OMPARISON OF C ONDITIONAL VAE AND VCI
For readers that are more familiar with deep generative modeling than causal inference, we provide a
straightforward comparison between conditional VAE and VCI (fundamentally a comparison between
conditional generative modeling and counterfactual generative modeling) in this section using VAE’s
notations. For data x and condition c, the differences in formulations and objectives are shown in
Figure 6 and Table 4. In causal inference, counterfactual outcome is an individual-level concept –
for a given individual that we observed outcome/data x under treatment/condition c, what would
their outcome have been if they had received treatment/condition c′ instead? This is a “would have”
question, meaning that we seek to find out what the alternative outcome x′ would be in a parallel
world where everything in the state of the universe remained the same, except that the treatment c′
(and its impact) was different. With this in mind, it is not hard to see why the conditional generative
modeling formulation is unorthodox for counterfactual generative modeling – the ELBO serves to
optimize the marginal-level likelihood p(x|c), which is interventional (rung 2) and not counterfactual
(rung 3) (Pearl, 1995), and the learnt model generates samples towards the marginal-level distribution
p(x|c) during inference time, and the question being asked here is “what will an outcome x be under
condition c?”. This is a “will” question – it is generating any outcome under condition c, not given
a specific individual, not given a specific state of the universe. Therefore, contrary to prior works
in HVAEs and diffusion models (Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022; Monteiro et al., 2023; Ribeiro et al.,


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023) which focus on model design adaptations to make the conditional VAE formulation work
in counterfactual generative modeling, we first derive the orthodox formulation and objective for
counterfactual generative modeling, then make the necessary model designs afterwards based on the
accordingly derived ELBO.

C.1   D IFFUSION M ODELS

Due to the popularity of the diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), we feel the necessity to include a
discussion here specifically about its compatibility with counterfactual generative modeling. It is very
important to note that, although diffusion models are the state-of-the-art in generative and conditional
generative modeling, it has not been shown that it has better capability in counterfactual generative
modeling than ordinary HVAEs with learnable encoder (Monteiro et al., 2023; Ribeiro et al., 2023),
and the reason is straightforward once we truly understand the fundamental incompatibility between
the goal of counterfactual inference and the diffusion mechanism. Counterfactual inference entails
abducting and preserving the exogenous noise in the original outcome; diffusion models, on the
other hand, entail diffusing and denoising the original image – it is a mechanism that inherently does
not respect the consistency assumption (Assumption 2) and fundamentally contradicts exogenous
noise abduction. Even if certain prior work such as Sanchez & Tsaftaris (2022) uses the learnt noise
model to replace random noise in inference time, it is still performing the illogical operation of
attempting to construct counterfactual from a noisy version of the original outcome, in which the
exogenous noise has already been discarded. And this is on top of the fact that diffusion models,
as models under the VAE formulation, are working towards the wrong interventional objective as
discussed above. Prior works that attempted at utilizing diffusion models in counterfactual generative
modeling (Dash et al., 2022; Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022; Komanduri et al., 2024) clearly exhibited
this flaw: as can be seen from the CelebA results in Dash et al. (2022) and the MNIST results in
Komanduri et al. (2024), exogenous noise/individuality has been largely discarded in counterfactual
generation – because the diffusion model is doing what it is intended to do: diffusing exogenous and
generating samples that fit seeminglessly into the conditional/marginal likelihood p(x|c); Sanchez
& Tsaftaris (2022) on the other hand, hardly showed any evidence that the model is capable of
preserving individuality – MNIST was the only benchmark in their experiments and only intervening
digit was performed, which does not have measurable counterfactual truth as intervening thickness
and intensity in Morpho-MNIST. In general, the “interventions” performed in Sanchez & Tsaftaris
(2022) all drastically modified the objects in the original images and makes it quite impossible to tell
if exogenous noise are preserved either quantitatively or qualitatively. When one drastically modifies
the objects, the problem moves very far away from the consistency assumption, and it becomes really
questionable whether the results under such “intervention” can even be defined as counterfactuals or
not. We want to clarify that we think Dash et al. (2022), Sanchez & Tsaftaris (2022) and Komanduri
et al. (2024) are meaningful and well-written works that conducted the important advancement of
experimenting diffusion models in counterfactual generative modeling, however, diffusion models
have not shown the capability of exogenous noise abduction on the level of state-of-the-art HVAEs
(Monteiro et al., 2023; Ribeiro et al., 2023) as it stands.
To give the readers a sense of how much difference it makes to use the VCI framework instead of
conditional diffusion models for counterfactual generative modeling, we presented the visual results
on CelebA in Figure 5 and the results on “intervening” digits of MNIST in Figure 13 for readers to
compare to aforementioned prior arts.

D     C OMPARISON OF T RADITIONAL C AUSAL F ORMULATION AND VCI
      FORMULATION

We note that we formulate counterfactuals Y ′ and T ′ as separate variables for the cleanliness of
graphical model and notation simplicity in variational inference, with the goal to bridge readers with
variational inference background and causal inference background. In essence, it is no different from
the traditional causal formulation where the do() operation is directly imposed on factual variable
T , as T ′ is just a dummy variable with no observations. Denote Ydo(T =t′ ) as Yt′ , see Figure 7 for a
demonstration of our formulation in traditional notations.
Then under the ignorability assumption (Assumption 1, note that there is no ϵY and ϵ′Y in the
traditional SCM formulation as there is only one copy of exogenous noise UY injected to factual and


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 UY
                                                                             Z                Y
                                                                  UY

                Y             Yt′                                                                    Yt′


 UX                   UT                                  UX                 UT

                                        do(T = t )  ′                                        do(T = t′ )

            X                    T                                     X                T
                (a) SCM, traditional                    (b) SCM, with fY (X, T, UY ) = f˜Y (fZ (X, UY ), T )
                                         Y                Z
                                               UY

                                                                                  Yt′


                               UT              UX

                                                                                  t′
                                         T                X
                           (c) SCM, with fY (X, T, UY ) = f˜Y (fZ (X, UY ), T ), unfolded

Figure 7: The evolution of our formulation from traditional SCM with observed triplets (X, T, Y ).
Figure 7b is simply extending the production function towards Y with an intermediate variable Z
representing two of its inputs (when fZ (X, UY ) = (X, UY ), f˜Y is just fY ). Then, Figure 7c is
just the unfolded graphical model of Figure 7b, as the do() operation replaces T in the production
function of Y with t′ , i.e. Yt′ = fY (X, t′ , UY ).


counterfactual outcome, but in general if there exists ϵY and ϵ′Y independent of UY , the following
result holds as long as ϵY , ϵ′Y ⊥⊥ UT ), we have the following version of Theorem 1:
Corollary 2. Suppose a collection of random variables follows a causal structure defined by the
Bayesian network in Figure 7b. Then log[p(Yt′ |Y, X, T, t′ )] has the following variational lower
bound:
       log [p(Yt′ |Y, X, T, t′ )] ≥ Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log [p(Y |Z, T )] − D [p(Y |X, T ) ∥ p(Yt′ |X, t′ )]
                               − DKL [p(Z|Y, T, X) ∥ p(Z|Yt′ , t′ , X)]                                    (10)
where D[p ∥ q] = log p − log q.
Now we define dummy variable
                                             T ′ = fT (X, UT′ ),                                           (11)
      ′
with UT satisfying the ignorability assumption (Remark 1), and
                             Y ′ = fY (X, T ′ , UY ) = f˜Y (fZ (X, UY ), T ′ ).                            (12)
        ′                      ′
Then, Ydo(T ′ =t′ ) = fY (X, t , UY ) = Yt′ . Hence, we have


              p(Yt′ |Y, X, T, t′ ) = p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, do(T ′ = t′ )) = p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ = t′ )
                                                                                            (13)
          ′
for any t . Therefore, Figure 1a and Theorem 1 is in essence just Figure 7c and Corollary 2 with
different notations and variable definitions.

E     I MPLICIT C OUNTERFACTUAL S UPERVISION
We demonstrated in Appendix C that the marginal-level observed likelihood is unorthodox for
counterfactual generative modeling and the individual-level likelihood log[p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ )] is
better motivated for this task. However, for researchers who insist on working towards the traditional
likelihood objective log[p(Y |X, T )] composed only of observed variables, there is an approach to
conduct counterfactual supervision implicitly – to view Y ′ as a latent variable restricted on the prior
p(Y ′ |X, T ′ ) and view counterfactual construction task as a latent recognition task:


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 3. J(O) = log[p(Y |X, T )] has the following variational lower bound:
       J(O) ≥ Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log [p(Y |Z, T )] − Ep(Z|Y,T,X) DKL [p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ ) ∥ p(Y ′ |X, T ′ )]
                 − DKL [p(Z|Y, T, X)p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ ) ∥ p(Z|Y ′ , T ′ , X)p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ )] .                      (14)

This induces the following ELBO in stochastic optimization:
         Jθ,ϕ (o) = Eqϕ (z|y,t,x) log [pθ (y|z, t)] − Eqϕ (z|y,t,x) DKL [pθ (y ′ |z, t′ ) ∥ p̂(y ′ |x, t′ )]
                     − DKL [qϕ (z|y, t, x)pθ (y ′ |z, t′ ) ∥ qϕ (z|y ′ , t′ , x)pθ (y ′ |z, t′ )] .             (15)
                                         ′
Equation 15 avoids estimating Y with a single sample as in the objective (Equation 3) derived from
the explicit ELBO (Equation 2). However, it could be a lot more sampling inefficient as the latent
divergence term requires Monte-Carlo samples from both Z and Y ′ to be estimated.

F    D EFINITION OF O RACLE C ONSISTENCY, O RACLE R ESTRICTIVENESS , AND
     D ISENTANGLEMENT
Let H = {(p̃, q̃) | p̃ : S → [0, 1]ΣV , q̃ : V × X → [0, 1]ΣS } be a hypothesis class of stochastic
models (p̃, q̃). The input space of p̃ is a measurable space S where a feature vector s ∈ S is drawn;
the input space of q̃ is the product space of V and X where a vector of interest v ∈ V and some
auxiliary attributes x ∈ X are drawn. The outputs of p̃ and q̃ are probability measures on V and S
respectively. Let the true model (p∗ , q ∗ ) be the true conditional distributions (p0 (V |s), p0 (S|v, x))
of random variables V and S. The following definitions provide criteria under which two parts SI
and S\I of feature variable S separated by an index set I are disentangled by a model.
Definition 1 (Oracle Consistency). Consider s = (sI , s\I ) and s′ = (sI , s′\I ) where
                                                      x ∼ p(X)                                                  (16)
                                                     sI ∼ p(SI |x)                                              (17)
                                                         iid
                                               s\I , s′\I ∼ p(S\I |sI , x)                                      (18)
We say that q̃ is consistent with SI if p is the true distribution p0 and
                                     Ep0 ,p∗ ∥q̃I p∗ (s; x) − q̃I p∗ (s′ ; x)∥ = 0,                             (19)
                         R
where q̃I (sI |v, x) =       s\I
                                   q̃(sI , s\I |v, x). More generally, we say that (p̃, q̃) is consistent with SI
under p if
                                       Ep,p̃ ∥q̃I p̃(s; x) − q̃I p̃(s′ ; x)∥ = 0.                               (20)

As discussed in Shu et al. (2019), oracle consistency (or encoder consistency) states that for any fixed
choice of SI , resampling S\I should not affect the oracle’s measurement of SI . A more general
notion of oracle consistency is defined in addition, as it is valuable in real-world optimization to
evaluate the estimating model’s consistency under its own oracle q̃ p̃.
In contrast, restrictiveness states that for any fixed choice of S\I , resampling SI should not affect the
oracle’s measurement of S\I :
Definition 2 (Oracle Restrictiveness). Consider s = (sI , s\I ) and s′ = (s′I , s\I ) where
                                                     x ∼ p(X)                                                   (21)
                                                   s\I ∼ p(S\I |x)                                              (22)
                                                        iid
                                                sI , s′I ∼ p(SI |s\I , x)                                       (23)
We say that q̃ is restricted to SI if p is the true distribution p0 and
                                    Ep0 ,p∗ ∥q̃\I p∗ (s; x) − q̃\I p∗ (s′ ; x)∥ = 0,                            (24)
                             R
where q̃\I (s\I |v, x) =      sI
                                   q̃(sI , s\I |v, x). More generally, we say that (p̃, q̃) is restricted to SI under
p if
                                      Ep,p̃ ∥q̃\I p̃(s; x) − q̃\I p̃(s′ ; x)∥ = 0.                              (25)


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notice that the oracle consistency and restrictiveness of SI is equivalent to the oracle restrictiveness
and consistency of S\I , we have the following definition of disentanglement:
Definition 3 (Disentanglement). We say that q̃ disentangles SI and S\I if q̃ is consistent with and
restricted to SI . More generally, we say that (p̃, q̃) disentangles SI and S\I under p if (p̃, q̃) is
consistent with and restricted to SI under p.

G    ROBUST M ARGINAL E FFECT E STIMATION
                                                                                     √
By Van der Vaart (2000), a sequence of estimators Ψ̂n is asymptotically efficient if n(Ψ̂n −Ψ(p)) =
   √ Pn
1/ n k=1 ψ̃p (Wk ) + op (1) where ψ̃p is the efficient influence function of Ψ(p) and Wk ∼ p(W ).
The theorem below gives this efficient influence function for the average treatment effect of the
                             ′
treated (ATT) Ψ(p) = Ep [Ydo(T  ′ =α) ] and thus provides a construction of an asymptotically efficient

regular estimator for Ψ:
Theorem 2. Suppose W : Ω → RW follows a causal structure defined by the Bayesian network in
Figure 1, where the counterfactual conditional distribution p(Y ′ , T ′ |Z, X) is identical to that of its
factual counterpart p(Y, T |Z, X). Then Ψ(p) has the following efficient influence function:
                              I(T = α)
                 ψ̃p (W ) =            (Y − Ep [Y |Z, T ]) + Ep [Y ′ |Z, T ′ = α] − Ψ.               (26)
                               p(T |X)

This leads to the construction of Ψ̂n (o) in Equation 4 which is asymptotically efficient under some
regularity conditions (Van Der Laan & Rubin, 2006), with the asymptotic distribution given by
                         √                   d
                                                        h                i
                            n(Ψ̂n − Ψ(p)) −  → N (0, Ep ψ̃p (W )ψ̃p (W )T )                      (27)
where the variance can be estimated empirically in practice and confidence bounds can be constructed
accordingly. The robust estimator within the VCI framework can also be extended to estimating
                                                             ′
covariate-specific marginal treatment effect Ξ(p) = Ep [Ydo(X=c,T    ′ =α) ] for a given covariate c of

interest:
Corollary 3. Under the same settings as Theorem 2, Ξ(p) has the following efficient influence
function:
                                              I(X = c)
                                   ξ˜p (W ) =            ψ̃p (W ).                                 (28)
                                                 p(X)

Note that when p(X) is estimated empirically, the asymptotically efficient estimator for Ξ(p):
              n
           1 X I(xk = c) I(tk = α)                          I(tk = α)                   ′        ′
 Ξ̂n (o) =                                   · yk + 1 −                     · Epθ [Y |zk,ϕ , T = α] (29)
           n i=1 p̂(xk )        ê(tk |xk )                   ê(tk |xk )
               nc
           1 X      I(tki = α)                    I(tki = α)
         =                       · yki + 1 −                       · Epθ [Y ′ |zki ,ϕ , T ′ = α]     (30)
           nc i=1 ê(tki |xki )                   ê(tki |xki )
is simply an application of Equation 4 on the set of observations with covariates c, where
{k1 , k2 , . . . , knc } are indices such that xki = c.

H    F ORMAL D EFINITION OF C OMMON C AUSAL A SSUMPTIONS UNDER THE
     VCI F ORMULATION
Assumption 1 (Ignorability). There is no unobserved confounders, i.e. ŨY ⊥
                                                                          ⊥ UT , where ŨY =
(UY , ϵY , ϵ′Y ).
Note that this assumption can be extended to the counterfactual treatment variable T ′ w.o.l.g.:
Remark 1 (Ignorability). Note that T ′ in our formulation is a dummy variable with no observations,
and we only care about the outcome distribution of Y ′ under assignment do(T ′ = t′ ) for any given
t′ . Hence, the ignorability ŨY ⊥
                                 ⊥ UT′ , and in addition, UX ⊥ ⊥ UT′ , can be assumed w.o.l.g. just so
that the outcome distributions under do(T ′ = t′ ) reduces to that under T ′ = t′ conditioned on X or
Z for notation simplicity, without violating any actual mechanism on the observed data.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The ignorability assumption is universally assumed and entailed in our formulation in Figure 1.
Assumption 2 (Consistency). An individual’s observed outcome under a treatment is the same as
                                                       ′                    ′                       ′
its potential outcome under that treatment, i.e. Y = Ydo(T ′ =T ) , where Ydo(T ′ =T ) = fY (Z, T, ϵY ) is
                                                    ′        ′
yielded by replacing the production equation for T with T = T .

The consistency assumption, commonly stated in causal inference literature, is indeed an assumption
and not just a direct consequence of the SCM under our formulation, since ϵY and ϵ′Y are two copies
of independent variables. In essence, it states that ϵY = 0 and there is only one copy of exogenous
noise UY injected to Y and Y ′ :
Remark 2 (Consistency). Under the consistency assumption, fY (z, t, ϵY ) must be deterministic
                                                     ′                                             ′
for any z and t, otherwise we would have Y ̸= Ydo(T     ′ =T ) since fY (z, t, ϵY ) and fY (z, t, ϵY ) are

independent for any z and t. Hence there exists deterministic function f˜Y such that f˜Y (Z, T, 0) =
fY (Z, T, ϵY ). So w.o.l.g., we let ϵY = 0 under the consistency assumption.

Note that this assumption does not result in a collapse of counterfactual inference to interventional
inference in the traditional sense, as latent Z is unobserved and entails further uncertainty UY beyond
the observed covariates X.

I     P ROOF OF T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
I.1     E VIDENCE L OWER B OUND

I.1.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Proof. By the d-separation (Pearl, 1988) of paths on the causal graph defined in Figure 1a, we have
    log [p(Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ )] = log Ep(Z|Y,T,X) [p(Y ′ |Z, Y, X, T, T ′ )]                                  (31)
                                                        ′                ′
                              ≥ Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log [p(Y |Z, Y, X, T, T )]           (Jensen’s inequality)        (32)
                                                        ′                ′
                                                p(Y , Z|Y, X, T, T )
                              = Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log                                                      (33)
                                                    p(Z|Y, T, X)
                                                  p(Y ′ , Z, Y |X, T, T ′ )
                              = Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log                                                      (34)
                                                p(Z|Y, T, X)p(Y |X, T )
                                                p(Y |Z, T )p(Z|Y ′ , T ′ , X)p(Y ′ |X, T ′ )
                              = Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log                                                      (35)
                                                        p(Z|Y, T, X)p(Y |X, T )
                              = Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log [p(Y |Z, T )] − DKL [p(Z|Y, T, X) ∥ p(Z|Y ′ , T ′ , X)]
                                − D [p(Y |X, T ) ∥ p(Y ′ |X, T ′ )] .                                         (36)
Note that the above steps still hold with an additional edge from Z or T to X (but not both) if UY or
UT is dependent of UX .

I.1.2     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3
Proof. By the d-separation (Pearl, 1988) of paths on the causal graph defined in Figure 1a, we have
                                                                             p(Y, Z, Y ′ |X, T, T ′ )
    log [p(Y |X, T )] = log [p(Y |X, T, T ′ )] = log Ep(Z,Y ′ |Y,X,T,T ′ )                                    (37)
                                                                             p(Z, Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ )
                                                  p(Y, Z, Y ′ |X, T, T ′ )
                      ≥ Ep(Z,Y ′ |Y,X,T,T ′ ) log                             (Jensen’s inequality)           (38)
                                                  p(Z, Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ )
                                                  p(Y ′ |X, T ′ )p(Y, Z|Y ′ , X, T, T ′ )
                      = Ep(Z,Y ′ |Y,X,T,T ′ ) log                                                             (39)
                                                         p(Z, Y ′ |Y, X, T, T ′ )
                                                  p(Y |X, T ′ )p(Z|Y ′ , T ′ , X)p(Y |Z, T )
                                                      ′
                      = Ep(Z,Y ′ |Y,X,T,T ′ ) log                                                             (40)
                                                         p(Z|Y, T, X)p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ )
                                                  p(Y |X, T ′ )p(Z|Y ′ , T ′ , X)p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ )p(Y |Z, T )
                                                      ′
                      = Ep(Z,Y ′ |Y,X,T,T ′ ) log                                                             (41)
                                                         p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ )p(Z|Y, T, X)p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ )

                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    = −Ep(Z|Y,T,X) DKL [p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ ) ∥ p(Y ′ |X, T ′ )]
                       − DKL [p(Z|Y, T, X)p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ ) ∥ p(Z|Y ′ , T ′ , X)p(Y ′ |Z, T ′ )]
                       + Ep(Z|Y,T,X) log [p(Y |Z, T )] .                                                          (42)
Note that the above steps still hold with an additional edge from Z or T to X (but not both) if UY or
UT is dependent of UX .

I.1.3    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 2
Proof. Note that Theorem 1 only relies on the conditional dependency structure in Figure 1, and
the only difference between the dependency structure of (X, Z, T, T ′ , Y, Y ′ ) in Figure 1 and that
of (X, Z, T, t′ , Y, Yt′ ) in Figure 7 is the dependency between (X, T ′ ) and (X, t′ ). However, such
difference does not change the conditional independence of latent posterior: p(Z|Y, T, X, t′ ) =
p(Z|Y, T, X) and p(Z|Yt′ , t′ , X, T ) = p(Z|Yt′ , t′ , X), the conditional independence of out-
come distribution p(Y |Z, T, t′ ) = p(Y |Z, T ) and p(Yt′ |Z, t′ , T ) = p(Yt′ |Z, t′ ), and the condi-
tional independence of covariate-specific outcome distribution p(Y |X, T, t′ ) = p(Y |X, T ) and
p(Yt′ |X, t′ , T ) = p(Yt′ |X, t′ ). Hence, the same proof for Theorem 1 applies to Corollary 2 by
replacing T ′ with t′ and Y ′ with Yt′ .

I.2     D ISENTANGLED E XOGENOUS N OISE A BDUCTION

I.2.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
Proof. Let SI = Z and S\I = T . On one hand,

                  Ep0 ,p∗ ∥q̃I p∗ ((sI , s\I ); x) − q̃I p∗ ((sI , s′\I ); x)∥
                = Ep0 (x),p0 (sI ,s\I ,s′\I |x),p0 (v|sI ,s\I ),p0 (v′ |sI ,s′\I ) ∥q̃I (v, x) − q̃I (v ′ , x)∥   (43)
                                                                                            ′   ′
                = Ep0 (x)p0 (z,t,t′ |x),p0 (y|z,t),p0 (y′ |z,t′ ) ∥q̃I (y, t, x) − q̃I (y , t , x)∥               (44)
                                                                  ′   ′
                = Ep0 (x,t,t′ ,y,y′ ) ∥q(·|y, t, x) − q(·|y , t , x)∥                                             (45)
                          r
                              1
                ≤ Ep0 (d)       DKL [q(·|y, t, x) ∥ q(·|y ′ , t′ , x)] (Pinsker’s inequality)                     (46)
                              2
                = 0,                                                                                              (47)
since Equation 5 implies that DKL [q(·|y, t, x) ∥ q(·|y ′ , t′ , x)] = 0 a.e. with respect to p0 . Hence q̃ is
consistent with Z. On the other hand, q̃ is restricted to Z by design:
                     Ep0 ,p∗ ∥q̃\I p∗ ((sI , s\I ); x) − q̃\I p∗ ((s′I , s\I ); x)∥
                   = Ep0 (sI ,s′I ,s\I ,x),p0 (v|sI ,s\I ),p0 (v′ |s′I ,s\I ) ∥q̃\I (v, x) − q̃\I (v ′ , x)∥      (48)
                                                                                           ′
                   = Ep0 (z,z′ ,t,x),p0 (y|z,t),p0 (y′ |z′ ,t) ∥q̃\I (y, t, x) − q̃\I (y , t, x)∥                 (49)
                   = Ep0 (t) ∥δt (·) − δt (·)∥                                                                    (50)
                   = 0.                                                                                           (51)
Therefore q̃ disentangles Z and T .

I.2.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
Assumption 3 (Uniqueness). Two different individuals do not have the exact same outcome (a.s.)
under the same treatment α, i.e. for y ∼ p(Y |z, α), y ′ ∼ p(Y |z ′ , α), we have y ̸= y ′ a.s. if z ̸= z ′ .

The uniqueness assumption is weak and automatically satisfied under common assumptions in
prior works such as injective decoder, continuous outcome or diffeomorphism (Khemakhem et al.,
2020; von Kügelgen et al., 2023). Note that this assumption could be unrealistic in traditional causal
inference but is very reasonable in high-dimensional outcome settings – take facial imaging dataset for
example, no two individuals with different facial features should look exactly identical pixel-by-pixel
under the same treatment.


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Denote
                 LB(p. , q. ) := Ep0 (d) Eq. (z|y,t,x) log [p. (y|z, t)] + log [p̂(y ′ |x, t′ )]


                                  − DKL [q. (·|y, t, x) ∥ q. (·|y ′ , t′ , x)]}                         (52)
and suppose that (p∗ , q∗ ) ∈ arg maxp. ,q. LB(p. , q. ) but

                              Ep0 (d) DKL [q∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗ (·|y ′ , t′ , x)] > 0,                   (53)
which we can factorize as
                       Ep0 (x,z,t,t′ ),p∗ DKL [q∗ p∗ (z, t; x) ∥ q∗ p∗ (z, t′ ; x)] > 0                 (54)

where p∗ (z, t) = (p0 (Y |z, t), δt (T )). Then we consider model (p∗∗ , q∗∗ ) such that ∀x, z, t, we have
                                   q∗∗ (Z|f0 (z, t, 0), t, x) = δγ(z) (Z)                               (55)
                                            p∗∗ (Y |γ(z), t) = δf0 (z,t,0) (Y )                         (56)

where f0 (z, t, ϵY ) = p0 (Y |z, t) is the true SCM and γ is any injective transformation of z (e.g.
γ(z) = z). Equation 55 is well-defined by Assumption 2 and 3, which guarantees that f0 (z, t, 0) ̸=
f0 (z ′ , t, 0) for z ̸= z ′ ; Equation 56 is well-defined due to the injectiveness of γ. q∗∗ = q∗ , p∗∗ = p∗
elsewhere. It follows that
                    Ep0 (d) DKL [q∗∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗∗ (·|y ′ , t′ , x)]
                  = Ep0 (x,z,t,t′ ),p∗ DKL [q∗ p∗ (z, t; x) ∥ q∗ p∗ (z, t′ ; x)]                        (57)
                                                                                        ′      ′
                  = Ep0 (x,z,t,t′ ) DKL [q∗∗ (·|f0 (z, t, 0), t, x) ∥ q∗∗ (·|f0 (z, t , 0), t , x)]     (58)

                  = Ep0 (x,z,t,t′ ) DKL δγ(z) (·) ∥ δγ(z) (·)                                           (59)
                                                              ′   ′
                  < Ep0 (d) DKL [q∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗ (·|y , t , x)]                                     (60)
by Assumption 2, in the meantime
                        Ep0 (d) Eq∗∗ (z|y,t,x) log [p∗∗ (y|z, t)]
                      = Ep0 (x,z,t),p0 (y|z,t) Eq∗∗ (z∗∗ |y,t,x) log [p∗∗ (y|z∗∗ , t)]                  (61)
                      = Ep0 (x,z,t) Eq∗∗ (z∗∗ |f0 (z,t,0),x,t) log [p∗∗ (f0 (z, t, 0)|z∗∗ , t)]         (62)
                      = Ep0 (x,z,t) log [p∗∗ (f0 (z, t, 0)|γ(z), t)]                                    (63)

                      = Ep0 (x,z,t) log δf0 (z,t,0) (f0 (z, t, 0))                                      (64)

                      = Ep0 (x,z,t) Eq∗ (z∗ |f0 (z,t,0),x,t) log δf0 (z,t,0) (f0 (z, t, 0))             (65)
                      ≥ Ep0 (x,z,t) Eq∗ (z∗ |f0 (z,t,0),x,t) log [p∗ (y|z∗ , t)]                        (66)
                      = Ep0 (x,z,t),p0 (y|z,t) Eq∗ (z∗ |y,t,x) log [p∗ (y|z∗ , t)]                      (67)
                      = Ep0 (d) Eq∗ (z|y,t,x) log [p∗ (y|z, t)]                                         (68)
by Assumption 2. Hence we have
                                         LB(p∗∗ , q∗∗ ) > LB(p∗ , q∗ )                                  (69)
which contradicts (p∗ , q∗ ) ∈ arg maxp. ,q. LB(p. , q. ). Therefore (p∗ , q∗ ) must satisfy

                               Ep0 (d) DKL [q∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗ (·|y ′ , t′ , x)] = 0                   (70)
and it follows that q̃∗ disentangles Z and T by Lemma 1.

I.2.3   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2
Proof. The strategy is similar to the proof of Proposition 1. We first prove a statement similar to
Lemma 1 that states a sufficient condition for empirical disentanglement (sufficiency), and then argue
that this condition is attainable by optimizing Jpdata (p. , q. ) (attainability).


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sufficiency We prove that if
                   Epdata (x,t,y),pdata (t′ |x),pdata (t′′ |x) DKL [q(·|y.′ , t′ , x) ∥ q(·|y.′′ , t′′ , x)] = 0          (71)
where y.′ = Ep. (·|Eq(·|y,t,x) Z,t′ ) Y and y.′′ = Ep. (·|Eq(·|y,t,x) Z,t′′ ) Y , then (g̃. , q̃) disentangles Z and T
            R
under pe = y e · pdata .
Let SI = Z and S\I = T . On one hand, notice that for any x, z s.t. pe (x, z) > 0, we have
pe (t|x, z) > 0 only if pe (x, z, t) > 0 only if pe (x, t) > 0 only if pdata (x, t) > 0 only if pdata (t|x) >
0 for any t. It follows that
                   Epe ,g̃. ∥q̃I g̃. (z, t′ ; x) − q̃I g̃. (z, t′′ ; x)∥
                 = Epdata (x,t,y),e(z|x,t,y),pe (t′ ,t′′ |x,z),g̃. ∥q̃I g̃. (z, t′ ; x) − q̃I g̃. (z, t′′ ; x)∥           (72)
                 = Epdata (x,t,y),pe (t′ ,t′′ |x,Eq(·|y,t,x) Z) ∥q̃I (y.′ , t′ , x) − q̃I (y.′′ , t′′ , x)∥               (73)
                 = Epdata (x,t,y),pe (t′ ,t′′ |x,Eq(·|y,t,x) Z) ∥q(·|y.′ , t′ , x) − q(·|y.′′ , t′′ , x)∥                 (74)
                                r
                                    1
                 ≤ Epdata ,pe         DKL [q(·|y.′ , t′ , x) ∥ q(·|y.′′ , t′′ , x)]       (Pinsker’s inequality)          (75)
                                    2
                 = 0,                                                                                                     (76)
since Equation 71 implies that DKL [q(·|y.′ , t′ , x) ∥ q(·|y.′′ , t′′ , x)] = 0 a.e. with respect to pdata .
Hence (g̃. , q̃) is consistent with Z under pe . On the other hand, (g̃. , q̃) is restricted to Z under pe by
design:
                      Epe ,g̃. ∥q̃\I g̃. (z ′ , t; x) − q̃\I g̃. (z ′′ , t; x)∥
                    = Epe (x,t),pe (z′ ,z′′ |x,t),g̃. ∥q̃\I g̃. (z ′ , t; x) − q̃\I g̃. (z ′′ , t; x)∥                    (77)
                    = Epe (x,t),pe (z′ ,z′′ |x,t) ∥q̃\I (Ep. (·|z′ ,t) Y, t, x) − q̃\I (Ep. (·|z′′ ,t) Y, t, x)∥          (78)
                    = Ep ∥δt (·) − δt (·)∥                                                                                (79)
                    = 0.                                                                                                  (80)
                                                              R
Therefore (g̃. , q̃) disentangles Z and T under                 y
                                                                    e · pdata .

Attainability Let A = {(xki , tki , yki )}|m                                                            n
                                              i=1 be the set of all unique entries in {(xk , tk , yk )}|k=1 .
Suppose that (p∗ , q∗ ) ∈ arg maxp. ,q. Jpdata (p. , q. ) but
                 Epdata (x,t,y),pdata (t′ |x),pdata (t′′ |x) DKL [q∗ (·|y∗′ , t′ , x) ∥ q∗ (·|y∗′′ , t′′ , x)] > 0,       (81)
where y∗′ =      Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y,t,x) Z,t′ ) Y and y∗′′ = Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y,t,x) Z,t′′ ) Y , i.e.          ∃l : 1 ≤ l ≤ n and
 (1) (2)
∃t    ,t     : pdata (t(1) |xl ) · pdata (t(2) |xl ) > 0 such that
                                     h                                           i
                                           (1)                    (2)
                                  DKL q(·|y∗ , t(1) , xl ) ∥ q(·|y∗ , t(2) , xl ) > 0                                     (82)
           (1)                                                    (2)
where y∗ = Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y ,t ,x ) Z,t(1) ) Y and y∗ = Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y ,t ,x ) Z,t(2) ) Y . Then we consider
                            l l l                                     l l l
model (p∗∗ , q∗∗ ) such that ∀(x, t, y) ∈ A, we have
                                 q∗∗ (Z|Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y,t,x) Z,α) Y, α, x) = q∗ (Z|y, t, x)                               (83)
for any α s.t. pdata (T = α|x) > 0. Equation 83 is well-defined since
        Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y,t,x) Z,α) Y = Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y′ ,t′ ,x) Z,α) Y
     ⇔ g∗ (Y |Eq∗ (·|y,t,x) Z, α) = g∗ (Y |Eq∗ (·|y′ ,t′ ,x) Z, α) ⇒ Eq∗ (·|y,t,x) Z = Eq∗ (·|y′ ,t′ ,x) Z                (84)
                                          ′   ′                          ′   ′                                 ′      ′
     ⇔ e∗ (Z|y, t, x) = e∗ (Z|y , t , x) ⇒ (y, t) = (y , t ) ⇒ q∗ (Z|y, t, x) = q∗ (Z|y , t , x)                          (85)
by uniqueness condition 1) and the construction of {q. }. q∗∗ = q∗ elsewhere and p∗∗ = p∗
everywhere.
Firstly, we show that (p∗∗ , q∗∗ ) is still a member of the model class of interest. Since q∗∗ is still
normally distributed with unit variance by definition and g∗∗ still satisfies uniqueness condition
1) by definition, we only need to show that (g∗∗ , e∗∗ ) still satisfies uniqueness condition 2). This


                                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is because ∀x, t, y, t′ : pdata (x, t, y) · pdata (t′ |x) > 0, we have (x, t, y) ∈ A and thus (x, t, y) =
(x, α, Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|yk ,tk ,xk ) Z,α) Y ) for some (xki , tki , yki ) ∈ A only if
                       i   i     i

              (x, α, Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|yk ,tk ,xk ) Z,α) Y ) = (x, α, Eg∗ (·|z,t′ )e∗ (z|yki ,tki ,xki ) Y ) ∈ A                   (86)
                                             i       i       i

only if (x, α, Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|yk ,tk ,xk ) Z,α) Y ) = (xki , tki , yki ) by the fact that (g∗ , e∗ ) satisfies unique-
                                     i   i       i
ness condition 2). In this case, we have (x, t, y) = (xki , tki , yki ) and
                      q∗∗ (Z|y, t, x) = q∗∗ (Z|Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|yk ,tk ,xk ) Z,α) Y, α, x)                                        (87)
                                                                                          i   i   i

                                           = q∗ (Z|yki , tki , xki ) = q∗ (Z|y, t, x).                        (88)
If (x, t, y) ̸= (x, α, Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|yk ,tk ,xk ) Z,α) Y ) for any (xki , tki , yki ) ∈ A, then q∗∗ (Z|y, t, x) =
                                                 i       i        i
                                                                                                           ′
q∗ (Z|y, t, x) by definition. Therefore we have q∗∗ (Z|y, t, x) = q∗ (Z|y, t, x). It follows that y∗∗         =
                                                               ′
Eg∗∗ (·|z,t′ )e∗∗ (z|y,t,x) Y = Eg∗ (·|z,t′ )e∗ (z|y,t,x) Y = y∗ and (g∗∗ , e∗∗ ) satisfies uniqueness condition
2) by the fact that (g∗ , e∗ ) satisfies uniqueness condition 2).
Secondly, we show that (p∗ , q∗ ) is no longer optimal, thus raise a contradiction. On one hand, we
must have
             Epdata DKL [q∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗ (·|y∗′ , t′ , x)]
                                  n                        h                                         i
                                                                                      (1)
           ≥ pdata (xl , tl , yl ) pdata (t(1) |xl )DKL q∗ (·|yl , tl , xl ) ∥ q∗ (·|y∗ , t(1) , xl )
                                      h                                          io
                                                                 (2)
             +pdata (t(2) |xl )DKL q∗ (·|yl , tl , xl ) ∥ q∗ (·|y∗ , t(2) , xl )                       (89)
               > 0,                                                                                                            (90)
                                                      (1)                      (2)
otherwise we would have q∗ (Z|yl , tl , xl ) = q∗ (Z|y∗ , t(1) , xl ) = q∗ (Z|y∗ , t(2) , xl ) a.e.                           which
contradicts Equation 82. Hence
                                                   ′
             Epdata DKL [q∗∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗∗ (·|y∗∗ , t′ , x)]
                X                      X
           =          pdata (x, t, y)      pdata (t′ |x) · DKL [q∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗∗ (·|y∗∗
                                                                                         ′
                                                                                            , t′ , x)]                         (91)
                  (x,t,y)∈A                                  t′
                    X                                    X
              =                pdata (x, t, y)                        pdata (t′ |x) · DKL [q∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗ (·|y, t, x)]    (92)
                  (x,t,y)∈A                                  t′

            = 0 < Epdata DKL [q∗ (·|y, t, x) ∥ q∗ (·|y∗′ , t′ , x)]                                                      (93)
by Equation 83 and the fact that q∗∗ (Z|y, t, x) = q∗ (Z|y, t, x) for any (x, t, y) ∈ A as shown above.
On the other hand, we have
                                                                                        ′
                         Epdata Eq∗∗ (z|y,t,x) log [p∗∗ (y|z, t)] + log [p̂(y∗∗            |x, t′ )]
                       = Epdata Eq∗ (z|y,t,x) log [p∗ (y|z, t)] + log [p̂(y∗′ |x, t′ )]

                                                                                                                         (94)
                                                                                                             ′
simply by the construction of p∗∗ and the fact that q∗∗ (Z|y, t, x) = q∗ (Z|y, t, x), y∗∗                       = y∗′ for any
(x, t, y) ∈ A as shown above. Hence we have
                                        Jpdata (p∗∗ , q∗∗ ) > Jpdata (p∗ , q∗ )                                          (95)
which contradicts (p∗ , q∗ ) ∈ arg maxp. ,q. Jpdata (p. , q. ). Therefore (p∗ , q∗ ) must satisfy
              Epdata (x,t,y),pdata (t′ |x),pdata (t′′ |x) DKL [q∗ (·|y∗′ , t′ , x) ∥ q∗ (·|y∗′′ , t′′ , x)] = 0          (96)
                                                                    R
and it follows that (g̃∗ , q̃∗ ) disentangles Z and T under y e∗ pdata by sufficiency.

I.2.4     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1
Proof. By the proof of Proposition 2 (attainability), we have
                    Epdata (x,t,y),pdata (t′ |x),pdata (t′′ |x) DKL [q∗ (·|y∗′ , t′ , x) ∥ q∗ (·|y∗′′ , t′′ , x)] = 0 (97)
             ′                                                ′′
where y∗ = Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y,t,x) Z,t′ ) Y and y∗ = Ep∗ (·|Eq∗ (·|y,t,x) Z,t′′ ) Y , hence Eq∗ (·|y∗′ ,t′ ,x) Z =
Eq∗ (·|y∗′′ ,t′′ ,x) Z a.e. on pdata and it follows that
      Epdata (x,t,y),pdata (t′ |x),pdata (t′′ |x) DKL [e∗ (·|y∗′ , t′ , x) ∥ e∗ (·|y∗′′ , t′′ , x)]
                                                                 h                                                 i
       = Epdata (x,t,y),pdata (t′ |x),pdata (t′′ |x) DKL δEq∗ (·|y′ ,t′ ,x) Z (·) ∥ δEq∗ (·|y′′ ,t′′ ,x) Z (·) = 0.   (98)
                                                                                      ∗                     ∗

Notice that y∗′ = Ep∗ (·|Ee∗ (·|y,t,x) Z,t′ ) Y and y∗′′ = Ep∗ (·|Ee∗ (·|y,t,x) Z,t′′ ) Y , we have (g̃∗ , ẽ∗ ) disentan-
                    R
gles Z and T under y e∗ pdata by the proof of Proposition 2 (sufficiency).


                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I.3     M ARGINAL E STIMATOR

I.3.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
Proof. Ψ(p) has the identification Ψ(p) = Ep [Ep [Y ′ |Z, X, T ′ = α]] = Ep [Ep [Y ′ |Z, T ′ = α]] under
Figure 1. Following Van der Vaart (2000), we define a path pϵ (Λ) = p(Λ)(1 + ϵS(Λ)) on density
p of random vector Λ as a submodel that passes through p at ϵ = 0 in the direction of the score
         d
S(Λ) = dϵ  log[pϵ (Λ)]     . Following the key identity presented in Levy (2019):
                           ϵ=0
      d
         pϵ (λi |pa(Λi ) = λ̄i−1 )
      dϵ                                 ϵ=0
    = p(λi |pa(Λi ) = λ̄i−1 )(E[S(Λ)|Λi = λi , pa(Λi ) = λ̄i−1 ] − E[S(Λ)|pa(Λi ) = λ̄i−1 ]) (99)
where pa(Λi ) denotes the parent nodes of variable Λi , we have
  d                  d
    Ψ(pϵ )       =            Ep [Epϵ [Y ′ |Z, T ′ = α]]                                                  (100)
 dϵ         ϵ=0     dϵ ϵ=0 Z ϵ
                     d
                 =                        y ′ [pϵ (y ′ |z, T ′ = α)pϵ (z, x)]                             (101)
                    dϵ ϵ=0 y′ ,z,x
                    Z
                                   d
                 =            y′             [pϵ (y ′ |z, T ′ = α)pϵ (z, x)] (dominated convergence)      (102)
                        ′
                     y ,z,x       dϵ   ϵ=0
                    Z
                                              d
                 =            y ′ p(z, x)              pϵ (y ′ |z, T ′ = α)                               (103)
                        ′
                     y ,z,x                  dϵ  ϵ=0
                   Z
                                                         d
                 +            y ′ p(y ′ |z, T ′ = α)               pϵ (z, x)                              (104)
                       ′
                     y ,z,x                              dϵ   ϵ=0

                                         p(t′ |x)
                    Z
                                                                              d
                 =        I(t′ = α) ′ y ′ p(y, t|z, x)p(z, x)                        pϵ (y ′ |z, t′ )
                     w                   p(t  |x)                             dϵ ϵ=0
                       Z
                                                             d
                   +              y ′ p(y ′ |z, T ′ = α)              pϵ (z, x)                           (105)
                           ′
                          y ,z,x                            dϵ   ϵ=0

                          I(t′ = a) ′ ′ ′
                    Z
                 =              ′
                                         y p(y , t |z, x)p(y, t|z, x)p(z, x) {S(w) − E [S(W )|y, z, x, t, t′ ]}
                     w p(t |x)
                       Z
                   +              y ′ p(y ′ |z, T ′ = α)p(z, x) {E [S(W )|z, x] − E [S(W )]}              (106)
                          y ′ ,z,x
                      Z
                          I(t = a)
                  =                 yp(y, t|z, x)p(y ′ , t′ |z, x)p(z, x) {S(w) − E [S(W )|y ′ , z, x, t′ , t]}
                       w   p(t|x)
                        Z
                      +        y ′ p(y ′ |z, T ′ = α)p(z, x) {E [S(W )|z, x] − E [S(W )]}                   (107)
                          y ′ ,z,x
                      Z
                                I(t = α)
                  =  S(w) ·               yp(w)
                   w             p(t|x)
                    Z
                                                                              I(t = α)
                 −       E [S(W )|y ′ , z, x, t, t′ ] p(y ′ , z, x, t, t′ ) ·           yp(y|z, t)
                     w                                                         p(t|x)
                    Z
                 +            E [S(W )|z, x] p(z, x) · y ′ p(y ′ |z, T ′ = α)
                     y ′ ,z,x
                    Z
                 −            E [S(W )] · y ′ p(y ′ |z, T ′ = α)p(z, x)                                       (108)
                     y ′ ,z,x
                  Z
                                I(t = α)
               =     S(w)                  (y − E [Y |z, t]) + E [Y ′ |z, T ′ = α] − Ψ p(w)                   (109)
                   w              p(t|x)
by the assumption of Theorem 2 and factorization according to Figure 1. Hence

  d                           I(T = α)                                          ′     ′
    Ψ(pϵ )     = S(W ),                  (Y − Ep [Y |Z, T ]) + Ep [Y |Z, T = α] − Ψ                           (110)
 dϵ        ϵ=0                 p(T |X)                                                               L2 (Ω;E)

and we have ψ̃p = I(T = α)/p(T |X) · (Y − Ep [Y |Z, T ]) + Ep [Y ′ |Z, T ′ = α] − Ψ.


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I.3.2    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 3
Proof. The proof is a simple extension on the proof of Theorem 2. We have
                 d               d
                    Ξ(pϵ )     =       Ep [Epϵ [Y ′ |Z, T ′ = α] |X = c]                          (111)
                 dϵ        ϵ=0   dϵ ϵ=0 Z ϵ
                                 d
                               =                y ′ [pϵ (y ′ |z, T ′ = α)pϵ (z|X = c)] .          (112)
                                 dϵ ϵ=0 y′ ,z,x
Hence, following the same derivation, pϵ (z, x) in Equation 102 and onwards becomes pϵ (z|X = c),
while p(z, x) in Equation 105 and onwards becomes I(x = c)/p(x) · p(z, x). Therefore, we have
ξ˜p (W ) = I(X = c)/p(X) · ψ̃p (W ).

J   M ODEL A RCHITECTURE FOR I MAGE G ENERATION TASKS

The specific model architecture used for image generation can be found in Figure 8. Note that in the
image generation tasks in our experiments, we treated every condition as intervenable, thus every
condition belongs in T rather than X. If this is not the case, the non-intervenable conditions would
compose covariates X and would only be inputted to the encoding model but not the decoding model.


Figure 8: Model architecture of the latent recognition model (grey) and outcome construction model
(pink) for image generation tasks.

To incorporate t (t′ ) and x into the convolutional layers, we first embed them into vector representa-
tions (tabular embedding for categorical variables; sinusoidal embedding with non-linear mapping for
continuous variable), then repeat and expand each value of the vectors to match the input resolutions
of the corresponding blocks and concatenate them to image representations as extra channels, similar
to Monteiro et al. (2023). Note that there are other ways to conduct image-vector incorporation such
as the scale-shift approach commonly used in diffusion models to incorporate time step variable
(Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022). Each convolutional block (each rectangle in Figure 8) contains a 1×1
embedding layer, a 3×3 (or 1×1 if resolution is lower than 3×3) botteleneck layer, and a 3×3 (or
1×1 if resolution is lower than 3×3) output layer.

K       D ETACHING PATTERNS

In practice, there are a few optional gradient detaching options when evaluating the divergence term
to enhance the stability of stochastic optimization. Our default behavior is to use a copy of qϕ for the
evaluation of the divergence term which is updated after every epoch, while preserving the gradient
                                        ′
path and gradient computation for yθ,ϕ    . This technique is analogous to the handling of surrogate
objectives commonly applied in reinforcement learning (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Van Hasselt et al.,
2016; Schulman et al., 2017), and the copy of qϕ is seen as the target network. In addition, we
                                           ′
provide the option of detaching ϕ from yθ,ϕ    (focusing on the second purpose described in divergence
interpretation: preservation of individuality in decoding) and the option of not detaching the gradient


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


computation for qϕ (reflecting the first purpose in divergence interpretation: recognition of mutual
features in encoding) during the evaluation of the latent divergence term.

L     B ENCHMARK A DAPTATIONS
L.1    AUTOENCODER

The adapted autoencoder reconstructs the outcome during training similar to a generic autoencoder,
but takes treatment and covariates as additional inputs. During test time, we simply plug in the
counterfactual treatments along with factual outcomes and covariates to generate the counterfactual
outcome predictions.

L.2    GANITE

GANITE (Yoon et al., 2018)’s counterfactual generator does not scale with a combination of high-
dimensional outcome and multi-level treatment, thus here we only input one randomly sampled
counterfactual treatment to the generator and correspondingly construct one counterfactual outcome
for each sample. See Figure 9 for the original and adapted structure of the model.

                                                                             yf.
                       yf.         ycf.                                             ycf.


                                                                                    tcf
                   x          t         yf                          x        tf           yf

                         (a) original                                    (b) adapted

Figure 9: GANITE’s counterfactual generator. tcf is a random sample of t, passed into the generator
as a part of the input (x, tcf , yf ), separately from input (x, tf , yf ) of the factual generation.

The discriminator predicts the logits lf , lcf of yf , ycf. separately. The cross entropy loss of (lf , lcf )
against (1, 0) is then calculated.

M     E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS
In this section, we describe the settings of our experiments in detail. For complete informa-
tion on hyperparameter settings, see our codebase at https://github.com/yulun-rayn/
variational-causal-inference.

M.1    S INGLE - CELL P ERTURBATION DATASETS

For both datasets in our experiments, two thousand most variable genes were selected for training and
testing. Marson has 2,000 dimensional outcomes, 3 categorical covariates (cell type, donor indicator,
stimulation indicator) and 1 categorical treatment (target gene), Sciplex has 2,000 dimensional
outcomes, 2 categorical covariates (cell type, replicate indicator) and 1 categorical treatment (used
drug). Data with certain treatment-covariate combinations are held out as the out-of-distribution
(OOD) set and the rest are split into training and validation set with a four-to-one ratio.

Out-of-Distribution Selections We randomly select a covariate category (e.g. a cell type) and
hold out all cells in this category that received one of the twenty perturbations whose effects are the
hardest to predict. We use these held-out data to compose the out-of-distribution (OOD) set. We
computed the Euclidean distance between the pseudobulked gene expression of each perturbation


                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


against the rest of the dataset, and selected the twenty most distant ones as the hardest-to-predict
perturbations. This is the same procedure carried out by Lotfollahi et al. (2021).

Differentially-Expressed Genes In order to evaluate the quality of the predictions on the genes
that were substantially affected by the perturbations, we select sets of 50 differentially-expressed
(DE) genes associated with each perturbation and separately evaluate model performance on these
genes. This is the same procedure carried out by Lotfollahi et al. (2021).

Hyperparameter Settings All common hyperparameters of all models are set to the same as the
defaults of CPA (Lotfollahi et al., 2021): an universal number of hidden dimensions 128; number of
layers 6 (encoder 3, decoder 3); an universal learning rate 3−4 , weight decay rate 4−7 . Contrary to
CPA, we use step-based learning rate decay instead of epoch-based learning rate decay, and decay
step size is set to 400, 000 while decay rate remains the same at 0.1. Batch size is 64 for Marson and
128 for Sciplex.

Other Details We used the empirical outcome distribution (with Gaussian kernel smoother) strati-
fied by X and T to estimate the covariate-specific outcome model p(Y |X, T ). The fully-attached
                                         ′
detaching pattern is applied where both yθ,ϕ and qϕ are not detached when evaluating the divergence
term. Models are trained on Amazon web services’ accelerated computing EC2 instance G4dn which
contains 2nd Generation Intel Xeon Scalable Processors (Cascade Lake P-8259CL) and up to 8
NVIDIA T4 Tensor Core GPUs.

M.2    M ORPHO -MNIST

We used the original Morpho-MNIST training set for model training, and the original Morpho-
MNIST testing set as the observed samples for model testing. The training and testing set have
28×28 dimensional outcomes, no covariates and 2 continuous treatments (thickness, intensity). Three
different testing sets are counstructed based on the counterfactual treatment settings: only modifying
thickness for do(th); only modifying intensity for do(in); randomly modifying thickness or intensity
for mix. For each observed sample in the testing set, we randomly sample the amount of modification
based on the range of the selected modification.

Data Augmentation For each image in the training set (28×28), we pad it by a margin of 4 pixels
on each side (36×36), then randomly crop a 32×32 region. This is the same procedure carried out by
Ribeiro et al. (2023).

Hyperparameter Settings The model width, depth and resolutions of our framework are set to
the same as Ribeiro et al. (2023): number of channels for the hierarchical encoding blocks are set to
{16, 32, 64, 128, 256} with resolutions {32, 16, 8, 4, 1} and number of blocks {4, 4, 4, 4, 4}; number
of channels for the hierarchical decoding blocks are set to {256, 128, 64, 32, 16} with resolutions
{1, 4, 8, 16, 32} and number of blocks {4, 4, 4, 4, 4}. Each block contains a bottleneck layer with
one-forth the number of channels as the input/output number of channels. Training is conducted with
a batch size of 32, an universal learning rate 1−4 , and weight decay rate 4−5 . Learning rate decays at
epoch 100 and linearly decays to 0 at epoch 200.

Other Details We used the adversarial training approach to estimate the covariate-specific outcome
model p(Y |X, T ). The default detaching pattern (see Appendix K) is applied where a copy of qϕ is
used as critic to evaluate the divergence term, and updated after every epoch. Models are trained on
Amazon web services’ accelerated computing EC2 instance G4dn which contains 2nd Generation
Intel Xeon Scalable Processors (Cascade Lake P-8259CL) and up to 8 NVIDIA T4 Tensor Core
GPUs.

M.3    C ELEBA-HQ

The two factors of interest – smiling and glasses, are regarded as intervenable. Therefore, the training
and testing set have 64×64×3 dimensional outcomes, no covariates and 2 categorical treatments.
The train-test split of the CelebA-HQ dataset is inherited from the original CelebA dataset.


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Data Augmentation For each image, we crop the 128×128 center region, then randomly crop a
120×120 region within the center region. Afterwards, we resize this region to 64×64, and apply
horizontal flip with probability 0.5. Note that data augmentation is applied to both training and testing
set in this experiment, since we are sampling and empirically examining the counterfactual results
and not evaluating any metric.

Hyperparameter Settings The model width and resolutions of our framework are set to the
same as Monteiro et al. (2023): number of channels for the hierarchical encoding blocks are set to
{32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024} with resolutions {64, 32, 16, 8, 4, 1}; number of channels for the hierar-
chical decoding blocks are set to {1024, 512, 256, 128, 64, 32} with resolutions {1, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64}.
The number of blocks is set to {3, 12, 12, 6, 3, 3} for the encoder and {3, 3, 6, 12, 12, 3} for the de-
coder. This is chosen to be slightly more shallow than Monteiro et al. (2023) ({4, 12, 12, 8, 4, 4} and
{4, 4, 8, 12, 12, 4}). Each block contains a bottleneck layer with one-forth the number of channels as
the input/output number of channels. Training is conducted with a batch size of 32. An universal
learning rate 3−4 , and weight decay rate 4−7 are inherited from the experiments with single-cell
perturbation datasets. Step size for learning rate decay is 400, 000 with decay rate 0.1.

Other Details We used the adversarial training approach to estimate the covariate-specific outcome
model p(Y |X, T ). The default detaching pattern (see Appendix K) is applied where a copy of qϕ
is used as critic to evaluate the divergence term, and updated after every epoch. Models are trained
on Amazon web services’ accelerated computing EC2 instance P3 which contains high frequency
Intel Xeon Scalable Processor (Broadwell E5-2686 v4) and up to 8 NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs, each
pairing 5,120 CUDA Cores and 640 Tensor Cores.

N     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND D ETAILS
N.1    M ARGINAL E STIMATIONS ON S INGLE - CELL P ERTURBATION DATASETS

In this section, we use the same evaluation metric as Section 3.1, but compute each R2 with the robust
marginal estimator and compare the results to that of the empirical mean estimator. Note that on OOD
set, the robust estimator reduces to empirical mean since no perturbation-covariates combination
exist in validation set. Therefore, we compute the R2 of the marginal estimators using samples from
the training set against the true empirical average on the validation set in these experiments. In each
run, we train a VCI model for individualized outcome predictions, and calculate the evaluation metric
for each marginal estimator periodically during the course of training. Table 5 shows the results on
Marson. Note that the goal of robust estimation is to produce less biased estimators with tighter
confidence bounds, hence we report the mean and standard error over five independent runs to reflect
its effectiveness regarding this goal.

            Table 5: Comparison of marginal estimators on Marson (Schmidt et al., 2022)

                                All Genes                                 DE Genes
      Episode           mean                robust                mean                robust
      40         0.9141 ± 0.0159      0.9343 ± 0.0080      0.7108 ± 0.0735      0.9146 ± 0.0305
      80         0.9171 ± 0.0104      0.9349 ± 0.0068      0.7274 ± 0.0462      0.9163 ± 0.0254
      120        0.9204 ± 0.0097      0.9352 ± 0.0063      0.7526 ± 0.0447      0.9182 ± 0.0229
      160        0.9157 ± 0.0043      0.9355 ± 0.0053      0.7383 ± 0.0402      0.9203 ± 0.0199

As is shown in the table, the robust estimator provides a crucial adjustment to the empirical mean
of model predictions especially on the hard-to-predict elements of high-dimensional vectors. Such
estimation could be valuable in many contexts involving high-dimensional predictions where deep
learning models might plateau at rather low ceilings.

N.2    M ORE C OMPLETE A BLATION S TUDY

Note that the latent divergence term is essentially a regularization term to counterfactual supervision,
as discussed in Section 2.2, hence it would not be meaningful to train VCI with the latent divergence


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


term and without the counterfactual supervision term – it would just further worsen the training-
inference disconnection problem described in Section 1 without any real benefit. However, we
acknowledge that presenting this case would make the ablation study more complete, and therefore
have made this inclusion (marked as HAE-A) in Figure 10. As expected, HAE-A is even worse than
HAE.


Figure 10: Ablation Study: Added HAE-A representing training VCI with the latent divergence term
and without the counterfactual supervision term.


N.3   E VALUATION ON L ATENT D ISENTANGLEMENT

The definition of disentanglement (Definition 3) is extended from a well-established definition of
disentanglement in Shu et al. (2019), based on the oracle consistency (Definition 1) of the latent
representation. It is a different notion from latent disentanglement in the non-linear ICA literatures
(Appendix A) although sometimes sharing a non-distinguishable terminology. In this context, the best
way to evaluate disentanglement is by definition, using oracle consistency, and we present the ablation
results in Table 6. Note that the oracle consistency is measured by KL-divergence for computational
efficiency due to the lack of analytic form for the total variational distance between Gaussians. As
stated by the Pinsker’s Inequality, the total variational distance is bounded once KL-divergence is
controlled.

Table 6: Oracle consistency under different strengths (denoted as coefficient ω2 ) on the exogenous
disentanglement term.

                                     ω2     oracle consistency ↓
                                     0       3979.86 ± 202.42
                                     0.01       0.84 ± 0.13
                                     0.02       0.75 ± 0.11
                                     0.03       0.53 ± 0.10
                                     0.04       0.51 ± 0.07
                                     0.05       0.51 ± 0.08



N.4   C OMPOSITION , E FFECTIVENESS , AND R EVERSIBILITY

We examine our model through the composition, effectiveness, and reversibility metrics (Monteiro
et al., 2023) and use the best benchmark model in Table 2 as a reference. The results are shown in
Table 7. Note that these results only serve model inspection purposes and should not be used as
strict performance evaluations in favor of Table 2. These metrics are merely surrogate measurements
of counterfactual models’ axiomatic characteristics, and they are inconclusive in deciding the best-
performing counterfactual model. For example, a naive model that simply returns the original image
as counterfactual outcome at all times is completely useless for counterfactual inference, but will
achieve the best score on 2 of these 3 metrics – a perfect composition score of 0 and a perfect
reversibility score of 0. There is a trade-off between composition and effectiveness as well as
effectiveness and reversibility, and it is not conclusive which counterfactual model performs the best
unless there is a clear domination of one model over the others on all three metrics.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Composition, effectiveness, and reversibility of ours against the best benchmark model in
Table 2. Images are scaled to [0, 1] in evaluations. All losses are on the L-2 scale (note that the factors
measured by effectiveness – thickness and intensity – are continuous values).

                      β       composition ↓          effectiveness ↓         reversibility ↓
             MED      1          0±0                283.99 ± 67.76         0.01024 ± 0.00767
             MED      3           0±0               151.13 ± 86.46         0.00816 ± 0.00306
             SAE           0.00048 ± 0.000084       189.03 ± 22.92         0.00102 ± 0.00019
             VCI           0.00026 ± 0.000055        17.64 ± 6.23          0.00076 ± 0.00015


As discussed in Section 3.3, it is expected that our model does not reach a composition of 0 because
the consistency assumption does not necessarily hold strictly and the model does not necessarily
perform exact reconstruction in regions directly affected by the intervention, which is not an issue for
the purpose of counterfactual generative modeling. Note that the composition metric does not interact
with counterfactual interventions at all, while the other two metrics interact with counterfactual
interventions at least in some capacity.

N.5    M ORE D ETAILS ON M ORPHO -MNIST E XPERIMENTS

Table 8 shows the standard error of metrics reported in Table 2 across five independent runs. Figure
11 shows the violin plot of errors reported in Table 2 and Table 8 across the corresponding runs.
Figure 12 and Figure 13 show some sampled results from VCI.

                                   Table 8: Standard error of metrics.

                  Std. of Image MSE (·10−2 )    Std. of Thickness (th) MAE     Intensity (in) MAE (·10−1 )
              β   do(th) do(in)       mix       do(th) do(in)       mix        do(th) do(in)       mix
 DEAR              0.20     0.06      0.11       0.18    0.10       0.21        0.32     0.49      0.25
 Diff-SCM          0.02     0.02      0.02       0.01    0.01       0.01        0.01     0.02      0.01
 CHVAE        1    0.53     0.86      0.62       0.03    0.15       0.10        0.33     0.32      0.20
 CHVAE        3    0.90     0.83      0.94       0.04    0.21       0.08        0.19     0.10      0.17
 MED          1    0.92     0.26      0.59       0.11    0.08       0.12        0.31     0.19      0.23
 MED          3    1.34     0.40      0.86       0.05    0.06       0.07        0.25     0.09      0.15
 SAE               0.12     0.05      0.05       0.10    0.04       0.05        0.15     0.10      0.08
 VCI               0.07     0.01      0.07       0.03    0.01       0.05        0.11     0.05      0.06


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Violin plot of Image MSE, Thickness MAE and Intensity MAE on benchmark models and
ours across five independent runs.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   (a) do(thickness).                          (b) do(intensity).

Figure 12: Sampled results on the test set of Morpho-MNIST. The left most image of each set is the
original image. These results are non-cherry-picked in terms of model performance (picking was
conducted to make sure there is a variety of digits and styles, but not based on performance).


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Sampled results on the test set of Morpho-MNIST on digit intervention. Note that these
results do not have quantifiable counterfactual truths which we can evaluate on the capacity of
intervening thickness and intensity in Table 2.


                                               35
