Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HINK - ON -G RAPH 2.0: D EEP AND FAITHFUL L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODEL R EASONING WITH K NOWLEDGE -
GUIDED R ETRIEVAL AUGMENTED G ENERATION

 Shengjie Ma1,2∗, Chengjin Xu1∗,† Xuhui Jiang1∗, Muzhi Li3 , Huaren Qu4 ,
 Cehao Yang1 , Jiaxin Mao2†, Jian Guo1†
 1
   IDEA Research, International Digital Economy Academy, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
 2
   Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
 3
   The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, New Territories, Hong Kong, China
 4
   The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China



                                                   A BSTRACT

             Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has improved large language models
             (LLMs) by using knowledge retrieval to overcome knowledge deficiencies. How-
             ever, current RAG methods often fall short of ensuring the depth and complete-
             ness of retrieved information, which is necessary for complex reasoning tasks.
             In this work, we introduce Think-on-Graph 2.0 (ToG-2), a hybrid RAG frame-
             work that iteratively retrieves information from both unstructured and structured
             knowledge sources in a tight-coupling manner. Specifically, ToG-2 leverages
             knowledge graphs (KGs) to link documents via entities, facilitating deep and
             knowledge-guided context retrieval. Simultaneously, it utilizes documents as en-
             tity contexts to achieve precise and efficient graph retrieval. ToG-2 alternates
             between graph retrieval and context retrieval to search for in-depth clues rele-
             vant to the question, enabling LLMs to generate answers. We conduct a series
             of well-designed experiments to highlight the following advantages of ToG-2:
             1) ToG-2 tightly couples the processes of context retrieval and graph retrieval,
             deepening context retrieval via the KG while enabling reliable graph retrieval
             based on contexts; 2) it achieves deep and faithful reasoning in LLMs through
             an iterative knowledge retrieval process of collaboration between contexts and
             the KG; and 3) ToG-2 is training-free and plug-and-play compatible with vari-
             ous LLMs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ToG-2 achieves overall state-
             of-the-art (SOTA) performance on 6 out of 7 knowledge-intensive datasets with
             GPT-3.5, and can elevate the performance of smaller models (e.g., LLAMA-2-
             13B) to the level of GPT-3.5’s direct reasoning. The source code is available on
             https://github.com/IDEA-FinAI/ToG-2.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has significantly enhanced the capabilities of large language
models (LLMs) by retrieving relevant knowledge from external sources, as a promising solution to
address the knowledge deficiencies and hallucination issues (Zhao et al., 2024). Despite this poten-
tial, and researchers’ attempts to incorporate various complex additional processes into RAG (Yu
et al., 2023; Edge et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024c), LLMs still struggle to maintain human-like reason-
ing trajectories (Kahneman, 2011) when handling complex tasks, which require continuous effort
and motivation to integrate fragmented information and the structural relationships between them.
Many recent implementations of RAG mainly rely on vector retrieval of textual content within doc-
uments (Ding et al., 2024; Asai et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b). Although vector embedding is
effective for measuring the semantic similarity between two texts, text-based RAG struggles to cap-
ture the structured relationship between texts and documents (Chen et al., 2023). Specifically, simple
    ∗
        Both authors contributed equally to this research.
    †
        Corresponding author


                                                             1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The illustration of differences among (a) text-based RAG, (b) KG-based RAG, (c)
KG+Text (Loose-coupling) Hybrid RAG, and (d) our proposed KG×Text (Tight-coupling) RAG
framework.


vector-based matching may overlook knowledge-level association between entities within different
texts, e.g., Global Financial Crisis and The 2008 Recession, which are two surface names that refer
to the same event; Harry Potter and Fantastic Beasts which are both written by J.K. Rowling. This
limitation results in that most text-based RAG approaches are not suitable for multi-step reasoning or
tracking logical links between different information fragments. As shown in Figure 1(a), the naive
RAG, where generic retrievers search through large-scale corpora, the recall often focuses on the
level of superficial semantic similarity (Edge et al., 2024), but overlooks the structured relationship
between Craig Virgin and Lukas Verzbicas, as well as texts containing one of them.
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) organize the structural relationships between entities from fragmented
information and store knowledge in the form of triples. Some researchers have explored KG-based
RAG approaches (Sun et al., 2024), which prompt LLMs by retrieving KG triples relevant to the
question. Although KGs are effective for structuring high-level concepts and relationships, they
inherently suffer from inner incompleteness and a lack of information beyond their ontology Li et al.
(2024a;b). As shown in Figure 1(b), the KG is unable to provide detailed information about Lukas
Verzbicas’s competition records. Some recent works focus on integrating text-based and KG-based
RAG systems (Li et al., 2024c; Edge et al., 2024). In this approach, information retrieved from
both structured and unstructured knowledge sources is aggregated to prompt the LLM to answer
questions but does not improve the retrieval results on one knowledge source through the other.
As shown in Figure 1(c), such loose-coupling combination (KG+Text) approaches still fall short
in handling complex queries that require detailed information returned obtained through in-depth
retrieval.
Considering the aforementioned challenges, we propose Think-on-Graph 2.0 (ToG-2), a tight-
coupling hybrid (KG×Text) RAG paradigm which effectively integrates unstructured knowledge
from texts with structured insights from KGs, serving as a roadmap to enhance complex problem-
solving. As shown in Figure 1(d), ToG-2 first initializes the starting point for graph search by
extracting topic entities from the question. At the beginning of each retrieval round, ToG-2 explores
more candidate entities by performing relation retrieval on the KG and retrieves relevant text from
documents associated with these candidate entities. Following knowledge-guided context retrieval,
ToG-2 prunes the candidate entities based on the results of the context retrieval, updates the set of
topic entities and uses it as the starting point for the next round of retrieval. After each retrieval
round, ToG-2 prompts the LLM to answer the question based on the highly relevant knowledge
triples and contexts obtained during the retrieval process. If the retrieved information is insufficient
to answer the question, the next round of retrieval continues for searching more in-depth clues. Such
a tight-coupling hybrid RAG paradigm makes LLM perform closer to human when solving complex


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


problems: examining current clues and associating potential entities based on their existing knowl-
edge framework, continuously digging into the topic until finding the answer.
The advantage of ToG-2 can be summarized as: (1) In-depth retrieval: ToG-2 achieves in-depth
and reliable context retrieval through the guide of KGs and performs precise graph retrieval by
treating documents as node contexts, achieving a tight-coupling combination of KG and text RAG,
enabling deep and comprehensive retrieval processes. (2) Faithful reasoning: ToG-2 iteratively
performs a collaborative retrieval process based on KG and text, using retrieved heterogeneous
knowledge as the basis for LLM reasoning and enhancing the faithfulness of LLM-generated con-
tent (3) Efficiency and Effectiveness: a) ToG-2 is a training-free and plug-and-play framework that
can be applied to various LLMs; b) ToG-2 can be executed between any associated KG and docu-
ment database, while for purely document database, entities can be extracted from the documents
first, and then a graph can be constructed through relation extraction or entity co-occurrence (Edge
et al., 2024); c) ToG-2 achieves new SOTA performances on various complex knowledge reasoning
datasets and can elevate the reasoning capabilities of smaller LLMs, e.g., Llama2-13B to a level
comparable to direct reasoning with powerful LLMs like GPT-3.5.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

RAG aims to offer effective utilization of external knowledge sources with high interpretability. An
important factor is the type of data retrieved. In this section, we will briefly review text-based RAG,
KG-based RAG and hybrid RAG.
Text-based RAG approaches retrieve information based on the semantic similarities between ques-
tions and texts (Gao et al., 2024; Qiu et al., 2024). However, these approaches have difficulties in
capturing in-depth relationships between texts and the retrieved texts may contain redundant content.
To address these challenges, ITER-RETGEN (Shao et al., 2023) follows an iterative strategy, merg-
ing retrieval and generation in a loop, alternating between “retrieval-augmented generation” and
“generation-augmented retrieval”. Trivedi et al. (2023) combined RAG with the Chain of Thought
(CoT) (Wei et al., 2022a) method, alternating between CoT-guided retrieval and retrieval-supported
CoT processes, significantly improving GPT-3’s performance on various Q&A tasks. While these
optimizations enhance the recall of relevant texts, the whole retrieval process becomes more time-
consuming and errors may accumulate over iterations, due to the lack of a reliable guide.
The structured knowledge representation of KGs is particularly beneficial to LLMs because it intro-
duces a level of interpretability and precision in the knowledge. Early approaches (Sun et al., 2020;
Peters et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2020) focused on embedding knowledge from KGs
directly into the neural networks of LLMs. To maximize the utilization of the interpretability of
the KG, more recent studies (Jiang et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024) have shifted towards using KGs to
augment LLMs externally rather than embedding the knowledge directly into the models. KG-based
RAG approaches involve translating relevant structured knowledge from KGs into textual prompts
that are then fed to LLMs, however naturally suffer from the knowledge incompleteness of KGs.
The most relevant works to ToG-2 are hybrid RAG approaches that aim to integrate both KGs and un-
structured data with LLM, leveraging the strengths of both to mitigate their respective weaknesses.
Chain-of-Knowledge (Li et al., 2024c) (CoK) is a hybrid RAG method that retrieves knowledge
from Wikipedia, Wikidata and Wikitable to ground LLMs’ outputs. GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024)
establishes a KG from documents and enables KG-enhanced text retrieval. HybridRAG (Sarmah
et al., 2024) retrieves information from both vector databases and KGs, achieving superior reason-
ing performance compared to either text-based RAG or KG-based RAG methods alone. However,
existing hybrid RAG approaches merely aggregate information retrieved from KGs and texts but do
not improve the retrieval results on one knowledge source through the other. In this work, ToG-2
aims to tightly couple KG-based RAG and text-based RAG methods, enabling both in-depth context
retrieval and precise graph retrieval to enhance complex reasoning performances of LLMs.


3   M ETHODOLOGY

The proposed method ToG-2 draws from the ToG approach Sun et al. (2024) in multi-hop searches
within KGs, starting from key entities identified in the query and exploring outward based on en-


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 2: An example illustrating the workflow of ToG-2.
tities and relationships with a prompt-driven inferential process. ToG-2 combines the logical chain
extensions based on triples with unstructured contextual knowledge of relevant entities by iteratively
performing knowledge-guided context retrieval and context-enhance graph retrieval, thus more ef-
fectively integrating and utilizing heterogeneous external knowledge.
Specifically, ToG-2 begins by extracting entities from the given question as initial topic entities.
It then performs an iterative process of graph retrieval, context retrieval and LLM reasoning. At
the start of each iteration, ToG-2 selectively explores entities neighboring the current topic entities
on the KG, using the newly encountered entities to refine the retrieval scope, thereby enhancing
both efficiency and accuracy. Next, ToG-2 ranks and selects entities based on the query and the
contextual knowledge retrieved from relevant documents, reducing ambiguity and ensuring accurate
exploration for the next step. After, the LLM utilizes heterogeneous knowledge, including triple
paths and entity contexts, to either answer the question or proceed with further rounds of retrieval if
the information gathered is insufficient. In this section, we will explain each step in detail.

3.1   I NITIALIZTION

Given a question q, ToG-2 first identifies the entities present in q and links them to entities in the
KG. This step can be done by different entity linking (EL) methods, such as LLMs or specialized EL
tools 1 . Then, ToG-2 performs a Topic Prune (TP) step to select suitable entities as starting points
of exploring in a KG, which prompts the LLM to evaluate q and appearing entities, selecting topic
           0
entities Etopic = {e1 , e2 , . . . , eN } and N is determined by LLM.
Prior to the 1st-round graph retrieval, ToG-2 uses dense retrieval models (DRMs, including dual-
tower and single-tower models) to extract the top-k chunks from the documents associated with
                            0
the initial topic entities Etopic . The LLM then evaluates whether this information is sufficient to
answer the question, drawing on its own knowledge. If it concludes that the available information is
adequate, no further steps will be required.

3.2   H YBRID K NOWLEDGE E XPLORATION

The following will illustrate how ToG-2 iteratively harmonizes and tightly couples heterogeneous
knowledge. The iterative process will be explained in two main parts, Context-enhanced Graph
Search and Knowledge-guided Context Retrieval. Formally, in the i-th iteration, the topic
                           i
entities are denoted as Etopic  = {ei1 , ei2 , . . . , eij } and their preceding triple paths are P i−1 =
    i−1   i−1        i−1     i−1
{P1 , P2 , . . . , Pj }, Pj      = {p0j , p1j , . . . , pi−1
                                                           j }, where j ∈ [1, W ], W is a hyperparame-
ter of exploration width (the max number of retained topic entities in each iteration, and pi−1    j   is a
  1
    We use entity linking API provided by Azure AI for Wikipedia, https://learn.microsoft.com/
en-us/azure/ai-services/language-service/entity-linking/overview?source=
recommendations


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


single triple (ei−1
                j , rj   , ej ) containing rji−1 as the relation between ei−1
                     i−1 i
                                                                          j   and eij in the KG, which
could be either direction. Note that i = 0 indicates the initialization phase and the P 0 is empty.

3.2.1   K NOWLEDGE - GUIDED G RAPH S EARCH
By leveraging the rich structural connectivity of knowledge on the KG, the graph search aims to
explore and establish high-level concepts and relationships between the question and target infor-
mation that are seemingly distant from each other in semantic space.
Relation Discovery: At the beginning of the i-th iteration, through the function
                            Edge(eij ) = {(rj,m
                                            i
                                                , hm ) | h ∈ {True, False}},                          (1)
we can find the relations for all topic entities. Edge() is a function that searches for relationships of
                                                               i
entities. h indicates whether the direction of that relation rj,m is pointing to the topic entity eij .
Relation Prune (RP): From the collected relation set {Edge(eij )}W       j=1 , We prompt the LLM to
select and score the relations that are likely to find entities containing helpful context information
for solving q. We design two prompting manners:

                                    PROMPTRP (eij , q, Edge(eij )),                                   (2)
                                            i
                             PROMPTRP cmb (Etopic , q, {Edge(eij )}W
                                                                   j=1 ).                             (3)
The detailed prompt is shown in Appendix E Table 15, 16 and 17. The relations with low scores
will be pruned. Equation 2 involves multiple calls to the LLM for entity pruning on each topic
entity individually, while Equation 3 processes the relation selection for all topic entities in a single
operation. Equation 2 simplifies the task for the LLM, but it is less efficient. Equation 3 reduces
the number of API calls, thereby enhancing inference speed, and allowing the LLM to consider
the interconnections between multiple reasoning paths simultaneously, facilitating selections from a
broader perspective. However, when all topic entities recall an excessive number of relations, this
may challenge the capacity of a weak LLM to effectively handle long texts. The selected relations
for all topic entities in the i-th iteration are denoted as Ri = {rj,m
                                                                     i
                                                                        } (j ∈ [1, W ]). In the case of
                             0                                  0
Figure 2, the topic entity e1 = Crag Virgin and its relation r1,1 = place of birth is pruned since it
may lead to a location that is unlikely to be relevant to a runner’s performance.
Entity Discovery: Given a topic entity eij in Etopic
                                                 i                                              i
                                                      and its corresponding selected relations rj,m in
 i
R , function
                                  Tail(eij , (rj,m
                                               i
                                                   , hm )) = cij,m )                               (4)
identifies the connected entities {cij,m } of the topic entities eij through the relation (rj,m
                                                                                            i
                                                                                                , hm ). In
the case of Figure 2, Crag Sandburg High Shool, Evan Jager are the connected entities of Crag
Sandburg High Shool after entity discovery. A context-based entity prune step will be executed
                                                                                           i+1
later to select top-W entities from all the connected entities as new topic entities Etopic      , thereby
completing the entire graph retrieval step.

3.2.2   K NOWLEDGE - GUIDED C ONTEXT R ETRIEVAL
In this step, ToG-2 digs granular information following high-level knowledge guidance provided
by the KG. Once we get all candidate entities by Function 4, we collect the documents relevant to
each candidate entity cij,m , forming a context pool of candidate entities for the current iteration. In
the case of Figure 2, the context pool of the first iteration contains documents relevant to candidate
entities including Crag Sandburg High School, Evan Jager, Lebanon High School, 1984 Summer
Olympics and so on.
Entity-guided Context Retrieval: In order to find useful information within the document con-
text of candidate entities, we apply DRMs to calculate the relevance scores of paragraphs. Rather
than directly calculating relevance scores between a context and the question—thereby neglecting
the relationship between each context and its corresponding entity—we translate the current triple
P cij,m = (eij , rj,m
                  i
                      ) of candidate entity cij,m into a brief sentence and append it to the context pend-
ing score calculation. Formally, we formulate the relevance score of z-th chunk of cij,m as:
                    sij,m,z = DRM(q, [triple sentence(P cij,m ) : chunkj,m,z
                                                                       i
                                                                             ]).                      (5)


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then the top-K scored chunks Ctxi will be chosen as references for the reasoning phase.
Context-based Entity Prune: The selection of candidate entities is based on the rank scores of
their context chunks. The ranking score of a candidate entity cij,m is calculated as the exponentially
decayed weighted sum of the scores of its chunks that rank in top-K (K denoted the Context Number
for reasoning), which is formally formulated as:
                                  K
                                  X
                score(cij,m ) =         sk · wk · I (the k-th ranked chunk is from cij,m ),        (6)
                                  k=1

where wk = e−α·k , sk is the score of the k-th ranked chunk, I is the indicator function that equals 1
if the k-th chunk belongs to eij,m , and K and α are hyperparameters. Candidate entities with top-W
                                               i+1
scores will be selected as the topic entities Etopic in the next iteration. Candidate Entities with low
relevance scores like Evan Jager in the Figure 2 are pruned.

3.3   R EASONING WITH H YBRID K NOWLEDGE

At the end of the i-th iteration, we prompt LLM with all knowledge found, including Cluesi−1 ,
triple paths, top-K entities and the corresponding context chunks, to evaluate if the given knowledge
is sufficient to answer the question, where Cluesi−1 is the retrieval feedback from the previous
iteration, aiming to maintain useful knowledge in historical context. If LLM judges the provided
knowledge is enough to answer the question, it directly outputs the answer. Otherwise, we prompt
LLM to output helpful clues Cluesi summarized from existing knowledge and then reconstruct an
optimized query based on accurate information until the maximum depth D is reached. The process
is formulated as:

                                                    Ans.,     if the knowledge is sufficient.
          PROMPTrs (q, P i , Ctxi , Cluesi−1 ) =                                                   (7)
                                                    Cluesi , otherwise.

The details of the prompts are shown in Appendix E Table 18 and 19.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   DATASETS AND M ETRICS

We evaluated our method on different knowledge-intensive reasoning benchmark datasets, including
two multi-hop KBQA datasets WebQSP (Yih et al., 2016) and QALD10-en (Usbeck et al., 2023), a
multi-hop complex document QA dataset AdvHotpotQA (Ye & Durrett, 2022) which is a challeng-
ing subset of HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), a slot filling dataset Zero-Shot RE(Petroni et al., 2021),
and two fact verification dataset FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018) and Creak (Onoe et al., 2021). The
evaluation metric for FEVER and Creak is Accuracy (Acc.), while the metric for other datasets is
Exact Match (EM). Recall and F1 scores are not used since knowledge sources are not limited to
document databases. Following previous work (Li et al., 2024c), full Wikipedia and Wikidata are
used as unstructured and structured knowledge sources for all of these datasets. Compared to the
distractor setting, this full Wiki setting makes the retrieval process more challenging and can better
evaluate the effectiveness of various methods on knowledge reasoning tasks.
Since Wikipedia is commonly used for training LLMs, a domain-specific QA dataset that has not
been exposed during the pre-training processes of the LLMs is needed for better evaluating different
LLM-based approaches. We collect thousands of 2023-year Chinese financial statements as a new
corpus, and further build a KG and manually design 97 multi-hop questions based on the corpus. In
this paper, we refer to this dataset as ToG-FinQA. Companies and other organizations are extracted
as entities in the KG, with 7 types of relationships defined (subsidiary company, main business,
supplier, sibling company, bulk transaction, subsidiary, and customer). Financial statements are
used as entity contexts. Please refer to Appendix C for detailed information of ToG-FinQA.

4.2   BASELINES

We compare ToG-2 with both widely-used baselines and state-of-the-art methods to provide a more
comprehensive overview: 1) LLM-only methods without external knowledge, including Direct Rea-


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            Datasets
 Baseline Type    Method
                                  WebQSP     AdvHotpotQA          QALD-10-en           FEVER          Creak    Zero-Shot RE
                                   (EM)         (EM)                (EM)                (Acc.)        (Acc.)       (EM)
                  Direct          65.9%           23.1%             42.0%             51.8%           89.7%       27.7%
 LLM-only         CoT             59.9%           30.8%             42.9%             57.8%           90.1%       28.8%
                  CoT-SC          61.1%           34.4%             45.3%         59.9%† (56.2%‡ )    90.8%       45.4%
 Text-based RAG   Vanilla RAG     67.9%           23.7%             42.4%               53.8%         89.7%       29.5%
 KG-based RAG     ToG             76.2%           26.3%             50.2%               52.7%         93.8%       88.0%
 Hybrid RAG       CoK             77.6%     35.4%‡ (34.1%† )        47.1%         63.5%† (58.5%‡ )    90.4%       75.5%
 Proposed         ToG-2           81.1%           42.9%             54.1%           63.1† (59.7%‡ )   93.5%       91.0%


Table 1: Performance comparison of different methods with GPT-3.5-turbo across various datasets.
Note that the CoK model has 6-shot and 3-shot settings. We present the best performance of CoK
under different shot settings for each dataset. For AdvHotpotQA and FEVER, we use the results
reported in the original paper of CoK, where † represents the 3-shot setting and ‡ represents the
6-shot setting. Bold numbers represent the highest result under parallel settings.

                          Model           ToG-2   Vanilla RAG       CoT       ToG       GraphRAG
                          ToG-FinQA    34.0%              0          0       14.0%         6.2%

                                           Table 2: ToG-FinQA Results
soning, Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022b), Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2023a); 2) Vanilla
RAG, indicating the text-based RAG method that directly retrieves from entity documents and an-
swers the question; 3) KG-based RAG method: Think-on-Graph (Sun et al., 2024), a KG-based RAG
method that searches useful KG triples for reasoning; 4) Chain-of-Knowledge (Li et al., 2024c), a
hybrid RAG method retrieving knowledge from Wikipedia, Wikidata and Wikitable; 5) GraphRAG
(Edge et al., 2024), a hybrid RAG method that first builds a KG from documents and enables KG-
enhanced text retrieval. Notably, we only evaluate GraphRAG on ToG-FinQA due to its unaffordable
computation cost during the indexing process on a large corpus. For a fair comparison, all baselines
are used with GPT-3.5-turbo and evaluated under an unsupervised setting.

4.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We mainly use GPT-3.5-turbo as the backbone LLM for a fair comparison to other baselines. To
evaluate the effect of backbone LLMs on ToG-2’s performance, we conduct experiments with GPT-
4o, Llama3-8B and Qwen2-7B. Consistent with the ToG settings, we set the temperature parameter
to 0 for all generations. The width W = 3 and the maximum number of iterations (depth) is 3.
During relation prune, we set a threshold of 0.2 to filter relations with low relevance scores and
then select the top W . For context retrieval, we utilize the BGE-embedding model without any
fine-tuning. In entity prune, we maintain 10 (K = 10) top-scored sentences for calculating entity
scores. In the reasoning stage, we employ a 2-shot demonstration for most of the datasets. Following
CoK (Li et al., 2024c), we employ 3-shot and 6-shot demonstration for FEVER and make the LLM
execute a self-consistency reasoning step first.

4.4   M AIN R ESULTS

The main results of several open-source datasets are shown in Table 1. We note that ToG-2 out-
performs other baselines on WebQSP, AdvHotpotQA, QALD-10-en, and Zero-Shot RE. Notably,
WebQSP, AdvHotpotQA and QALD-10-en are multi-hop reasoning datasets. On Fever, ToG-2 has
a competitive performance to CoK since the fact statements in Fever mainly are about single-hop
relations and thus do not need in-depth information retrieval. In another fact verification dataset
Creak, all fact statements can be verified based on Wikidata. Thus, ToG-2 and ToG have similar per-
formances on Creak. Meanwhile, compared to original ToG, ToG-2 achieved a substantial improve-
ment on AdvHotpotQA (16.6%) and also demonstrated notable enhancements on other datasets
(4.93% on WebQSP, 3.85% on QALD-10-en, 3% on Zero-Shot RE, and 10.4% on FEVER). This
demonstrates the advantages of our KG×Text RAG framework in addressing complex problems.


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Llama-3-8B         Qwen2-7B          GPT-3.5-turbo             GPT-4o
                     Direct    ToG-2    Direct    ToG-2     Direct    ToG-2     Direct      ToG-2
        AdvHotpotQA 20.8 34.7 (66.8% ↑) 17.9 30.8 (72.1% ↑) 23.1 42.9 (85.7% ↑) 47.7 53.3 (11.3% ↑)
        FEVER       35.5 52.9 (49.0% ↑) 38.6 53.1 (38.1% ↑) 51.8 63.1 (21.8% ↑) 66.2 70.1 (5.9% ↑)
        ToG-FinQA    0         8.2       0         10.3      0         34.0      0         36.1

Table 3: Performance comparison of direct reasoning and ToG-2 with different backbone models.

Most LLMs have been pre-trained on Wikipedia which is also the unstructured knowledge source
of datasets like AdvHotpotQA and Fever, and thus LLM-only methods can work on these datasets.
To further evaluate the effectiveness of different methods on domain-specific reasoning scenarios
where it is essential to retrieve information from specific knowledge sources since LLMs themselves
usually lack relevant knowledge, we conduct an extra evaluation in our established ToG-FinQA
dataset. Table 2 shows a comparison of ToG-2 with CoT and the original RAG based on GPT-
3.5-turbo. ToG-2 demonstrates a notable advantage over other baselines in this task. Both vanilla
RAG and CoT struggled, indicating that traditional RAG and CoT methods may not enable LLMs to
solve unseen complex problems. GraphRAG only answered correctly 6.2%, suggesting that while
loosely coupled hybrid RAG can retrieve information from both knowledge graphs and documents,
it fails to perform multi-hop context retrieval and reasoning with the help of the KG. Compared
to GraphRAG, ToG shows improved effectiveness, albeit limited, indicating that the knowledge
framework provided by triples can better support multi-hop reasoning.

4.5     A BLATION S TUDY

4.5.1     A BLATION OF LLM BACKBONES
To what extent do LLMs with varying capabilities benefit from the knowledge enhancement of
ToG-2? To answer this research question, we analyzed the enhancement of ToG-2 under different
LLM backbone selections through experiments on AdvHotpotQA and FEVER. The experimental
results are shown in Table 3.
We observe that ToG-2 can elevate the reasoning capability of weaker LLMs, e.g., Llama-3-8B,
Qwen2-7B to the level of direct reasoning by more powerful LLMs, e.g., GPT-3.5-turbo, which
supports our intuition that ToG-2 helps LLMs with knowledge and comprehension bottlenecks. On
the other hand, powerful LLMs, e.g., GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-4o, can still benefit from ToG-2 to
improve their own performances on complex knowledge reasoning tasks, indicating that ToG-2 may
achieve even higher performance with stronger LLMs. On AdvHotpotQA and FEVER which use
Wikipedia as knowledge sources, the most powerful LLMs among all backbone LLMs, GPT-4o
experiences the least improvement since GPT-4o has a better memory for knowledge related to
Wikipedia than other backbone LLMs, making its direct reasoning performance on these datasets
already desirable. It is evident that LLMs with stronger reasoning ability like GPT-4o benefit more
significantly from ToG-2 on ToG-FinQA when the relevant knowledge has not been exposed during
pre-training and a knowledge retrieval process is necessary. In such scenarios, ToG-2 enables more
in-depth knowledge retrieval and more reliable reasoning with stronger LLMs.

4.5.2     C HOICES OF E NTITY-P RUNING T OOLS
At the step of context-based entity prune, the selection of new topic entities should be based on the
relevance of the corresponding contexts, which then reversely guides the next round of graph path
exploration. In this experiment, we evaluate different methods for relevance scoring on a sampled
set from AdvHotpotQA. In addition to the three DRM models—BGE-Embedding, BGE-reranker,
and Minilm—we also tested the sparse retrieval model BM25 and generative ranking with LLMs.
What kind of tools are most suitable for tight coupling graph-based knowledge and document-
based knowledge? First, Figure 3a presents various choices of pruning tools with a fixed number
K = 10 of entity contexts. The BGE-Reranker demonstrates the best performance, followed by
Minilm, which serves as a lighter alternative to the former. Generative-based and embedding-based
tools show comparable results, while BM25, as a classic and efficient retrieval method, exhibits
performance close to that of the advanced models. Considering the long runtime of LLMs and
the lower accuracy of embedding models, employing a reranker for entity pruning strikes the best


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Figure 3: Comparative analysis of Entity-Pruning Tools.

balance of both. The observation also suggests that classic retrieval techniques like BM25 alongside
more sophisticated models can still yield good results in a resource-efficient manner.
Then we conduct another experiment in Figure 3b to find the best setting of context numbers K.
Our findings indicate that BGE-Reranker tends to yield better results with longer context inputs,
whereas LLM shows diminished effectiveness. Nevertheless, the overall performance of the pruning
tool using BGE-Reranker slightly exceeds that of the LLM. We attribute this outcome to the fact that
reasonably more contexts allow for greater tolerance toward irrelevant documents, and DRMs can
handle a large number of candidates. While LLM possesses strong discriminative capabilities and
offers greater flexibility, its performance is significantly constrained by the input length. Thus, we
opt for entity pruning based on the DRM approach, considering its advantages in cost-effectiveness
and enhanced generalization.

4.5.3    W IDTH & D EPTH S ETTINGS
Is a broader exploration scope necessarily better?
To answer this research question, we analyze the im-
pacts of maximum width W and depth D settings.
Figure 4 illustrates the performance of ToG-2 on
AdvHotpotQA across varying maximum inference
width and depth configurations. The results demon-
strate a gradual improvement in model performance
as the width increases from 2; however, the marginal Figure 4: Width and depth settings analysis.
gains diminish beyond a width of 3. This trend is at-
tributed to the inference width, which corresponds to the number of top-W relevant entities retained
at each step; a greater width allows for more leniency in topic pruning. With respect to depth, the
model’s performance plateaus beyond a depth of 3. These observations suggest that a larger search
scope is not always better; it should be adjusted according to the difficulty of the task.

4.6     RUNTIME A NALYSIS                                 Answer Type                  Percentage
                                                          Direct Answer                 16.13%
In the above-mentioned experiments, we use Equa-
                                                          Triple-enhanced Answer         9.68%
tion 3 in Relation Prune for efficiency. Under this
setting, the reasoning process of ToG-2 needs at          Doc-enhanced Answer           41.94%
most 2D+(D−1)+1 calls to the LLM. When using              Both-enhanced Answer          32.26%
Equation 2 in relation pruning, ToG-2 needs at most
W D + D + 1 LLM calls and can achieve slightly          Table 4: Sources of answer clue origins: Di-
higher performances on several datasets as shown in     rect Answer refers to questions that can be
Appendix B.3 Table 7. In Table 7, we also report        answered directly without additional infor-
the results of an additional ablation study. By con-    mation. Triple-enhanced Answer refers to
trast, ToG needs at most 2W D + D + 1 LLM calls.        answers that use triple links as clues. Doc-
We compare the specific runtime between ToG and         enhanced Answer refers to answers where
ToG-2 on different datasets in Appendix B.4 Table       entity context information provides clues for
8. Even though ToG-2 integrates additional knowl-       generating the answer. Both-enhanced An-
edge through entity context, ToG-2 still manages to     swer refers to answers where both triple links
                                                        and entity context information contribute.

                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


reduce the entity pruning phase to 68.7% of ToG’s runtime on average. This is because ToG relies
on LLM-based entity pruning, while ToG-2 leverages DRMs, which can handle more candidates
and compute relevance scores faster.

4.7   M ANUAL A NALYSIS

To what extent does ToG-2 leverage the triple links and the contextual information? To gain a
deeper understanding of ToG-2’s behavior, we randomly select 50 AdvHotpotQA reasoning results
from ToG-2 and perform a manual analysis about how triple link reasoning and the contextual in-
formation of entities within the links contribute to the correct answers, respectively. As shown in
Table 4, Doc-enhanced Answers have the highest proportion, at approximately 42%, while Triple-
enhanced Answers are the least common, indicating that textual context is often the most important
source of information for complex QA tasks. Triple links alone lack detailed context, making it
difficult to provide deeper insights, and their role is more of a macro-level guide. Even without
relying on the text information within the triples, key clues can still be navigated effectively. The
proportion of Both-enhanced Answer shows significant utilization, suggesting that the combination
of triple-link reasoning and entity context documents is a highly effective pattern. Direct Answers
account for 16% of the responses, showing that for complex questions, the LLM can directly answer
relatively few questions and still relies heavily on advanced information-enhanced pipelines.
We demonstrate two cases in AdvHotpotQA to show examples of Both-enhanced Answer and Doc-
enhanced Answer. In the Both-enhanced case, the method not only derives that “the group of Black
Indians associated with the Seminole people is Black Seminoles” from the triple links information,
but also leverages the context within the document of Black Seminoles to determine their settlement
location. In the Doc-enhanced case, the approach utilizes triple links as guidance, ultimately iden-
tifying the target information from the document context of Billy Corgan, a member of the band in
the album. More cases in AdvHotpotQA and ToG-FinQA are shown in Appendix D.


Figure 5: Illustrations of Both-enhanced Answer (left side) and Doc-enhanced Answer (right side).
We also compare the outputs of ToG-2 and CoT regarding the selected questions. As shown in
Appendix B.1 Table 5, ToG-2 alleviates the hallucination issues of LLMs compared to CoT with
in-depth knowledge retrieval, and tends to refuse answers more often when faced with insufficient
knowledge. We also observe a significant number of false negatives in the responses of ToG-2 when
using EM as an evaluation metric, suggesting there is still untapped potential for our method.


5     C ONCLUSION

Existing RAG systems based on KGs or texts struggle to ensure in-depth knowledge retrieval
when dealing with complex knowledge reasoning tasks. In this work, we introduce a hybrid RAG
paradigm, KG×Text RAG, which tightly couples KG-based and text-based RAG, and propose the
Think-on-Graph 2.0 (ToG-2) algorithmic framework that enables reliable graph retrieval by using
textual contexts, achieves knowledge-guided context retrieval via the KG, and iteratively perform a
cooperative retrieval process to obtain in-depth knowledge for achieving deep and faithful LLM rea-
soning. Experimental results demonstrate that ToG-2 can significantly improve LLMs of different
sizes and outperform existing various LLM reasoning methods and RAG methods without additional
training costs.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning
  to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2310.11511.
Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. Benchmarking large language models in
   retrieval-augmented generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.01431.
Yujuan Ding, Wenqi Fan, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei Yin, Tat-Seng Chua, and
  Qing Li. A survey on rag meets llms: Towards retrieval-augmented large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.06211, 2024.
Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt,
  and Jonathan Larson. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summariza-
  tion, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16130.
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng
  Wang, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10997.
Rikui Huang, Wei Wei, Xiaoye Qu, Wenfeng Xie, Xianling Mao, and Dangyang Chen. Joint multi-
  facts reasoning network for complex temporal question answering over knowledge graph. In
  ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 10331–10335. IEEE, 2024.
Zhouyu Jiang, Ling Zhong, Mengshu Sun, Jun Xu, Rui Sun, Hui Cai, Shuhan Luo, and Zhiqiang
  Zhang. Efficient knowledge infusion via kg-llm alignment, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2406.03746.
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011.
Muzhi Li, Minda Hu, Irwin King, and Ho-fung Leung. The integration of semantic and struc-
 tural knowledge in knowledge graph entity typing. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven
 Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
 sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-
 pers), pp. 6625–6638, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024a. Association for Computational Linguis-
 tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.369. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
 naacl-long.369/.
Muzhi Li, Cehao Yang, Chengjin Xu, Xuhui Jiang, Yiyan Qi, Jian Guo, Ho fung Leung, and Ir-
 win King. Retrieval, reasoning, re-ranking: A context-enriched framework for knowledge graph
 completion, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.08165.
Xingxuan Li, Ruochen Zhao, Yew Ken Chia, Bosheng Ding, Shafiq Joty, Soujanya Poria, and Li-
  dong Bing. Chain-of-knowledge: Grounding large language models via dynamic knowledge
  adapting over heterogeneous sources. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024c. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=cPgh4gWZlz.
Daizong Liu, Xiaoye Qu, Jianfeng Dong, and Pan Zhou. Reasoning step-by-step: Temporal sentence
  localization in videos via deep rectification-modulation network. In Proceedings of the 28th
  International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 1841–1851, 2020.
Yasumasa Onoe, Michael J. Q. Zhang, Eunsol Choi, and Greg Durrett. Creak: A dataset for com-
  monsense reasoning over entity knowledge, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.
  01653.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Robert L Logan IV, Roy Schwartz, Vidur Joshi, Sameer Singh,
 and Noah A Smith. Knowledge enhanced contextual word representations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1909.04164, 2019.
Fabio Petroni, Aleksandra Piktus, Angela Fan, Patrick Lewis, Majid Yazdani, Nicola De Cao,
  James Thorne, Yacine Jernite, Vladimir Karpukhin, Jean Maillard, Vassilis Plachouras, Tim
  Rocktäschel, and Sebastian Riedel. Kilt: a benchmark for knowledge intensive language tasks,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.02252.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zexuan Qiu, Zijing Ou, Bin Wu, Jingjing Li, Aiwei Liu, and Irwin King. Entropy-based decoding
  for retrieval-augmented large language models, 2024.
Bhaskarjit Sarmah, Benika Hall, Rohan Rao, Sunil Patel, Stefano Pasquali, and Dhagash Mehta.
  Hybridrag: Integrating knowledge graphs and vector retrieval augmented generation for efficient
  information extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04948, 2024.
Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Minlie Huang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. Enhancing
  retrieval-augmented large language models with iterative retrieval-generation synergy, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15294.
Jiashuo Sun, Chengjin Xu, Lumingyuan Tang, Saizhuo Wang, Chen Lin, Yeyun Gong, Lionel M.
   Ni, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. Think-on-graph: Deep and responsible reasoning of
   large language model on knowledge graph, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.
   07697.
Yawei Sun, Lingling Zhang, Gong Cheng, and Yuzhong Qu. SPARQA: skeleton-based seman-
  tic parsing for complex questions over knowledge bases. CoRR, abs/2003.13956, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.13956.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. Fever: a large-scale
  dataset for fact extraction and verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05355, 2018.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Interleaving re-
  trieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10509.
Ricardo Usbeck, Xi Yan, Aleksandr Perevalov, Longquan Jiang, Julius Schulz, Angelie Kraft, Cedric
  Möller, Junbo Huang, Jan Reineke, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, et al. Qald-10–the 10th chal-
  lenge on question answering over linked data. Semantic Web, (Preprint):1–15, 2023.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,
  2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171.
Zhiruo Wang, Jun Araki, Zhengbao Jiang, Md Rizwan Parvez, and Graham Neubig. Learning to
  filter context for retrieval-augmented generation, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2311.08377.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed H. Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou.
  Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. CoRR, abs/2201.11903,
  2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022b.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600, 2018.
Xi Ye and Greg Durrett. The unreliability of explanations in few-shot prompting for textual reason-
  ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Wen-tau Yih, Matthew Richardson, Christopher Meek, Ming-Wei Chang, and Jina Suh. The value
 of semantic parse labeling for knowledge base question answering. In Proceedings of the 54th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp.
 201–206, 2016.
Wenhao Yu, Hongming Zhang, Xiaoman Pan, Kaixin Ma, Hongwei Wang, and Dong Yu. Chain-
 of-note: Enhancing robustness in retrieval-augmented language models, 2023. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2311.09210.
Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhengren Wang, Yunteng Geng, Fangcheng Fu, Ling
  Yang, Wentao Zhang, and Bin Cui. Retrieval-augmented generation for ai-generated content: A
  survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19473, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P SEUDOCODE


Algorithm 1: The ToG-2 Algorithm
Input: Question q
Output: Answer Ans
// Initialization;
Clues = Null;
                0
Topic entities Etopic ← Perform NER then Topic Prune;
     0                                                         0
Ctx ← Retrieve top-k chunks from documents associated with Etopic using DRM;
Prompt LLM evaluates the sufficiency of knowledge to answer q:
  PROMPTrs (q, Ctx0 , Clues0 )
if Information is sufficient then
     Output Ans;
     return
end
else
     Outputs Clues0 ;
end
for i = 1 to D do
    // Context Enhanced Graph Retrieval
    for eij ∈ Etopic
               i
                     do
        Find relations Edge(eij ) = {(rj,m
                                       i
                                           , hm )};
    end
    Use LLM to select and score relations: Ri ← PROMPTRP cmb (Etopic   i
                                                                            , q, {Edge(eij )}W
                                                                                             j=1 );
          i       i
    for rj,m ∈ R do
        Find connected entities cij,m = Tail(eij , (rj,m
                                                     i
                                                         , hm ));
                                                    i
        Collect documents of candidate entities cj,m and split into chunks;
    end
    // Knowledge-guided Context Retrieval
              i
    for chunkj,m,z  of cij,m do
        Compute relevance score sij,m,z = DRM(q, [triple sentence(P cij,m ) : chunkj,m,z
                                                                                   i
                                                                                         ]);
    end
    Ctxi ← Select top-K scored chunks;
    Compute scores for candidate entities based on chunk scores: score(cij,m );
      i+1
    Etopic ← Select top-W entities;
   // Reasoning with Hybrid Knowledge
   Prompt LLM evaluates sufficiency of knowledge to answer q:
   PROMPTrs (q, P i , Ctxi , Cluesi−1 )
   if Knowledge is sufficient then
       Output Ans;
       return
   end
   else
       Outputs Cluesi ;
   end
end
Output failure or best effort answer;


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Category    Type               Definition                        ToG-2 w/o SC       GPT3.5-SC
                Correct            The answer is correct.                 100%             88.3%
    Correct
                False positive     Incorrectly judged as correct.          0%              11.7%
                False negative     Correct answer but judged as          38.7%             18.1%
                                   incorrect due to ambiguous
    Incorrect
                                   questions or labels.
                Hallucination      Incorrect answer due to hallu-         9.7%             72.7%
                                   cination.
                No Info.           Relevant information missing          48.3%               —
                                   or not found in knowledge
                                   sources.
                Misunderstood      LLM misunderstood the                  3.2%              9.1%
                                   question and gave an irrele-
                                   vant response.

Table 5: Human study for Correct and Incorrect cases from randomly sampled HotpotQA questions.


B     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENT ANALYSIS

B.1    M ANUAL A NALYSIS ( CONTINUE )

The manual analysis results presented in Table 5 reveal several additional observations:
1) Even though ToG-2 consistently outperforms the baselines across various datasets, it still faces
significant bottlenecks when it comes to information retrieval. These issues are largely due to in-
complete knowledge sources and the limitations of retrieval models. For instance, Wikidata often
contains inaccuracies, contradictions, or gaps, and many Wiki entities are missing key details on
their Wikipedia pages. On the retrieval side, different types of questions require different informa-
tion, and a one-size-fits-all retrieval model can struggle without specific training. Therefore, ToG-2
can be further optimized through plug-ins that incorporate more comprehensive knowledge graphs
and more advanced retrieval models, which is convenient.
2) When handling less straightforward or more complex questions, LLMs can sometimes misun-
derstand the intent. For example, in the question “What number president nominated Annie Caputo
to become a member of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission?” the correct answer is 45th but the
model might answer Donald Trump (which, while true, isn’t exactly what the question was asking).
3) EM (Exact Match), while often used to assess model performance on QA problems, is not ideal
to handle the complexity of such generating. EM struggles to match aliases correctly, and also
can’t handle answers with different levels of detail. For example, if the question is “Where was A
born?” without specifying the level of detail, both New York and Manhattan should be accepted
as correct answers. Researchers have attempted to use LLMs as evaluators, considering factors
such as efficiency, cost, and the potential bias in LLM evaluations, we opted to use EM for a rough
evaluation. While the role of the evaluator is indeed a significant challenge in the era of large
language models, this work does not delve into that aspect.

B.2    S UPPLEMENTARY A NALYSIS FOR T HE M AIN R ESULTS

As we observed a performance discrepancy between ToG and ToG-2 on the Creak dataset in Table 1,
we aim to provide a more detailed analysis on this particular dataset. This analysis will offer insights
into the underlying factors contributing to the observed discrepancy. Furthermore, we will showcase
and discuss the implications of these findings for understanding the strengths and limitations of
both methods in the context of the Creak dataset. Specifically, we manually analyzed the reasoning
process for 50 examples. Table 6 provides an overview of the distribution of answer types for ToG-2,
following the format of Table 4 in our paper.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Answer Type                  ToG-2
                                 Triple-enhanced Answer         42%
                                 Doc-enhanced Answer            24%
                                 Both-enhanced Answer           34%

               Table 6: Distribution of answer types for ToG-2 on the Creak dataset.



Due to the relatively simple nature of the questions in the Creak dataset, results can often be inferred
directly using triples. As a result, ToG already performs well on this dataset, and the richer entity
document information utilized by ToG-2 does not provide significant additional benefits. As shown
in the table, ToG-2 produces a higher proportion of Triple-enhanced Answers on Creak compared
to more complex datasets like HotpotQA.
We conducted a detailed case study of the behavior of ToG and ToG-2, highlighting three represen-
tative cases that elucidate the primary reasons for the observed performance differences. These bad
cases reveal distinct patterns in how each model approaches reasoning.

Case 1: One can watch Bugs Bunny on the television.
ToG-2 Response: {Yes}, Bugs Bunny can be watched on television. The references mention the his-
tory and success of the Bugs Bunny series, indicating its presence on various channels and streaming
services over the years. The knowledge triplets also confirm Bugs Bunny’s association with iconic
works like Looney Tunes and notable creators like Tex Avery and Mel Blanc.
ToG Response: {Yes}, the claim is {True}. Based on the knowledge triplets, Bugs Bunny is a
beloved character from iconic works such as Looney Tunes, which was created by Warner Bros, and
has been featured extensively in television broadcasts since its creation.
Label: True
Error Reason: The model failed to produce the expected output format {True}. The LLM did not
strictly follow the instructions, which is a low-probability event but accounts for a large proportion
of errors.


Case 2: Quark served the man a drink on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine.
ToG-2 Response: {No}, the claim is {False}. The claim that “Quark served the man a drink on
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine” cannot be evaluated based on the given information. The references
provide information about the character Quark is a Ferengi bartender on Deep Space Nine, but there
is no specific mention of him serving a drink to a man.
ToG Response: {Yes}, the claim is {True}. The knowledge triplets confirm Quark’s association
with Star Trek: Deep Space Nine and his role as a bartender, serving drinks to patrons in the series.
Label: True
Error Reason: The model’s failure stems from two main issues: overcautiousness and semantic
ambiguity. Despite identifying the golden sentence, “Quark was the bartender on Deep Space Nine,”
ToG-2’s excessive caution prevented it from making implicit inferences without explicit evidence.
Additionally, the phrase “the man” implies a specific individual without sufficient context, leading
to a misinterpretation.


Case 3: Parkinson’s disease causes various hallucinations in people.
ToG-2 Response: {Yes}, the claim is {True}. The retrieved references mention that Parkinson’s
disease psychosis (PDP) is present in around 20 percent of cases and comprises hallucinations, illu-
sions, and delusions. This confirms that Parkinson’s disease can indeed cause various hallucinations
in people.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ToG Response: {No}, the claim is {False}. The retrieved references do not provide any evidence
linking Parkinson’s disease to causing various hallucinations in people. As no supporting informa-
tion was found, it is concluded that this condition does not lead to hallucinations.
Label: False
Error Reason: Although ToG-2’s response appears reasonable from a medical perspective, the
golden label is “False.” This misalignment suggests that ToG-2’s detailed document analysis can
sometimes lead to conclusions that diverge from the dataset’s annotations, particularly when the
dataset lacks nuanced inferences.


Conclusion: ToG performs well in scenarios that demand rapid, triplet-based reasoning, while ToG-
2 demonstrates its strength in cases requiring detailed contextual reasoning. However, ToG-2’s
overcautious behavior and occasional divergence from the ground truth reveal its tendency to prevent
hallucinations at the cost of misalignment with less explicit labels. Additionally, the quality issues
within some questions in the Creak dataset also limit the upper bound of model performance.

B.3   S UPPLEMENTARY A BLATION S TUDIES

To evaluate the contribution of each component in ToG-2, we conducted comprehensive ablation
experiments across WebQSP, AdvHotpotQA, QALD-10-en and FEVER. To conserve API costs,
we sampled a small subset of the FEVER dataset for ablation experiments. Compared to the per-
formance on the other three datasets, on WebQSP, the effectiveness of Topic Prune (TP) is more
pronounced, possibly due to the higher relative proportion of general entities in WebQSP questions,
which tends to introduce more unnecessary noise. Additionally, the retrieval feedback (Clue) also
brought relatively consistent improvements across each dataset, indicating that adaptive query opti-
mization can help the LLM better understand the tasks.

                                                         Datasets
                 Model
                                     WebQSP    AdvHotpotQA     QALD-10-en    FEVER
                                      (EM)        (EM)           (EM)         (Acc.)
                 Direct               65.9%        23.1%            42.0%     52.1%
                 ToG-2/T P/RC/Clue    78.7%        40.9%            51.1%     56.3%
                 ToG-2/T P/Clue       78.0%        40.2%            49.9%     56.0%
                 ToG-2/T P            77.6%        41.9%            52.9%     56.5%
                 ToG-2                81.1%        42.8%            54.1%     58.5%

Table 7: Influence of each module in ToG-2 on the final performance. / denote without. Clue: the
retrieval feedback. T P : topic prune. /RC: replace relation prune Eq.3 with Eq.2.

B.4   RUNTIME A NALYSIS R ESULTS

Does ToG-2 improve graph exploring efficiency compared to ToG? Therefore, we first statis-
tically compared the runtime of ToG and ToG-2 across different stages under the same settings.
Specifically, we analyze the average number of iterations in answering each discrete question, along
with the average runtime for each iteration.
The results in Table 8 show a substantial improvement in ToG-2’s relation pruning time, reducing it
to just 45% of ToG’s. This gain comes from the relation pruning combination strategy, which cuts
down the number of LLM calls from W times to 1 time each iteration. Even though ToG-2 integrates
additional knowledge through entity context, ToG-2 still manages to reduce the entity pruning phase
to 68.7% of ToG’s runtime on average across both datasets. This is because ToG relies on LLM-
based entity pruning, while ToG-2 leverages DRMs, which can handle more candidates and compute
relevance scores faster.
To better illustrate the efficiency of our method compared to the baselines, we analyze the average
total runtime and API call counts for each method on HotpotQA. The results are summarized in
Table 9 below. ToG: For each question, ToG requires up to 2W D + D + 1 API calls, where W is the


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Dataset        Method   Avg. time per RP (s)    Avg. time per EP (s)   Avg. time per Reasoning (s)   Avg. Depth
                ToG-2            6.4                        4.5                     5.9                  2.21
 FEVER
                ToG             14.2                        6.5                     5.5                  1.94
                ToG-2            6.1                        4.3                     5.7                  2.17
 AdvHotpotQA
                ToG             13.8                        6.3                     5.4                  1.71

  Table 8: Running time comparison of ToG-2 and ToG on FEVER and AdvHotpotQA datasets.
                          Method           Avg Total Time (s)           API Calls
                          ToG-2                        27.3                 5.4
                          NaiveRAG                     10.2                  1
                          ToG                          69.3                16.3
                          CoK                          30.1                 11

              Table 9: Comparison of API Call Counts and Runtime Across Methods.


maximum width (number of knowledge triplets explored in parallel) and D is the maximum iteration
depth. This structure enables comprehensive multi-hop reasoning and knowledge exploration, but
results in a relatively high number of API calls per question.
CoK: To ensure fairness in comparison, we restricted the knowledge domain to factual data from
WikiData, Wikipedia, and DPR. We also adopted the update rationales at once setting
from the original implementation. CoK has a fixed API call count of 11 per question: 1 domain
selection call, 1 chain-of-thought sub-question generation call, 2 × 3 knowledge retrieval calls, 2
rationale editing calls, and 1 final answer generation call.
NaiveRAG: To simulate a retrieval corpus, we use all entity documents encountered during ToG-2
iterations. NaiveRAG uses a two-stage retrieval system that combines BM25 with BGE-Reranker,
resulting in the fewest API calls among the compared methods.
ToG-2: For each question, ToG-2 requires up to 2D + (D − 1) + 1 API calls, where:

       • 2D: Calls for Relation Pruning (RP) and Reasoning during each iteration.
       • D − 1: Query re-writing between iterations.
       • 1: Topic Prune (TP).

Compared to baselines, ToG-2 achieves a good balance between cost-efficiency and performance. It
reduces the total API calls and runtime while maintaining robust reasoning capabilities.

B.5   I MPACT OF T HRESHOLD S ETTING IN R ELATION P RUNE

We conducted threshold experiments in Relation Prune (RP) to analyze the effect of different thresh-
old scores. Specifically, we compared the effects of three thresholds (0.2, 0.5, and 0.8) on the final
results in the HotpotQA dataset. The results are summarized in Table 10.

                     Threshold          Results (%)               Avg. Retained Score
                         0.2                    42.9                      0.65
                         0.5                    43.2                      0.68
                         0.8                    40.0                      0.92

Table 10: Effects of different thresholds on the final results in HotpotQA. The Avg. retained score
represents the average score of all relations that pass through the threshold filtering.

When the threshold is set between 0.2 and 0.5, its impact on the final result is minimal. However,
when the threshold increases to 0.8, the results weaken significantly. We attribute this to two main
reasons:


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. During the relation pruning stage, the relations passing the threshold are further filtered by
         selecting the top relations based on the width W . Therefore, even if the threshold is set
         very low, relations with extremely low scores will ultimately fail to be included in the Top
         W . This explains why the Avg. retained score is very close when the threshold is 0.2 or
         0.5. However, setting a reasonable threshold is still necessary to prevent the inclusion of
         entirely irrelevant relations in cases where very few relations are found and are scored low
         (e.g., as low as 0.1).
      2. Relations with moderate relevance scores (e.g., 0.3–0.7) can potentially lead to useful in-
         formation. A lower threshold allows for more tolerance for such potential. When the
         threshold is raised to 0.8, it overly amplifies the impact of the LLM’s judgment during
         relation pruning on the entire process, leading to the loss of potentially valuable relations.

B.6   I MPACT OF SC S ETTING

Figure 6 illustrates the impact of varying self-consistency
thresholds on the performance of ToG-2 on AdvHot-
potQA. As the threshold increases, we observe a cor-
responding performance improvement. This can be at-
tributed to the stricter consistency demands placed on the
LLM’s multiple responses as the threshold rises, which
more effectively identifies and filters out complex ques-
tions that are challenging for the LLM to resolve di-
rectly. These difficult cases are then handed over to ToG-
2, enabling more accurate responses. Furthermore, while
fewer questions are answered during the SC phase, they            Figure 6: Impact of SC setting
are answered with a higher degree of certainty.

B.7   I MPACT OF G RAPH C OMPLETENESS

To investigate the impact of graph quality on the reasoning performance of ToG-2, we designed
an experiment to quantify the specific effect of Knowledge Graph (KG) quality on the model’s
performance. Specifically, we conducted experiments on a subset of randomly sampled HotpotQA
questions (100 in total) using simulated incomplete KGs. The incompleteness was introduced by
randomly discarding relations and entities discovered during the Relation Discovery (Equation 1)
and Entity Discovery (Equation 4) stages. Specifically, we tested scenarios where 30%, 50%, and
80% of the discovered entities and relations were retained, while the rest were randomly removed.
This systematic evaluation provided insights into the model’s adaptability to varying levels of KG
completeness. The results are shown in Table 11.

                    KG Completeness (%)         Exploration Setting      EM (%)
                              100                      Default              43
                               80                      Default              41
                               50                      Default              35
                               30                      Default              23
                               30                      Adjusted             29

Table 11: Impact of KG Completeness on ToG-2.0 Performance with Default (W = 3, D = 3) and
Adjusted (W = 8, D = 2) Exploration Strategies

At 80% completeness, the model demonstrated robust performance with minimal impact compared
to the fully complete KG, indicating its strength at high completeness levels. With 50% complete-
ness, moderate performance degradation was observed, suggesting that ToG-2.0 remains resilient to
moderate KG incompleteness. However, at 30% completeness, performance dropped significantly
due to sparse connections in the graph, highlighting the challenges posed by severe KG incomplete-
ness.
To mitigate this, adjustments were made to the exploration strategy: By increasing the exploration
width (W ) to 8 and reducing the exploration depth (D) to 2, the model was able to broaden its


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


search scope, compensating for the missing information. This adjustment led to a notable recovery
in performance, bringing it closer to an acceptable level despite the significant KG incompleteness.
These findings emphasize the model’s adaptability and provide insights into potential strategies for
handling incomplete KGs.

B.8   S IGNIFICANCE T EST

Statistical significance is a key factor in evaluating model performance. To assess this, we conducted
pairwise t-tests on select datasets where we had access to both ToG-2 and baseline results. However,
many of the baseline results reported in Table 1 were directly cited from their respective original
papers or other related works. As a result, we do not have access to the detailed outputs of these
baseline models for individual questions, preventing us from performing significance tests on those
baselines at this time.
For the WebQSP, Zero-Shot-RE, QALD-10-en, and Creak datasets, we computed pairwise t-tests
comparing ToG-2 with CoK and ToG as in Table 12.

         (ToG-2 vs. ) Method       WebQSP      Zero-Shot-RE       QALD-10-en        Creak
         CoK                       p < 0.05       p < 0.01          p < 0.05       p < 0.05
         ToG                       p < 0.05       p < 0.05          p < 0.05       p > 0.9

Table 12: ToG-2 significantly outperforms CoK and ToG on most datasets (p < 0.05), except on
Creak where the difference with ToG is not significant (p > 0.9), indicating similar performance on
this dataset.


C     T O G-F IN QA DATASET OVERVIEW
The dataset comprises three main components: (1) a document corpus, (2) a knowledge graph, and
(3) QA pairs. Table 13 provides a summary of the key statistics for each component.

        Component             Statistic                                                Value
        Document Corpus       Total documents                                         17,013
                              Average document length                                 40,469
        Knowledge Graph       Total entities                                         671,806
                              Total edges                                            565,994
                              Average edges                                             0.84
                              Maximum edges                                            3,982
                              Median edges                                                1.0
        QA Pairs              Total QA pairs                                              97
                              Topics                    Market Analysis, Competitor Analysis,
                                                        Bulk Transactions, Customer Analysis,
                                                        Supplier Analysis

                   Table 13: Key Statistics of the Chinese Financial QA Dataset


We automatically sample some candidate triple paths based on predefined meta-path rules, such as
supplier-customer-supplier (a meta-path that might explore competitive relationships), while pre-
serving the entity context involved along the path. These triple paths, along with their contextual
information, are then manually inspected and filtered to select candidates that can logically and
factually form multi-hop questions with objective answers.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    OTHER C ASES


We present two cases of ToG-FinQA in Figure 7. On the left side is a Both-endanced case with the
topic of Supplier Analysis. From the triple relationships of predicate relation customers and subject
relation suppliers, two suppliers of ZEC were identified, and information related to recycling was
found in their documents. On the right side is also a Both-endanced case, candidate entities were
identified through paths of the same customer or supplier, and then the context in the documents of
the candidate entities was used to confirm that Nanjing Jujong is the target entity.


                                    Figure 7: ToG-FinQA Cases

Figure 8 shows a Triple-enhanced case in HotpotQA, where the common style of the two movies is
identified by solely utilizing the triple links.


                                  Figure 8: Triple-enhanced Case


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E   P ROMPTS

 Topic Prune Prompt
 Given a question and a group of related topic entities derived from the Wikipedia knowledge graph,
 the task is to select which of these entities are suitable as starting points for reasoning on the Wiki
 knowledge graph to find information and clues that are useful for answering the question.
 Note that your output should be strictly JSON formatted: {id: entity}.
 Here are examples showing how to analyze and output a JSON formatted answer:

 Example 1:
 Question: What major city is the Faith Lutheran Middle School and High School located in?
 Topic entities: {
 “Q111”: “Faith Lutheran Middle School”,
 “Q39722”: “Faith Lutheran High School”
 }
 Analysis:
 All entities are directly related to the core of the question—finding the possible information about
 Faith Lutheran and its location.
 Output:
 {“Q111”: “Faith Lutheran Middle School”, “Q39722”: “Faith Lutheran High School”}

 Example 2:
 Question: How many Turkish verbs ending with “uş” with their lemma?
 Topic entities: {
 “Q24905”: “verb”
 }
 Analysis:
 Q24905 “verb” focuses on verbs, which are action words in a language. The task involves not just
 identifying verbs but specifically Turkish verbs that end with the suffix “uş,”. Therefore, the entity
 “verb” is too broad and does not point to a specific Turkish verb. Thus there is no suitable topic
 entity as a starting point for reasoning. Output:
 {}

 Example 3:
 Question: On which island is the Indonesian capital located?
 Topic entities: {
 “Q252”: “Indonesia”,
 “Q23442”: “island”
 }
 Analysis:
 Q252 “Indonesia” represents the country of Indonesia. Considering the question is about the capital
 of Indonesia and which island it is located on, the entity “Indonesia” is directly related to the core
 of the question—finding the capital of Indonesia and then identifying the island it is situated on.
 Therefore, this entity is highly suitable as a starting point for reasoning.
 Q23442 “island” represents the concept of an island. While the question does indeed relate to
 an island, the concept of “island” itself is too broad and does not point to a specific geographical
 location or country. From the perspective of reasoning on a knowledge graph, trying to find the
 capital of a specific country based solely on the concept of an island is less relevant and efficient
 compared to starting from that country. Hence, Q252 “Indonesia” is the more suitable topic entity
 as a starting point for reasoning on the knowledge graph. It directly connects to the key information
 of the question and can effectively guide the search for entities related to the answer within the
 knowledge graph.
 Output:
 {“Q252”: “Indonesia”}

                                        Table 14: Topic Prune


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Relation Prune Prompt
 Please retrieve %s relations (separated by semicolon) that contribute to the question and rate their
 contribution on a scale from 0 to 10.
 Question: Mesih Pasha’s uncle became emperor in what year?
 Topic Entity: Mesih Pasha
 Relations:
 1. child
 2. country of citizenship
 3. date of birth
 4. family
 5. father
 6. languages spoken
 7. military rank
 8. occupation
 9. place of death
 10. position held

 Answer:
 1. {family (Score: 10)}: This relation is highly relevant as it can provide information about the
 family background of Mesih Pasha, including his uncle who became emperor.
 2. {father (Score: 4)}: Uncle is father’s brother, so father might provide some information as well.
 3. {position held (Score: 1)}: This relation is moderately relevant as it can provide information
 about any significant positions held by Mesih Pasha or his uncle that could be related to becoming
 an emperor.
 4. ......

 Question: Van Andel Institute was founded in part by what American businessman, who was best
 known as co-founder of the Amway Corporation?
 Topic Entity: Van Andel Institute
 Relations:
 1. affiliation
 2. country
 3. donations
 4. educated at
 5. employer

 Answer:
 1. affiliation (Score: 8): This relation is relevant because it can provide information about the
 individuals or organizations associated with the Van Andel Institute, including the American busi-
 nessman who co-founded the Amway Corporation.
 2. donations (Score: 3): This relation is relevant because it can provide information about the
 financial contributions made to the Van Andel Institute, which may include donations from the
 American businessman in question.
 3. educated at (Score: 3): This relation is relevant because it can provide information about the
 educational background of the American businessman, which may have influenced his involvement
 in founding the Van Andel Institute.
 4. ......

                                   Table 15: Topic Prune Prompt


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Relation Prune CMB Prompt
 # Task:
 1. Carefully review the question provided.
 2. From the list of available relations for their corresponding entity, select the %s that you believe
 are most likely to link to the entities that can provide the most relevant information to help answer
 the provided question.
 3. For each selected relation, provide a score between 0 to 10 reflecting its usefulness in answering
 the question, with 10 being most useful.
 4. Provide a brief explanation for your choices, highlighting how each selected relation potentially
 contributes to answering the question.

 # The input follows the below format:
 Question:[The question text]
 Entity 1:[The name of the entity 1]
 Available Relations:[A relation list of entity 1 to be chosen.]
 Entity 2:[The name of the entity 2]:
 Available Relations:[A relation list of entity 2 to be chosen.]
 ...(Continue in the same manner for additional entities)

 # Below is two examples:
 # Example1:
 Question: Mesih Pasha’s uncle became emperor in what year?
 Topic Entity: Mesih Pasha
 Relations:
 1. child
 2. country of citizenship
 3. date of birth
 4. family
 5. father
 6. languages spoken, written or signed
 7. military rank
 Answer:
 1. {family (Score: 1.0)}: This relation is highly relevant as it can provide information about the
 family background of Mesih Pasha, including his uncle who became emperor.
 2. {father (Score: 0.4)}: Uncle is father’s brother, so father might provide some information as well.
 3. ......

 # Example2:
 Question: what the attitude of Joe Biden towards China?
 Entity 1: china
 Relations:
 1. alliance
 2. international relation
 3. political system
 4. population
 Entity 2: joe biden
 Relations:
 1. political position
 2. presidency
 3. family
 4. early life
 Answer:
 Entity 1:
 1. {alliance (Score: 8)}: This relation is highly relevant as it can provide information about the
 relationship between china and other parties.
 2. {political system (Score: 7)}: This relation is relevant as it can provide information about the
 policies that might reflect the relationship between china and other parties.
 3. ......

                               Table 16: Relation Prune CMB Prompt


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Relation Prune CMB Prompt (Continue)
 Entity 2:
 1. {political position (Score: 10)}: This relation is highly relevant as it can provide information
 about Joe Biden’s political position to other parties or countries.
 2. {presidency (Score: 2)}: This relation is slightly relevant as it can provide information about Joe
 Biden’s position, which might provide clues to answer the question.
 3. ......

 # For questions involving multiple entities, you are required to analyze the relation list for each
 entity separately. Then select the %s most relevant relations for each entity, based on the analysis as
 done in the given example. # It’s essential to maintain strict adherence to the line breaks and format
 as seen in the provided example for clarity and consistency:
 Answer:
 Entity 1: The Name of Entity 1
 1. {Relation1 (Score: X)}: Explanation.
 2. {Relation2 (Score: Y)}: Explanation.

 Entity 2: The Name of Entity 2
 1. {Relation1 (Score: X)}: Explanation
 2. {Relation2 (Score: Y)}: Explanation

 ...(Continue in the same manner for additional entities)

 # Now, I will provide you with a new question with %s entities and relations. Please analyze it
 following all the guidance above carefully.
 # For questions involving multiple entities, you are required to analyze the relation list for each
 entity separately. Then select the %s most relevant relations for each entity, based on the analysis as
 done in the given example. # It’s essential to maintain strict adherence to the line breaks and format
 as seen in the provided example for clarity and consistency:
 Answer:
 Entity 1: The Name of Entity 1
 1. {Relation1 (Score: X)}: Explanation.
 2. {Relation2 (Score: Y)}: Explanation.

 Entity 2: The Name of Entity 2
 1. {Relation1 (Score: X)}: Explanation
 2. {Relation2 (Score: Y)}: Explanation

 ...(Continue in the same manner for additional entities)

 # Now, I will provide you with a new question with %s entities and relations. Please analyze it
 following all the guidance above carefully.

                         Table 17: Relation Prune CMB Prompt (Continue)


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Reasoning Prompt (QA)
 Given a question, some clues, the associated retrieved knowledge triplets and related contexts, you
 are asked to evaluate if these resources, combined with your pre-existing knowledge, are sufficient
 to formulate an answer ({Yes} or {No}).
 Your answer must begin with {Yes} or {No}.
 If {Yes}, please note that the analyzed answer entity must be enclosed in curly brackets {xxxxxx}
 If {No}, it means the resources are useless or provide clues that are helpful but insufficient to answer
 the question conclusively. Based on the given knowledge, please summarize any insights (if any) so
 far that may help answer the question, which must also be enclosed in curly brackets{xxxxxx}.

 Here are some examples:
 # Example 1:
 Question:
 The Sentinelese language is the language of people of one of which islands in the Bay of Bengal ?
 (Clues):
 None
 (Knowledge triplets):
 Sentinelese language, Indigenous to, Sentinelese people
 (Triplet’s related context):
 The Sentinelese, also known as the Sentinel and the North Sentinel Islanders, are an indigenous
 people who inhabit North Sentinel Island in the Bay of Bengal in the northeastern Indian Ocean.
 (Knowledge triplets):
 Bay of Bengal, area, Andaman and Nicobar Islands
 (Triplet’s related context):
 Andaman and Nicobar Islands are an archipelagic island chain in the eastern Indian Ocean across
 the Bay of Bengal, they are part of India. They are within the union territory of the Andaman and
 Nicobar Islands
 # Answer:
 {Yes} The analyzed answer entity is {Andaman and Nicobar Islands}.

 # Example 2:
 Question:
 Who is the coach of the team owned by the most famous English former professional footballer?
 (Clues):
 The most famous English former professional footballer is David Beckham.
 (Knowledge triplets):
 David Beckham, co-owned, Inter Miami CF
 (Triplet’s related context):
 Inter Miami CF, founded in 2018, is a professional soccer club based in Miami, Florida. It competes
 in Major League Soccer (MLS) as part of the Eastern Conference. David Beckham made a 3 years
 contract with his major coach.
 # Answer:
 {No} The given knowledge provides helpful information that the footballer is David Beckham and
 David Beckham’s ownership of Inter Miami CF, but they do not explicitly mention who the coach
 is. The useful information for now is {the team owned by the famous English former professional
 footballer David Beckham is Inter Miami CF}

 Now, please carefully consider the following case:

                                  Table 18: Reasoning Prompt (QA).


 Reasoning Prompt (QA)
 Given a question and some knowledge gained so far, please predict the additional evidence that
 needs to be found to answer the current question, and then provide a suitable query for retrieving
 this potential evidence. Note that the query must be included in curly brackets {xxx}.

                                  Table 19: Query Re-form Prompt


                                                   25
