Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROVABLY R ELIABLE C ONFORMAL P REDICTION S ETS
IN THE P RESENCE OF DATA P OISONING

 Yan Scholten, Stephan Günnemann
 Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute
 Technical University of Munich
 {y.scholten, s.guennemann}@tum.de



                                               A BSTRACT
           Conformal prediction provides model-agnostic and distribution-free uncertainty
           quantification through prediction sets that are guaranteed to include the ground
           truth with any user-specified probability. Yet, conformal prediction is not reliable
           under poisoning attacks where adversaries manipulate both training and calibra-
           tion data, which can significantly alter prediction sets in practice. As a solution,
           we propose reliable prediction sets (RPS): the first efficient method for construct-
           ing conformal prediction sets with provable reliability guarantees under poisoning.
           To ensure reliability under training poisoning, we introduce smoothed score func-
           tions that reliably aggregate predictions of classifiers trained on distinct partitions
           of the training data. To ensure reliability under calibration poisoning, we construct
           multiple prediction sets, each calibrated on distinct subsets of the calibration data.
           We then aggregate them into a majority prediction set, which includes a class only
           if it appears in a majority of the individual sets. Both proposed aggregations mit-
           igate the influence of datapoints in the training and calibration data on the final
           prediction set. We experimentally validate our approach on image classification
           tasks, achieving strong reliability while maintaining utility and preserving cov-
           erage on clean data. Overall, our approach represents an important step towards
           more trustworthy uncertainty quantification in the presence of data poisoning.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Conformal prediction has emerged as a powerful, model-agnostic framework for distribution-free
uncertainty quantification. By constructing prediction sets calibrating on hold-out data, it transforms
any black-box classifier into a predictor with formal coverage guarantees, ensuring its prediction
sets cover the ground truth with any user-specified probability (Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021). This
makes it highly relevant for safety-critical applications like medical diagnosis (Vazquez & Facelli,
2022), autonomous driving (Lindemann et al., 2023), and flood forecasting (Auer et al., 2023).
However in practice, noise, incomplete data or adversarial perturbations can lead to unreliable pre-
diction sets (Liu et al., 2024). In particular data poisoning – where adversaries modify the training
or calibration data (e.g. during data labeling) – can significantly alter the prediction sets, resulting
in overly conservative or empty sets (Li et al., 2024). This vulnerability can undermine the practical
utility of conformal prediction in safety-critical applications, raising the research question:
  How can we make conformal prediction sets provably reliable in the presence of data poisoning?
As a solution, we propose reliable prediction sets (RPS): the first efficient method for constructing
prediction sets more reliable under data poisoning where adversaries can modify, add and delete dat-
apoints from training and calibration sets. Our approach consists of two key components (Figure 1):
First (i), we introduce smoothed score functions that reliably aggregate predictions from classifiers
trained on distinct partitions of the training data, improving reliability under training poisoning. Sec-
ond (ii), we calibrate multiple prediction sets on disjoint subsets of the calibration data and construct
a majority prediction set that includes classes only when a majority of the independent prediction
sets agree, improving reliability under calibration poisoning. Using both strategies (i) and (ii), RPS
effectively reduces the influence of individual datapoints during training and calibration.
    1
        Project page: https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/reliable-conformal-prediction/


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  (i) Reliable CP under training poisoning (ii) Reliable CP under calibration poisoning
    Test image        Train      fi (x)   Smoothed score       Calibrate      Ci (x)        Majority


                  Training partitions
                       P1 f1 squirrel         function                τ1                  prediction set


                                                                                   Calibration part.
                                                                P1          {squirrel}

                                        P2    f2    car                                                P2    τ2 {marmot, squirrel}


                                                              s(x, y)
                                                                                                                                      C M (x)
                                        P3    f3   marmot                                              P3    τ3   {car, marmot}
                                                                                                                                     {squirrel}
                                         ..
                                         .            ...                                               ..
                                                                                                        .                ...


                                                                        ... mot
                                                                         ca
                                                                          m irre
                                                                          sq
                                                                                                             τc


                                                                            r
                                                                            ar l
                                        Pt    ft


                                                                             u
                                                   squirrel                                            Pc           {squirrel}
         x

Figure 1: Conformal prediction (CP) is not reliable under poisoning (orange) of training and calibra-
tion data, undermining its practical utility in safety-critical applications. As a solution, we propose
reliable prediction sets (RPS): A novel approach for constructing more reliable prediction sets. We
(i) aggregate predictions of classifiers trained on distinct partitions, and (ii) merge multiple predic-
tion sets Ci (x)={y : s(x, y) ≥ τi } calibrated on separate partitions into a majority prediction set that
includes classes only if a majority of the prediction sets Ci agree. This way RPS reduces the influ-
ence of datapoints while preserving the coverage guarantee of conformal prediction on clean data.


We further derive certificates, i.e. provable guarantees for the reliability of RPS under worst-case poi-
soning. We experimentally validate the effectiveness of our approach on image classification tasks,
demonstrating strong reliability under worst-case poisoning while maintaining utility and empiri-
cally preserving the coverage guarantee of prediction sets on clean data. Our main contributions are:
    • We propose reliable prediction sets (RPS) – the first scalable and efficient method for making
      conformal prediction more reliable under training and calibration poisoning.
    • We derive novel certificates that guarantee the reliability of RPS under worst-case data poisoning
      attacks, including guarantees against label flipping attacks.
    • We thoroughly evaluate our method and verify our theorems on image classification tasks.

2     R ELATED WORK

Prediction set ensembles. Ensembles of prediction sets are studied in the uncertainty set litera-
ture beyond machine learning (Cherubin, 2019; Solari & Djordjilović, 2022; Gasparin & Ramdas,
2024), e.g. to reduce the effect of randomness. Our work instead proposes a method to improve the
reliability of conformal prediction under worst-case training and calibration poisoning.
Conformal prediction under evasion. Most works regarding reliable conformal prediction focus
on evasion threat models, i.e. adversarial perturbations of the test data. They typically build upon
randomized smoothing (Cohen et al., 2019) to certify robustness against evasion attacks (Gendler
et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2024; Zargarbashi et al., 2024), or use neural network-specific verification
(Jeary et al., 2024). Ghosh et al. (2023) introduce a probabilistic notion as an alternative to worst-
case evasion attacks. Unlike prior work on evasion, we consider poisoning threat models.
Conformal prediction under poisoning. Despite emerging poisoning attacks (Li et al., 2024), the
few existing attempts to improve reliability consider other reliability notions. Most works only cer-
tify the coverage guarantee under calibration poisoning (Park et al., 2023; Zargarbashi et al., 2024;
Kang et al., 2024). Others study calibration poisoning empirically (Einbinder et al., 2022), under
specific label noise (Penso & Goldberger, 2024), or consider distribution shifts between calibration
and test data (Cauchois et al., 2020). Zargarbashi et al. (2024) consider modifications to the cali-
bration data, but their threat model does not support adversarial data insertion or deletion. Overall,
none of the existing approaches considers pointwise reliability of prediction sets under threat models
where adversaries can modify, add or remove datapoints from both training and calibration data.
Robustness certification against data poisoning. Most certification techniques for robust classi-
fication under poisoning consider other threat models, specific training techniques or architectures
(Rosenfeld et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2023; Sosnin et al., 2024). The strongest guarantees also partition
the training data and aggregate predictions of classifiers trained on each partition (Levine & Feizi,
2021; Wang et al., 2022; Rezaei et al., 2023). However, all of the prior works only guarantee robust
classification and are not directly applicable to certify conformal prediction since prediction sets (1)
contain multiple classes, and (2) can be manipulated via poisoning during training and calibration.


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3   BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES
We focus on classification tasks defined on an input space X = Rd for a given finite set of classes
Y = {1, . . . , K}. We model prediction set predictors as functions C : X → 2Y , which provide
prediction sets as subsets C(x) ⊆ Y of the classes Y for any given datapoint x ∈ X .
Exchangeability. Conformal prediction is a model-agnostic and distribution-free method for con-
structing prediction sets. It only requires that calibration and test points are exchangegable, which
means that their joint distribution is invariant under permutations. In this paper, we adopt the stan-
dard assumption (e.g. in image classification) that datapoints are i.i.d., which implies exchangeabil-
ity. Specifically, we assume three datasets with datapoints sampled i.i.d. from the same distribution
D over X × Y: training set Dtrain , calibration set Dcalib ={(xi , yi )}ni=1 and test set Dtest .
Conformal prediction. Conformal prediction transforms any given black-box classifier f : X → Y
into a prediction set predictor. We focus on split conformal prediction (Papadopoulos et al., 2002;
Lei et al., 2018), the most widely used variant in machine learning. First, one trains a classifier f
on the training set and defines a score function s(x, y) that measures conformity between samples
x and classes y. For example, homogeneous prediction sets (HPS) use the class probabilities of a
given soft classifier, s(x, y) = fy (x) (Sadinle et al., 2019). Then, one computes conformal scores
S={s(xi , yi )}ni=1 for samples of the calibration set Dcalib using the score function s. Finally, one
can construct prediction sets with the following coverage guarantee (Vovk et al., 1999; 2005):
Theorem 1. Given user-specified coverage probability 1 − α ∈ (0, 1), test sample (xn+1 , yn+1 ) ∈
Dtest exchangeable with Dcalib , and a score function s, we can construct the following prediction set
                               C(xn+1 ) = {y ∈ Y : s(xn+1 , y) ≥ τ },
which fulfills the following marginal coverage guarantee
                                    Pr[yn+1 ∈ C(xn+1 )] ≥ 1 − α
for τ = Quant(αn ; S). Specifically, the threshold τ is chosen as the αn -quantile of the conformal
scores S for a finite-sample corrected significance level αn = ⌊α(n + 1) − 1⌋/n.

4   D ESIDERATA FOR RELIABLE CONFORMAL PREDICTION
First we want to outline the desired properties that reliable conformal prediction should exhibit,
setting clear goals for how uncertainty should be captured by prediction sets under data poisoning.
Data poisoning. While exchangeability may hold for the data distribution D in theory, the labeled
data Dl = (Dtrain , Dcalib ) can be poisoned to alter prediction sets in practice. We formalize this
threat model, i.e. the strength of poisoning attacks, as a ball centered around labeled data:
                               n                                                            o
                Brt ,rc (Dl ) = D̃l | δ(D̃train , Dtrain ) ≤ rt , δ(D̃calib , Dcalib ) ≤ rc      (1)
where δ is a distance metric between datasets, and rt , rc are the radii for training and calibration
sets, respectively. Specifically, we define δ as the number of inserted or deleted datapoints and label
flips, modeling feature modification as two perturbations (deletion and insertion): δ(D1 , D2 ) =
|D1 ⊖ D2 | − |F(D1 , D2 )| where A ⊖ B = (A \ B) ∪ (B \ A) is the symmetric set difference
between two sets A and B, |S| denotes the cardinality of a set S, and F(D1 , D2 ) represents the set
of datapoints with label flips F(D1 , D2 )={x | ∃ y1 : (x, y1 )∈ D1 \ D2 , ∃ y2 : (x, y2 )∈ D2 \ D1 }.
Note that we count label flips only once, and feature perturbations can be of arbitrary magnitude.
Reliability under data poisoning. Given a datapoint x ∈ X and a prediction set C(x) ⊆ Y, we
define reliability of conformal prediction sets under data poisoning as follows:
Definition 1 (Reliability). We assume that reliability is compromised if adversaries can remove or
add a single class from or to the prediction set C(x) under our threat model (Equation 1). Specif-
ically, we call prediction sets coverage reliable if adversaries cannot shrink prediction sets C(x)
by removing classes, and size reliable if adversaries cannot inflate prediction sets C(x) by adding
classes. We further call coverage and size reliable prediction sets robust.

Note that while the coverage guarantee (Theorem 1) provides a marginal guarantee over the entire
distribution, our notion of coverage reliability is pointwise, i.e. applies to each prediction set C(x).


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Accordingly, we propose the following novel desiderata for reliable conformal prediction:
      Desiderata for reliable conformal prediction under data poisoning
  I: Reliable conformal prediction must provide marginal coverage (Theorem 1) for clean data.
 II: Reliable prediction sets must be small (comparable to sets without reliability guarantees).
III: Reliable conformal prediction must provably ensure reliability of prediction sets (Defini-
     tion 1) under data addition, deletion, modification and label flipping (Equation 1) up to a
     radius that meets the application’s needs and safety requirements.
IV: Algorithms for constructing reliable prediction sets must be flexible enough to allow for
     increased reliability given larger training and calibration sets.
 V: Algorithms for constructing reliable prediction sets and their guarantees must be compu-
     tationally efficient, scalable, and reproducible.

While desideratum I requires marginal coverage (Theorem 1), desideratum II ensures small sets,
and together they prevent that reliability can be achieved trivially by predicting empty or full sets.
desideratum III ensures that reliability must be certifiable, i.e. a provable guarantee under worst-case
poisoning. desideratum IV requires that algorithms can increase reliability as more data becomes
available since practical risks often increase with more data. Finally, desideratum V ensures effi-
ciency in deployment, where reproducibility requires stability under recomputation.

5     R ELIABLE CONFORMAL PREDICTION SETS
Guided by our desiderata for reliable conformal prediction we introduce reliable conformal predic-
tion sets (RPS): the first method for provably reliable conformal prediction under training and cal-
ibration poisoning (Figure 1). The first component of RPS (i) reliably aggregates classifiers trained
on kt disjoint partitions of the training data. The second component of RPS (ii) constructs reliable
prediction sets by merging sets calibrated separately on kc disjoint partitions of the calibration data.
Intuitively, larger kt increases reliability against training poisoning and larger kc increases reliability
against calibration poisoning. We provide detailed instructions in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2.

5.1    C ONFORMAL SCORE FUNCTIONS RELIABLE UNDER TRAINING DATA POISONING

First, our goal is to derive a conformal score function that is reliable under poisoning of training
data. This is challenging since the score function also has to quantify agreement between samples
and classes, and maintain exchangeability of conformal scores between calibration and test data.
To overcome this challenge we propose to (1) partition the training data into kt disjoint sets, (2)
train separate classifiers on each partition, and (3) design a score function that counts the number of
classifiers voting for a class y given sample x. Since deleting or inserting one datapoint from or into
the training set only affects a single partition and thus a single classifier, this procedure effectively
reduces the influence of datapoints on the score function.
Training data partitioning. To prevent that simple reordering of the datasets affects all partitions
simultaneously, we have to partition the training data in a way that is invariant to its order. To achieve
this we assign datapoints to partitions by using a hash function directly defined on x. For example
for images, we use the sum of their pixel values. This technique that has been previously shown to
induce certifiable robustness in the context of image classification (Levine & Feizi, 2021). Given a
deterministic hash function h : X → Z we define the i-th partition of the training set as
                          Pit = {(xj , yj ) ∈ Dtrain : h(xj ) ≡ i (mod kt )} .
Then we deterministically train kt classifiers f (i) : X → Y on all partitions P1t , . . . , Pktt separately.
Smoothed score function. Now we define our score function that measures agreement between a
sample x and class y by counting the number of classifiers f (i) voting for class y given x:
                                                                kt
                              eπy (x)                       1 X
                s(x, y) = PK              with πy (x) =            1{f (i) (x) = y}          (2)
                             i=1 e
                                   πi (x)                  kt i=1
where πy (x) is the percentage of classifiers voting for class y given sample x, and K is the number
of classes. Note that we introduce the additional softmax over class distribution π(x) to prevent
overly large prediction sets in practice (desideratum II, see Section 7).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Reliable conformal score function            Algorithm 2 Reliable conformal prediction sets
Input: Dtrain , kt , deterministic training algo. T       Input: Dcalib , kc , s, α, xn+1
 1: Split Dtrain into kt disjoint partitions Pit           1: Split Dcalib into kc disjoint partitions Pic
      t
    Pi = {(xj , yj ) ∈ Dtrain : h(xj ) ≡ i (mod kt )}         Pic = {(xj , yj ) ∈ Dcalib : h(xj ) ≡ i (mod kc )}
 2: for i = 1 to kt do                                     2: for i = 1 to kc do
 3:    Train classifier f (i) = T (Pit ) on partition Pit  3:    Compute scores Si ={s(xj , yj )}(xj ,yj )∈Pic
                                                           4: Compute αni -quantile τi of scores Si
 4: Construct the voting function                          5: Construct prediction set for quantile τi
    πy (x) = k1t ki=1    1{f (i) (x) = y}
                 P t
                                                                 Ci (xn+1 ) = {y : s(xn+1 , y) ≥ τi }
 5: Smooth the voting function                             6: Construct majority Pvote  prediction set
    s(x, y) = eπy (x) /( K        πi (x)
                                                              C M (xn+1 )={y : ki=1  c
                                                                                       1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} > τ̂ (α)}
                          P
                             i=1 e       )
Output: Reliable conformal score function s               Output: Reliable conformal prediction set C M


For any function to be considered a valid score function for conformal prediction it has to maintain
exchangeability of conformal scores between calibration and test data (Angelopoulos et al., 2021).
Lemma 1. The smoothed score function in Equation 2 is a valid conformal score function.

Proof. We use one function to score all points independent of other datapoints and which dataset
they belong to (and where in the dataset). Thus, given exchangeable data, scores computed by our
smoothed score function remain exchangeable. Therefore s of Equation 2 is a valid score function. □
Lemma 1 implies that the coverage guarantee (Theorem 1) holds on clean data when using our
smoothed score function (desideratum I). Intuitively, our score function quantifies uncertainty by
the number of votes from multiple classifiers (instead of the logits of one classifier). As long as clas-
sifiers are trained on isolated partitions we can reduce the influence of datapoints on the conformal
scores. We summarize instructions for the smoothed score function in Algorithm 1.

5.2    M AJORITY PREDICTION SETS RELIABLE UNDER CALIBRATION DATA POISONING

Now we derive prediction sets reliable against calibration poisoning. This is challenging since the
prediction sets must also achieve marginal coverage on clean data (desideratum I) without inflat-
ing set size (desideratum II). We propose to (1) partition the calibration data into kc disjoint sets,
(2) compute separate prediction sets based on the conformal scores on each partition, and (3) merge
the resulting prediction sets via majority voting. This improves reliability since adversaries have to
poison multiple partitions to alter the majority vote. We further show that such majority prediction
sets achieve marginal coverage, and do not grow too much in size in practice (Section 7).
Calibration data partitioning. We partition the calibration data as follows: Given hash function h
we define the i-th partition of the calibration set as Pic = {(xj , yj ) ∈ Dcalib : h(xj ) ≡ i (mod kc )}.
We then use a (potentially reliable) conformal score function s to compute the conformal scores
Si ={s(xj , yj )}(xj ,yj )∈Pic on each partition Pic . We can then determine the αni -quantiles of the
separate conformal scores, τi = Quant(αni ; Si ), where ni is the size of the i-th partition, ni = |Pic |.
Majority prediction sets. Now we propose prediction sets, which are provably reliable under cal-
ibration poisoning. Given a new datapoint xn+1 ∈ Dtest we construct kc prediction sets for each
partition as Ci (xn+1 ) = {y : s(xn+1 , y) ≥ τi }. We then construct a prediction set composed of all
classes that appear in the majority of independent prediction sets (see instructions in Algorithm 2):
                                        (    kc
                                                                            )
                                             X
                         C M (xn+1 ) = y :        1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} > τ̂ (α)                      (3)
                                                  i=1

with quantile function τ̂ (α) = max {x ∈ [kc ] : F (x) ≤ α} for [kc ] = {0, . . . , kc }, where τ̂ (α) is the
inverse of the CDF F of the Binomial distribution Bin(kc , 1 − α). Intuitively, we select the required
majority τ̂ (α) such that the sum over kc Bernoulli random variables 1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} (each with
success probability at least 1 − α) is at most τ̂ (α) with probability at most α. Note that for kc = 1
we have τ̂ (α) = 0, for which C M amounts to vanilla conformal prediction. Notably, such majority
prediction sets achieve marginal coverage on clean data (Proof in Appendix D):
Theorem 2. Given any conformal score function s and test sample (xn+1 , yn+1 ) ∈ Dtest exchange-
able with Dcalib , the majority prediction set (Equation 3) – constructed from sets calibrated on
disjoint partitions – achieves marginal coverage on clean data: Pr[yn+1 ∈ C M (xn+1 )] ≥ 1−α.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof sketch. Since each prediction set Ci fulfills marginal coverage, Pr[yn+1 ∈ Ci (xn+1 )] ≥ 1 − α,
the probability of the sum over Bernoulli random variables 1{yn+1 ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} being larger than
τ̂ (α) is at least 1−α (due to the selection of τ̂ (α)). Thus we have Pr[yn+1 ∈ C M (xn+1 )] ≥ 1−α.□
Note that majority voting is also used in the context of merging uncertainty sets (Gasparin & Ram-
das, 2024), but their approach comes without reliability guarantees (see discussion in Appendix D).
Importantly, Theorem 2 guarantees marginal coverage for any conformal score function. This holds
especially for our smoothed score function (Equation 2). As a consequence, majority prediction sets
based on the smoothed score function achieve marginal coverage (desideratum I).

6     P ROVABLE GUARANTEES FOR RELIABLE CONFORMAL PREDICTION SETS
After introducing reliable prediction sets (RPS), we derive certificates for their reliability as defined
in Definition 1 and required by desideratum III. We consider the threat model Brt ,rc (Dl ) where ad-
versaries can insert, delete and flip labels for up to rt training and rc calibration points (Section 3). In
the following we treat training poisoning, then calibration poisoning, and finally poisoning of both.

6.1   G UARANTEES FOR SMOOTHED SCORING FUNCTION UNDER TRAINING POISONING

We begin with the reliability of the smoothed scoring function under training poisoning (rt >0,
rc =0). Let C(xn+1 )={y ∈ Y : s(xn+1 , y) ≥ τ } be a prediction set for a new test point xn+1 derived
using conformal prediction (Section 3) under the clean dataset Dl with smoothed score function s.
                                        ˜ n+1 ) derived under any poisoned dataset D̃l ∈ Br ,r (Dl ).
Our goal is to bound the prediction set C(x                                                 t c
This requires that we bound score function s and quantile τ . We start with the score function:
Lemma 2. We can upper bound the score function for any D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ) as follows:
                                               eπy
       s(x, y) =           max               PK π       with π = [π1 (x) + ∆1 , . . . , πK (x) + ∆K ]   (4)
                         0≤πi ≤1
                                              i=1 e
                                                    i
                                      r
                   ∆i ∈{0,± k1 ,...,± kt }
                       PK t             t
                         i=1 ∆i =0


Proof in Appendix E. Although optimizing softmax func-               Algorithm 3 Greedy algorithm for upper
tions typically leads to non-convex optimization problems,           bounding the smoothed score function s
the problem in (4) reduces to a discrete optimization prob-
lem that can be solved efficiently (desideratum V). We               Input: Score function s, x, y, kt , rt
                                                                      1: π = [π1 (x), . . . , πK (x)]
derive algorithms computing lower and upper bounds in                 2: for i = 1 to rt do
rt steps, presenting the upper bound in Algorithm 3. In-              3: ŷ = argmaxŷ̸=y πŷ
tuitively, in each step we greedily redistribute k1t probability      4: πŷ ← min(max(πŷ − 1/kt , 0), 1)
mass from the current class ŷ̸=y with the largest probability        5: πy ← min(max(πy + 1/kt , 0), 1)
mass to the target class y. We repeat this process until we          Output: s(x, y) = eπy /( K
                                                                                                  P       πi
                                                                                                     i=1 e )
have redistributed the entire probability mass krtt . We present
the lower bound algorithm and proofs in Appendix E.
Given lower and upper bounds zi = s(xi , yi ) and zi = s(xi , yi ) on the conformal scores for all
points (xi , yi ) ∈ Dcalib in the calibration set, we can directly determine the worst-case quantiles:
                          τ = Quant(αn ; {zi }ni=1 )        τ = Quant(αn ; {zi }ni=1 )
Finally we need to identify (1) the class within the prediction set that received the fewest votes from
the classifiers f (i) and (2) the class outside the prediction set that got most votes from the classifiers:
                               y = argmin πy (x)            y = argmax πy (x)
                                    y∈C(xn+1 )                  y ∈C(x
                                                                  /    n+1 )

Then we can provide the following guarantees (Proof in Appendix E):
Theorem 3. Given rc =0, the conformal prediction set C(x    ˜ n+1 ) derived with the smoothed score
function under                                                                    ˜ n+1 ) ⊇ C(xn+1 ),
               any poisoned dataset D̃l ∈Brt ,rc (Dl ) is coverage reliable, i.e. C(x
                                        ˜

if s x, y ≥ τ , and size reliable, i.e. C(xn+1 ) ⊆ C(xn+1 ), if s (x, y) < τ .

Intuitively, if class y cannot be removed from C(xn+1 ) (y added), adversaries cannot remove (add)
any other class and thus the prediction sets are coverage (size) reliable.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.2   G UARANTEES FOR MAJORITY PREDICTION SETS UNDER CALIBRATION POISONING

Now we analyze reliability of our majority prediction sets under calibration poisoning (rt =0, rc >0).
Let C M (xn+1 ) be the majority prediction set for a new test point xn+1 derived under the clean
dataset Dl using any deterministic conformal score function s. Intuitively, if adversaries cannot
remove (add) a class from the majority prediction set by removing (adding) it from (to) rc individual
prediction sets, the majority prediction set remains coverage (size) reliable even in the worst case.
This is since adversaries can perturb at most rc calibration partitions under our threat model. To
determine
        Pwhether    adversaries can remove or add classes, we have to count minimum and maximum
           kc
support i=1    1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} for classes in and outside of the majority set:
                            kc
                            X                                         kc
                                                                      X
               m = min            1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )}       m = max           1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )}
                    y∈C M                                       / M
                                                              y ∈C
                            i=1                                       i=1

Using each support we can provide the following guarantees (Proof in Appendix E):
Theorem 4. Given rt =0 and deterministic score function s, the majority prediction set C˜M (xn+1 )
derived under any dataset D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ) is coverage reliable, i.e. C˜M (xn+1 ) ⊇ C M (xn+1 ), if
m − rc > τ̂ (α), and size reliable, i.e. C˜M (xn+1 ) ⊆ C M (xn+1 ), if m + rc ≤ τ̂ (α), provided that
the smallest calibration partition i∗ is large enough |Pic∗ | − rc ≥ ( α1 − 1).

Note that the last condition ensures that the calibration partitions are large enough such that worst-
case adversaries cannot delete datapoints to prevent us from computing the majority prediction sets.

6.3   P ROVABLE RELIABILITY GUARANTEES FOR RPS UNDER GENERAL DATA POISONING

Finally, we consider poisoning of training and calibration data (rt > 0, rc > 0).
Coverage reliability. To ensure coverage reliability we have to show that all classes y ∈ C M are
guaranteed to be in the majority prediction set under worst-case poisoning. The majority prediction
set C M contains a class y only if it appears in a majority of τ̂ (α) individual prediction sets Ci . Under
calibration poisoning, adversaries can remove classes from rc individual prediction sets. Intuitively,
the number of prediction sets reliable under training poisoning βy must be large enough such that
even under calibration poisoning, the number of prediction sets containing the class is still larger
than the threshold, βy − rc > τ̂ (α). This leads to the following guarantee (Proof in Appendix E):
Theorem 5. Let βy denote the number of prediction sets Ci ∈ {C1 , . . . , Ckc } for which we can
guarantee y ∈ Ci under rt poisoned training datapoints. If βy − rc > τ̂ (α) for all y ∈ C M (xn+1 )
then the majority prediction set is coverage reliable under any dataset D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ), provided
that the smallest calibration partition i∗ is large enough |Pic∗ | − rc ≥ ( α1 − 1).

                                                                                / C M are guaranteed to
Size reliability. To ensure size reliability we have to show that all classes y ∈
stay outside of the majority prediction set under worst-case poisoning. The majority prediction set
C M does not contain a class y if it appears in less than or equal to τ̂ (α) individual prediction sets
Ci . Under calibration poisoning, adversaries can add classes to rc prediction sets in the worst-case.
Intuitively, if we can guarantee that γy prediction sets Ci do not contain the class y under training
poisoning, at most kc − γy prediction sets contain the class under worst-case training poisoning.
This number of prediction sets containing the class in the worst-case must be small enough such that
even if adversaries add the class to rc prediction sets, the majority prediction set does not contain
the class, kc − γy + rc ≤ τ̂ (α). This leads to the following guarantee (Proof in Appendix E):
Theorem 6. Let γy denote the number of prediction sets Ci ∈ {C1 , . . . , Ckc } for which we can
guarantee y ̸∈ Ci under rt poisoned training datapoints. If kc −γy +rc ≤ τ̂ (α) for all y ∈ / C M (xn+1 )
then the majority prediction set is size reliable under any dataset D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ), provided that the
smallest calibration partition i∗ is large enough |Pic∗ | − rc ≥ ( α1 − 1).

Note that we can efficiently compute numbers βy and γy as described in Subsection 6.1 by comput-
ing the worst-case quantiles and verifying s(x, y) < τ and s(x, y) < τ , respectively. Our overall
certification approach is efficient in practice (desideratum V) as we discuss in Appendix E and ex-
perimentally demonstrate in the next section.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7                       E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

In this section we evaluate our reliable prediction sets and their worst-case guarantees, demonstrating
their effectiveness in analyzing and improving reliability of conformal prediction under poisoning.
We compare three settings (calibration poisoning, training poisoning, and poisoning of both) by
computing the following prediction sets: (a) majority prediction sets merging multiple homogeneous
prediction sets calibrated on each partition, (b) conformal prediction sets using our smoothed score
function, and (c) majority prediction sets using our smoothed score function.
Datasets and models. We train ResNet18, ResNet50 and ResNet101 models (He et al., 2016)
on SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011), CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). The datasets
contain images with 3 channels of size 32x32, categorized into 10, 10 and 100 classes, respectively.
Unless stated otherwise, we show results for ResNet18 on CIFAR10 and coverage level 1 − α = 0.9
in this section and provide additional experimental results in Appendix B.
Experimental setup. We randomly select 1,000 images of the test set for calibration and use the
remaining 9,000 datapoints for testing. To account for randomness in model initialization and cali-
bration set sampling, we train 5 classifiers with different initializations and validate each of them on
5 different calibration splits. We report mean and standard deviation (shaded areas in the plots). We
refer to Appendix A for the full experimental setup including detailed reproducibility instructions.
Evaluation metrics. We report three reliability ratios: The ratios of test datapoints whose prediction
sets are, according to our worst-case analysis, coverage reliable (classes cannot be removed), size
reliable (classes cannot be added), or robust (classes cannot removed or added). Empirical coverage
refers to the ratio of datapoints whose prediction sets cover the ground truth label of the test set. We
also report the average size of the prediction sets computed on the test set.

                                            (a)                                                 (b)                                                     (c)
    Reliab. ratio (%)


                                                            Reliab. ratio (%)


                                                                                                                 Reliab. ratio (%)
                                                                                             robust                                                 robust
                        75                                                      75           coverage reliable                       75             coverage reliable
                                                                                             size reliable                                          size reliable
                                   robust
                        50         coverage reliable                            50                                                   50
                                   size reliable
                        25                                                      25                                                   25

                             1      5         10       15                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                   1   2   3         4   5     6
                                 Calib. set radius rc                                Training set radius rt                               Poisoning radius rt = rc

Figure 2: Worst-case reliability guarantees across three scenarios: (a) poisoning of the calibration
data, (b) poisoning of the training data, and (c) poisoning of both datasets. Our guarantees against
coverage attacks are stronger when training data is poisoned, whereas for calibration attacks our
method offers stronger guarantees for size reliability. Notably, even under strong adversarial condi-
tions where both datasets can be poisoned we still provide non-trivial reliability guarantees.

(a) Reliability of majority prediction sets under calibration poisoning. Majority prediction sets
demonstrate strong reliability guarantees against calibration set poisoning in empirical evaluations
(Figure 2 a). Specifically, we construct majority prediction sets by merging kc =22 homogeneous
prediction sets, each calibrated on separate calibration partitions, resulting in an empirical coverage
of 90.2% and an average set size of 0.94. When up to rc =4 datapoints in the calibration set are
poisoned, our method guarantees that over 93% of the prediction sets remain reliable against worst-
case coverage attacks. The guarantees against set size attacks are even stronger: Even if rc =15
datapoints are poisoned we still guarantee that over 87% of the prediction sets remain size reliable.
(b) Reliability of smoothed score function under training poisoning. The setting of training
set poisoning is considerably more challenging since adversaries can simultaneously manipulate the
quantiles during calibration and the scores at inference. We compute conformal prediction sets using
our smoothed score function on kt =100 training partitions, resulting in empirical coverage of 90.7%
and average set size of 3.18 (Figure 2 b). Despite strong adversaries, our reliable prediction sets still
manage to provide non-trivial reliability guarantees under worst-case perturbations. Specifically,
when up to rt = 4 datapoints in the training set are poisoned, our method guarantees that over 34%
of the prediction sets remain reliable against worst-case coverage attacks.


                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(c) Reliability of RPS under training and calibration poisoning. By far the most challenging set-
ting constitutes adversaries that manipulate both training and calibration data. We compute majority
prediction sets using our smoothed score function on kt =100 training partitions and kc =40 cali-
bration partitions, resulting in empirical coverage of 92% and average set size of 3.41 (Figure 2 c).
Notably, under poisoning of up to rt = 3 training and rc = 3 calibration points, our method still
guarantees that over 31% of the prediction sets remain reliable against worst-case coverage attacks.

                                   (a)                                                   (b)                                                   (c)
 Avg. set size


                                                      Avg. set size


                                                                                                            Avg. set size
                          α=0.05                                               α=0.05                                                α=0.05
                          α=0.1                                       3        α=0.1                                                 α=0.1
                                                                                                                            3
                 1                                                    2                                                     2

                                                                      1                                                     1
                      1   5        10    15      20                        1   5         10    15      20                        1    5       10     15      20
                      Number of partitions kc                              Number of partitions kt                               Num. partitions kt = kc
 Emp. coverage


                                                      Emp. coverage


                                                                                                            Emp. coverage
                 95
                                                                      95                                                    95

                 90                                                                                                         90
                                                                      90
                              α=0.05     α=0.1                                     α=0.05      α=0.1                                      α=0.05     α=0.1
                      1   5        10    15      20                        1   5         10    15      20                        1    5       10     15      20
                      Number of partitions kc                              Number of partitions kt                               Num. partitions kt = kc

Figure 3: Average set size and empirical coverage in all three different experiment settings (a–c).
Notably, our reliable prediction sets yield valid coverage guarantees without becoming too large.

Average set size. In Figure 3 (top row) we study the average set size. Notably, our majority predic-
tion sets yield strong guarantees (Figure 2 a) without any significant increase in size (Figure 3 a):
the average prediction set size remains below 1, which even holds for kc =40 (α=0.1). Interestingly,
the size increases with more training partitions, creating a tade-off between reliability and utility of
the prediction sets. Practitioners have to fine-tune this trade-off depending on the application’s sensi-
tivity. Additionally, we study set sizes on different datasets under calibration poisoning (setting (a)):
On CIFAR100 the average set size remains below 4 for kc ≤ 26, demonstrating that our majority
prediction sets scale well to datasets with more classes (Figure 4 (1)). Overall, we empirically find
that our reliable prediction sets do not become too large in size (desideratum II).
Empirical coverage. In Figure 3 (bottom row) we empirically validate the coverage guarantee
(Theorem 2) on clean data (desideratum I). In Subsection B.1 we provide additional empirical evi-
dence that, while concentration around the nominal level 1 − α naturally decreases for smaller sets,
majority prediction sets are again closely concentrated around the nominal coverage level.
Minimal number of classifiers. We observe increasing empirical coverage and sizes when using
only kt =2 or 3 classifiers (spikes in Figure 3). Intuitively, a small number of classifiers makes the
smoothed score function less stable during calibration. In practice, a sufficient number of classifiers
is required to achieve consistent majority vote consensus and reliability. Notably, our analysis shows
that four classifiers are already sufficient to prevent excessively large prediction sets.
Softmax ablation study. We found that smoothing the voting function with a softmax (Section 5)
avoids overly large prediction sets and overcoverage in practice. To demonstrate this we conduct
an experiment (Figure 4 (2, 3)) for varying numbers of training partitions kt , where we compare
conformal prediction with our smoothed score function s against using the voting function π only.
Computational efficiency. Training the classifiers takes most of the time (statistics in Appendix A).
Note, however, that while having to train more classifiers, each one is trained on a subset of the
training data, which can speed up the training process. Inference with the ResNet18 models takes
between 2 and 10 seconds on CIFAR10. Constructing the conformal prediction sets takes at most
0.5 seconds for the entire test set. Computing certificates for majority prediction sets takes less than
a second, and around one minute when computing guarantees under training and calibration poison-
ing. Overall, we found that reliable prediction sets are computationally efficient (desideratum V).


                                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   (1)                                              (2)                                                 (3)
                                                                                                                        9


                                                   Emp. coverage
    Avg. set size


                                                                                                        Avg. set size
                    4                                                                                                           with softmax
                                                                                                                        7       without softmax
                    3
                            CIFAR100                               95                                                   5
                    2       CIFAR10
                            SVHN                                            with softmax                                3
                    1                                                       without softmax
                                                                   90                                                   1
                        1    5    10     15   20                        1    5      10        15   20                       1    5      10        15   20
                        Num. partitions kt = kc                         Num. partitions kt = kc                             Num. partitions kt = kc

Figure 4: (1): Average prediction set size of majority prediction sets across three different datasets.
(2,3): Softmax ablation study for empirically justifying smoothing of the voting function (α = 0.05).


8                   D ISCUSSION

Reproducible prediction sets. Score functions in the literature are not just unreliable but some also
depend on randomization to break ties (Romano et al., 2020). While randomization at inference
changes prediction sets by at most one class (Angelopoulos et al., 2021), different prediction sets
for the same input may not be desirable from a reliability standpoint, violating desideratum V. For
example, a differential diagnosis for two patients with identical health should not yield different
results. As a remedy, we propose to make randomized score functions reproducible (Appendix C).
Limitations. Although RPS computationally scales to larger settings, training on subsets of larger
datasets such as CIFAR100 or ImageNet comes with accuracy loss, which also affects the utility of
our smoothed score function (details in Appendix B). This accuracy loss is an open challenge in the
general certifiably robust classification literature and beyond the scope of this paper.
Minimal calibration set size for majority prediction sets. Recall that desideratum VI requires that
the reliability of prediction sets must increase for larger calibration sets. Our majority prediction sets
fulfill this desideratum by construction since increasing the number of partitions kc will decrease
the influence of datapoints. However, we need enough data to construct our prediction sets: due
to the finite-sample correction, the calibration partitions cannot become arbitrarily small. If the
hashing function would distribute all calibration     images into equally-sized partitions of size n/kc ,
we would need at least n ≥ kc α1 − 1 calibration points in total (Proof in Appendix D). Notably,

this relationship is linear: given a fixed coverage probability of 1 − α, increasing the calibration
partitions by a factor of k only requires k-times larger calibration sets, which is realistic for all
commonly used image classification datasets and coverage probabilities used in the literature.
Training poisoning discussion. Under the assumption of exchangeability, adversaries cannot com-
promise the coverage guarantee of Theorem 1 by poisoning training data. This holds because confor-
mal scores are computed using a fixed classifier (post-training). However, in practice, the exchange-
ability assumption may not always hold: Adversaries could exploit knowledge of the calibration set
to manipulate the training process, causing the classifier to perform differently on the (known) cal-
ibration set than on unseen test data. Moreover, even if exchangeability holds, adversaries can still
affect individual prediction sets: For example, they could manipulate the training process to degrade
the utility of the score function, significantly altering the resulting prediction sets. This underscores
again the need for point-wise coverage and size reliability as we introduce in Definition 1.


9                   C ONCLUSION

We introduce reliable prediction sets (RPS), a novel method designed to improve pointwise relia-
bility of conformal prediction sets in the presence of data poisoning and label flipping attacks. By
leveraging smoothed score functions and a majority voting mechanism, RPS effectively mitigates
the influence of adversarial perturbations during both training and calibration. We provide theo-
retical guarantees that RPS maintains stability under worst-case data poisoning, and demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach on image classification tasks. Overall, our approach represents
an important contribution towards more reliable uncertainty quantification in practice, fostering the
trustworthiness in real-world scenarios where data integrity cannot be guaranteed.


                                                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

We ensure reproducibility by documenting all hyperparameters and experimental setups in App. A.
We also provide code along with detailed reproducibility instructions via the following project page:
https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/reliable-conformal-prediction/.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors want to thank Jan Schuchardt, Lukas Gosch, and Leo Schwinn for valuable feedback
on the manuscript. This work has been funded by the DAAD program Konrad Zuse Schools of
Excellence in Artificial Intelligence (sponsored by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research).
The authors of this work take full responsibility for its content.

R EFERENCES
Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and
  distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511, 2021.
Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Michael I. Jordan, and Jitendra Malik. Uncer-
  tainty sets for image classifiers using conformal prediction. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2021.
Andreas Auer, Martin Gauch, Daniel Klotz, and Sepp Hochreiter. Conformal prediction for time
  series with modern hopfield networks. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Philip J Boland, Harshinder Singh, and Bojan Cukic. Stochastic orders in partition and random
  testing of software. Journal of applied probability, 39(3):555–565, 2002.
Maxime Cauchois, Suyash Gupta, Alnur Ali, and John C. Duchi. Robust validation: Confident
 predictions even when distributions shift. CoRR, abs/2008.04267, 2020.
Giovanni Cherubin. Majority vote ensembles of conformal predictors. Machine Learning, 108(3):
  475–488, 2019.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
   smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1310–1320. PMLR, 2019.
Bat-Sheva Einbinder, Stephen Bates, Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Asaf Gendler, and Yaniv Ro-
  mano. Conformal prediction is robust to label noise. CoRR, abs/2209.14295, 2022.
Matteo Gasparin and Aaditya Ramdas. Merging uncertainty sets via majority vote. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2401.09379, 2024.
Asaf Gendler, Tsui-Wei Weng, Luca Daniel, and Yaniv Romano. Adversarially robust conformal
  prediction. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2022.
Subhankar Ghosh, Yuanjie Shi, Taha Belkhouja, Yan Yan, Jana Doppa, and Brian Jones. Proba-
  bilistically robust conformal prediction. In UAI, volume 216 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 681–690. PMLR, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, pp. 770–778. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.
Linus Jeary, Tom Kuipers, Mehran Hosseini, and Nicola Paoletti. Verifiably robust conformal pre-
  diction. CoRR, abs/2405.18942, 2024.
Mintong Kang, Zhen Lin, Jimeng Sun, Cao Xiao, and Bo Li. Certifiably byzantine-robust federated
 conformal prediction. In ICML. OpenReview.net, 2024.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-
   free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113
   (523):1094–1111, 2018.

                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander Levine and Soheil Feizi. Deep partition aggregation: Provable defenses against general
  poisoning attacks. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2021.
Yangyi Li, Aobo Chen, Wei Qian, Chenxu Zhao, Divya Lidder, and Mengdi Huai. Data poisoning
  attacks against conformal prediction. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, 2024.
Lars Lindemann, Matthew Cleaveland, Gihyun Shim, and George J. Pappas. Safe planning in dy-
  namic environments using conformal prediction. IEEE Robotics Autom. Lett., 8(8):5116–5123,
  2023.
Ziquan Liu, Yufei Cui, Yan Yan, Yi Xu, Xiangyang Ji, Xue Liu, and Antoni B. Chan. The pitfalls
  and promise of conformal inference under adversarial attacks. In ICML. OpenReview.net, 2024.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In ICLR
   (Poster). OpenReview.net, 2017.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Baolin Wu, Andrew Y Ng, et al.
  Reading digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. In NIPS workshop on deep
  learning and unsupervised feature learning, pp. 4. Granada, 2011.
Harris Papadopoulos, Kostas Proedrou, Volodya Vovk, and Alex Gammerman. Inductive confidence
  machines for regression. In ECML, volume 2430 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 345–
  356. Springer, 2002.

Sangdon Park, Osbert Bastani, and Taesoo Kim. Acon2 : Adaptive conformal consensus for provable
  blockchain oracles. In USENIX Security Symposium, pp. 3313–3330. USENIX Association, 2023.
Coby Penso and Jacob Goldberger. A conformal prediction score that is robust to label noise. CoRR,
  abs/2405.02648, 2024.
Keivan Rezaei, Kiarash Banihashem, Atoosa Malemir Chegini, and Soheil Feizi. Run-off election:
  Improved provable defense against data poisoning attacks. In ICML, volume 202 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 29030–29050. PMLR, 2023.
Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel J. Candès. Classification with valid and adaptive
  coverage. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Elan Rosenfeld, Ezra Winston, Pradeep Ravikumar, and J. Zico Kolter. Certified robustness to label-
  flipping attacks via randomized smoothing. In ICML, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 8230–8241. PMLR, 2020.
Mauricio Sadinle, Jing Lei, and Larry Wasserman. Least ambiguous set-valued classifiers with
 bounded error levels. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 114(525):223–234, 2019.
Aldo Solari and Vera Djordjilović. Multi split conformal prediction. Statistics & Probability Letters,
  184:109395, 2022.
Philip Sosnin, Mark Niklas Müller, Maximilian Baader, Calvin Tsay, and Matthew Wicker. Certified
  robustness to data poisoning in gradient-based training. CoRR, abs/2406.05670, 2024.
Wenpin Tang and Fengmin Tang. The poisson binomial distribution—old & new. Statistical Science,
 38(1):108–119, 2023.
Zhiyi Tian, Lei Cui, Jie Liang, and Shui Yu. A comprehensive survey on poisoning attacks and
  countermeasures in machine learning. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(8):166:1–166:35, 2023.
Janette Vazquez and Julio C. Facelli. Conformal prediction in clinical medical sciences. J. Heal.
  Informatics Res., 6(3):241–252, 2022.
Vladimir Vovk. Conditional validity of inductive conformal predictors. Mach. Learn., 92(2-3):
  349–376, 2013.
Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world,
  volume 29. Springer, 2005.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Volodya Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Craig Saunders. Machine-learning applications of al-
  gorithmic randomness. In ICML, pp. 444–453. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
Wenxiao Wang, Alexander Levine, and Soheil Feizi. Improved certified defenses against data poi-
 soning with (deterministic) finite aggregation. In ICML, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 22769–22783. PMLR, 2022.
Ge Yan, Yaniv Romano, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Provably robust conformal prediction with improved
  efficiency. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2024.
Soroush H Zargarbashi, Mohammad Sadegh Akhondzadeh, and Aleksandar Bojchevski. Robust yet
  efficient conformal prediction sets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09165, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX OVERVIEW
In this appendix we provide additional results, details on our experimental setup and prove theoreti-
cal results as outlined in the following:

A Full experimental setup and reproducibility details                                             15

B Additional results for reliable prediction sets                                                 16

C Reproducible prediction sets                                                                    21

D Proofs for reliable prediction sets (Section 5)                                                 22

E Proofs for reliability certificates (Section 6)                                                 23


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A       F ULL EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND REPRODUCIBILITY DETAILS
We provide details on the experimental setup to ensure reproducibility of our results.
Datasets. The datasets we use for evaluation are described in Section 7 (SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011),
CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009)) and are publicly available. We use the torchvi-
sion library to load the datasets.2 We normalize images before training, and we compute dataset
mean and standard deviation on each training partition separately to ensure models are trained on
isolated partitions, which is required by our method to improve reliability.
Training details. We train all models with stochastic gradient descent (learning rate 0.01, momen-
tum 0.9, weight decay 5e-4) for 400 epochs using early stopping if the training accuracy does not
improve for 100 epochs. We further deploy a cosine learning rate scheduler (Loshchilov & Hutter,
2017). We use a batch size of 128 during training and 300 at inference. To ensure that our guarantees
against training-poisoning hold we require that the training process is deterministic, which not only
involves fixing the random seed for data augmentation but also ensuring that the internal training
processes are deterministic (Levine & Feizi, 2021). We also sort the training data in each partition
to ensure that training is invariant w.r.t. the order of the training data (Levine & Feizi, 2021).
Image preprocessing. We determine dataset-wide mean and standard deviation dynamically on ev-
ery training set partition separately once before training to ensure that each classifier is trained on
an isolated partition. We subsequently normalize all images in one partition with the corresponding
values. We also augment the training set with random crops (padding of 4 pixels) and random hori-
zontal flips (but we perform the data augmentation in a deterministic, reproducible way across runs).
Note that mean and standard deviation are computed before data augmentation.
Hardware details. We train ResNet18 models on a NVIDIA GTX 1080TI GPU, and the ResNet50
and ResNet101 models on a NVIDIA A100 40GB. We perform inference of all models on a NVIDIA
GTX 1080TI GPU, and compute certificates on a Xeon E5-2630 v4 CPU.
Reproducibility. To ensure reproducibility we use random seeds for all randomized functions, this
especially includes the dataset preprocessing, model training and calibration splits. We provide all
random seeds and detailed reproducibility instructions along with our code.
Training time details. The average runtime statistics for training ResNet18 models on CIFAR-10
and SVHN are as follows. Training a single ResNet18 model on CIFAR-10 takes approx. 2.6 hours,
while training 100 models requires a total of 2.4 hours, with each individual model taking approx.
1.5 minutes. For SVHN, a single ResNet18 model takes 1.5 hours to train, and training 100 models
requires a total of 1.6 hours, with each model training taking around 58 seconds. For CIFAR100, a
single ResNet18 model takes 3 hours to train, and training 100 models requires a total of 2.27 hours,
with each model training for around 1.4 minutes.


    2
        https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/index.html


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR RELIABLE PREDICTION SETS

In this section, we expand on the experimental results by providing further analyses and complemen-
tary results. Figure 5 shows the worst-case reliability guarantees for the SVHN dataset under the
three different poisoning scenarios (in the same settings as described in the main paper). We again
observe that our method provides reliable prediction sets even under worst-case poisoning attacks.
Complementary to the main section, Figure 6 shows the average set size and empirical coverage in
all three different experiment settings (a–c) on the SVHN dataset.
Figure 7 (1) shows the average set sizes of the three different architectures (ResNet18, ResNet50,
ResNet101) on the CIFAR10 dataset when using majority vote prediction sets with the smoothed
score function (third experimental setting). Interestingly, using the ResNet18 model yields the best
results, which we attribute to the fact that models trained on subsets of the training set require less
capacity to learn the data distribution, and the reduced size prevents overfitting. Figure 7 (2,3) show
the softmax ablation study for empirically justifying the smoothing of the voting function (α = 0.1).
In the main plots in Section 7, we only considered the diagonal rt = rc for the reliability ratios. In
Figure 8, we show the reliability ratios for coverage reliability, size reliability, and robustness for all
combinations of rt and rc for the CIFAR10 dataset (kt =100, kc =40, α=0.1). Reliability ratios are
generally higher for larger rc , which indicates that RPS is more reliable under calibration poisoning.
In Figure 9 we provide additional results for ResNet18 on the CIFAR100 dataset under calibration
poisoning. We show the empirical coverage, average set size, and reliability guarantees for the
ResNet18 model. We observe that our method provides reliable prediction sets even under calibra-
tion poisoning attacks on the CIFAR100 dataset (showing that majority prediction sets generally
scale to datasets with significantly more classes).
Figure 10 shows the relationship between reliability of ResNet18 and the number of partitions under
calibration poisoning for SVHN, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100. For training poisoning, guarantees
become non-trivial for kt = 100 partitions as shown in the main text. Note that size reliability
reduces again if the number of calibration partitions becomes too large. The main reason for this
is that a minimum number of calibration points is required to construct prediction sets (due to the
finite-sample correction, as already discussed in Section 8). As the number of calibration points per
partition decreases with more partitions, adversaries could remove points from partitions to prevent
us from constructing prediction sets in the first place (see theoretical analysis in Appendix D).
As mentioned in Section 8, training on subsets of larger datasets such as CIFAR100 or ImageNet
comes with accuracy loss, which affects the utility of our smoothed score function. Specifically,
when splitting the training set of CIFAR100 into 10 partitions, each individual classifier achieves
an accuracy of approximately 30% (in contrast to at least 70% when trained on the entire dataset).
This causes inconsistencies between the classifiers, which affects the utility of the score function,
eventually leading to excessively large prediction sets. Figure 11 (a) shows that the average set size
is above 42 for 10 partitions. When using 100 partitions, the average set size is 42.96, indicating low
utility. Future learning algorithms could further improve performance under training poisoning for
larger datasets with more classes, ultimately boosting robustness and reliability in machine learning.
In additional experiments (Figure 11) we finetune classifiers pretrained on ImageNet (instead of
training randomly initialized models from scratch as for all other plots in the paper). Note that
in this case the reliability guarantees hold for the fine-tuning dataset only, not for the dataset used
for pretraining. Interestingly, Figure 11 (1) shows that the average set size in experiments with
pretrained models is significantly reduced, indicating that the models benefit from pretraining on
ImageNet (although the average size still remains high for 100 partitions on CIFAR100 – 18.16).
Further, Figure 11 (2-3) show reliability guarantees under both training and calibration poisoning
for the CIFAR10 dataset when using a pretrained ResNet18 model (3) compared to training from
scratch (2). We observe that reliability increases significantly when compared to the reliability of a
model that was randomly initialized and trained from scratch. Notably, this means that improving
the classifier’s performance under partitioning of the training data will also improve the reliability
of prediction sets and thus provides an interesting direction for future work, e.g. by applying recent
improvements in the certifiable robustness literature (Wang et al., 2022; Rezaei et al., 2023). We
also believe that studying poisoning in fine-tuning settings is a promising future research direction,
especially given the proliferation of pretrained models in practice.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, we provide additional results for our reliable prediction sets for the following evaluation
metrics: (1) the ratio of empty sets, (2) the ratio of full sets, (3) the singleton ratio (ratio of sets
containing a single class), and (4) the singleton hit ratio (empirical coverage of singleton predic-
tion sets). Figure 12 shows results for the CIFAR10 dataset, and Figure 13 shows results for the
SVHN dataset, for all three evaluation settings (a-c) described in Section 5.

                                            (a)                                                                             (b)                                                                             (c)
   Reliab. ratio (%)


                                                                             Reliab. ratio (%)


                                                                                                                                                       Reliab. ratio (%)
                                                                                                                         robust                                                                         robust
                       75                                                                        75                      coverage reliable                                 75                           coverage reliable
                                                                                                                         size reliable                                                                  size reliable
                                   robust
                       50          coverage reliable                                             50                                                                        50
                                   size reliable
                       25                                                                        25                                                                        25

                             1      5           10          15                                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                          1       2       3         4        5   6
                                 Calib. set radius rc                                                     Training set radius rt                                                Poisoning radius rt = rc

Figure 5: SVHN: Worst-case reliability guarantees across three scenarios: (a) poisoning of the
calibration data, (b) poisoning of the training data, and (c) poisoning of both datasets.


                                            (a)                                                                             (b)                                                                          (c)
 Avg. set size


                                                                      Avg. set size


                                                                                                                                                   Avg. set size
                                  α=0.05                                                                       α=0.05                                                                        α=0.05
                                  α=0.1                                                                        α=0.1                                                                         α=0.1
                                                                                       1.25                                                                          1.5
                       1

                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
                            1      5       10          15        20                                       1       5         10       15       20                                    1           5        10            15       20
                            Number of partitions kc                                                   Number of partitions kt                                                   Num. partitions kt = kc
 Emp. coverage


                                                                      Emp. coverage


                                                                                                                                                    Emp. coverage


                       95
                                                                                                 95                                                                        95

                       90                                                                                                                                                  90
                                                                                                 90
                                       α=0.05          α=0.1                                                          α=0.05        α=0.1                                                           α=0.05            α=0.1
                            1      5       10          15        20                                       1       5         10       15       20                                1            5           10           15       20
                            Number of partitions kc                                                   Number of partitions kt                                                   Num. partitions kt = kc

                   Figure 6: Avg. size and empirical coverage in all three settings (a–c) on the SVHN dataset.


                                            (1)                                                                           (2)                                                                           (3)
                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                         Emp. coverage
 Avg. set size


                                                                                                                                                     Avg. set size


                                  ResNet18                                                                    with softmax                                                                  with softmax
                       3          ResNet50                                                                    without softmax                                                               without softmax
                                  ResNet101
                                                                                            95                                                                             2
                       2
                                                                                            90
                       1                                                                                                                                                   1
                            1      5       10          15        20                                   1       5          10        15        20                                 1           5          10             15       20
                            Num. partitions kt = kc                                               Num. partitions kt = kc                                                      Num. partitions kt = kc

Figure 7: (1): Different models on CIFAR10. (2,3): Softmax ablation study for empirically justify-
ing smoothing of the voting function (here with α = 0.1) on CIFAR10.


                                                                                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               (1)                                                                          (2)                                                                                   (3)
                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                   5 4 3 2 1


                                                                                               5 4 3 2 1


                                                                                                                                                                                     5 4 3 2 1
 Radius rt


                                                                             Radius rt


                                                                                                                                                                   Radius rt
                                                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                       0.2
                                   1        2       3     4        5                                               1        2       3       4        5                                                   1        2       3       4       5
                                       Radius rc                                                                       Radius rc                                                                             Radius rc

Figure 8: CIFAR10, kt = 100, kc = 40, α = 0.1, (1): Coverage reliability ratio, (2): Size reliability
ratio, (3): Robustness ratio (with with all radii combinations).


                                                 (1)                                                                             (2)                                                                                   (3)


                                                                                                                                                                       Reliab. ratio (%)
   Emp. coverage


                                                                               Avg. set size

                                                                                                     15            α=0.05                                                                                             robust
                                                                                                                   α=0.1                                                                   75                         coverage reliable
                    95                                                                                                                                                                                                size reliable
                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                    90                                                                                5                                                                                    25
                                           α=0.05          α=0.1
                                                                                                      0
                               1       5        10            15       20                                  1           5         10             15       20                                      1            5           10          15
                               Number of partitions kt                                                     Number of partitions kt                                                                   Calib. set radius rc

Figure 9: Additional results for ResNet18 on CIFAR100 under calibration poisoning: (1): Empirical
coverage, (2): Average set size, (3): Reliability guarantees.


                                                 (1)                                                                             (2)                                                                                   (3)
                                       robust                                                                          robust                                                                                robust
                      15               coverage reliable                                             15                coverage reliable                                                   15                coverage reliable
      AUCRC


                                                                                  AUCRC


                                                                                                                                                                        AUCRC


                                       size reliable                                                                   size reliable                                                                         size reliable
                      10                                                                             10                                                                                    10
                           5                                                                           5                                                                                     5
                           0                                                                           0                                                                                     0
                               0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35                                                       0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35                                                                 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
                               Number of partitions kc                                                     Number of partitions kc                                                               Number of partitions kc

Figure 10: Relationship between reliability and the number of partitions under calibration poisoning
for ResNet18 on (1): SVHN, (2): CIFAR10, and (3): CIFAR100. Here, AUCRC stands for the area
under the certifiable reliability curve of the corresponding reliability types.


                                                 (1)                                                                             (2)                                                                                   (3)
                                                                                 Reliab. ratio (%)


                                                                                                                                                                       Reliab. ratio (%)
   Avg. set size


                                                    not pretrained                                                              robust                                                                                robust
                    75                                  pretrained                                   75                         coverage reliable                                          75                         coverage reliable
                                                                                                                                size reliable                                                                         size reliable
                    50                                                                               50                                                                                    50
                    25                                                                               25                                                                                    25

                               1           5            10             15                                      1        2       3       4        5       6                                           1        2       3       4       5       6
                               Number of partitions kt                                                     Poisoning radius rt = rc                                                              Poisoning radius rt = rc

Figure 11: (1): Average set size using the smoothed score function on CIFAR100, comparing pre-
trained vs. non-pretrained models. (2-3): Reliability certificates under both training and calibration
poisoning on CIFAR10, comparing reliability of randomly initialized ResNet18 models (2) – (as in
Figure 2 c) – against the reliability of pretrained models that are only fine-tuned on CIFAR10 (3).



                                                                                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        (a)                                                       (b)                                                         (c)
  Sing. hit ratio


                                                            Sing. hit ratio


                                                                                                                       Sing. hit ratio
                     95                                                        95                                                         95

                     90                                                        90                                                         90
                                   α=0.05     α=0.1                                          α=0.05      α=0.1                                           α=0.05     α=0.1
                          1   5        10     15      20                            1   5        10      15      20                            1     5       10     15      20
                          Number of partitions kc                                   Number of partitions kt                                        Num. part. kt = kc
                    1.0                                                       1.0                                                        1.0
 Singleton ratio


                                                           Singleton ratio


                                                                                                                      Singleton ratio
                    0.5                                                       0.5                                                        0.5

                                   α=0.05     α=0.1                                          α=0.05      α=0.1                                           α=0.05     α=0.1
                    0.0                                                       0.0                                                        0.0
                          1    5        10    15      20                            1    5          10   15      20                            1     5        10    15      20
                          Number of partitions kc                                   Number of partitions kt                                        Num. part. kt = kc
                    1.0                                                       1.0                                                        1.0
 Empty set ratio


                                                           Empty set ratio


                                                                                                                         Full set ratio


                                   α=0.05     α=0.1                                          α=0.05      α=0.1                                           α=0.05     α=0.1


                    0.5                                                       0.5                                                        0.5


                    0.0                                                       0.0                                                        0.0
                          1    5        10    15      20                            1    5          10   15      20                            1     5        10    15      20
                          Number of partitions kc                                   Number of partitions kt                                        Num. part. kt = kc
                    1.0                                                       1.0                                                        1.0
    Full set ratio


                                                              Full set ratio


                                                                                                                         Full set ratio


                                   α=0.05     α=0.1                                          α=0.05      α=0.1                                           α=0.05     α=0.1


                    0.5                                                       0.5                                                        0.5


                    0.0                                                       0.0                                                        0.0
                          1    5        10    15      20                            1    5          10   15      20                            1     5        10    15      20
                          Number of partitions kc                                   Number of partitions kt                                        Num. part. kt = kc

Figure 12: Various metrics for RPS in the three experiment settings (a-c) for ResNet18 on CIFAR10.


                                                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        (a)                                                       (b)                                                         (c)
  Sing. hit ratio


                                                            Sing. hit ratio


                                                                                                                       Sing. hit ratio
                     95                                                        95                                                         95

                     90                                                        90                                                         90
                                   α=0.05     α=0.1                                          α=0.05      α=0.1                                           α=0.05     α=0.1
                          1   5        10     15      20                            1   5        10      15      20                            1     5       10     15      20
                          Number of partitions kc                                   Number of partitions kt                                        Num. part. kt = kc
                    1.0                                                       1.0                                                        1.0
 Singleton ratio


                                                           Singleton ratio


                                                                                                                      Singleton ratio
                    0.5                                                       0.5                                                        0.5

                                   α=0.05     α=0.1                                          α=0.05      α=0.1                                           α=0.05     α=0.1
                    0.0                                                       0.0                                                        0.0
                          1    5        10    15      20                            1    5          10   15      20                            1     5        10    15      20
                          Number of partitions kc                                   Number of partitions kt                                        Num. part. kt = kc
                    1.0                                                       1.0                                                        1.0
 Empty set ratio


                                                           Empty set ratio


                                                                                                                      Empty set ratio


                                   α=0.05     α=0.1                                          α=0.05      α=0.1                                           α=0.05     α=0.1


                    0.5                                                       0.5                                                        0.5


                    0.0                                                       0.0                                                        0.0
                          1    5        10    15      20                            1    5          10   15      20                            1     5        10    15      20
                          Number of partitions kc                                   Number of partitions kt                                        Num. part. kt = kc
                    1.0                                                       1.0                                                        1.0
    Full set ratio


                                                              Full set ratio


                                                                                                                         Full set ratio


                                   α=0.05     α=0.1                                          α=0.05      α=0.1                                           α=0.05     α=0.1


                    0.5                                                       0.5                                                        0.5


                    0.0                                                       0.0                                                        0.0
                          1    5        10    15      20                            1    5          10   15      20                            1     5        10    15      20
                          Number of partitions kc                                   Number of partitions kt                                        Num. part. kt = kc

Figure 13: Various metrics for RPS in the three experiment settings (a-c) for ResNet18 on SVHN.


                                                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1                    S TUDY OF STATISTICAL EFFICIENCY OF MAJORITY PREDICTION SETS

Empirical coverage is a random variable following a Beta distribution concentrated around the nom-
inal coverage level (Vovk, 2013). Here we conduct additional experiments to provide empirical
evidence that the majority prediction sets are again closely concentrated around the nominal cover-
age level. We train a ResNet18 classifier on CIFAR10 and calibrate homogeneous prediction sets
(Sadinle et al., 2019) for the nominal coverage level of 1 − α = 0.9. Then we compute the smaller
prediction sets on kc = 10 and kc = 20 partitions, respectively. Finally, we merge the smaller
prediction sets using the majority voting scheme described in Section 5. We repeat this process 100
times and compute the empirical coverage for each run. We then plot the empirical coverage for
each run in Figure 14. As we partition the calibration set, the concentration naturally decreases for
smaller prediction sets, leading to overcoverage. Interestingly, we observe that the majority pre-
diction sets are again closely concentrated around the nominal coverage level, providing empirical
evidence that majority prediction sets are statistically efficient.


                                      kc = 10                                                         kc = 20
                      1.00                                                              1.00
 Empirical coverage


                                                                   Empirical coverage
                      0.95                                                              0.95

                      0.90                                                              0.90

                      0.85                                                              0.85

                      0.80                                                              0.80
                             HPS     Smaller HPS   Majority                                    HPS   Smaller HPS   Majority

Figure 14: Concentration of empirical coverage for vanilla HPS, HPS for each partition, and the
majority prediction sets. We use kc = 10 partitions for the left plot, and kc = 20 partitions for
the right plot. Majority prediction sets are again closely concentrated around the nominal coverage
level, providing empirical evidence that majority prediction sets are statistically efficient.


C                     R EPRODUCIBLE PREDICTION SETS

There are conformal score functions that rely on random variables, e.g. for ensuring exact coverage
by breaking ties. For example, adaptive prediction sets (APS) sum over class probabilities of classes
                                                 PK
with probability at least fy (x): s(x, u, y)=−( i=1 fi (x)1[fi (x)>fy (x)]+ufy (x)), where f is a
soft classifier and u ∈ [0, 1] a uniform random variable (Romano et al., 2020). Conformal prediction
sets are then formed by C(xn+1 ) = {s(xn+1 , un+1 , y) ≥ τ }, where un+1 ∈ [0, 1] .
Although randomization at inference changes prediction sets by at most one class (Angelopoulos
et al., 2021), generating different prediction sets for the same input may not be desirable from a
reliability standpoint and violates desideratum V. For example, a differential diagnosis for two pa-
tients with identical health parameters should not yield different results. As a solution, we propose
reproducible score functions: Instead of drawing from a random variable, we propose to compute
pseudorandom numbers by hashing the sum of the image’s pixel values and initialize the pseudo-
random number with the hash. We found that this is enough to break ties in practice while ensuring
determinism required by our reliability guarantees. Note that our score functions with pseudo-
randomization are valid since they maintain exchangeability as the numbers depend solely on the
data itself (not its position in the dataset or other datapoints).
We analyze this in Figure 15 (with α=0.05): Without randomization APS results in large set sizes (2)
despite tight coverage (1). Randomization leads to smaller sets but also compromises reproducibil-
ity. With pseudo-randomization, APS is reproducible with tight coverage and small prediction sets.


                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                (1)                                                                      (2)


    Emp. coverage


                                                                                Avg. set size
                    95                                                                          5
                                                                                                             APS without randomization
                                                                                                             randomized APS
                    90                                                                          3            reproducible APS (ours)
                             APS without randomization
                             randomized APS
                             reproducible APS (ours)
                                                                                                1
                         1        5            10        15       20                                1    5              10               15   20
                                Number of partitions kc                                                 Number of partitions kc

    Figure 15: Comparing APS without and with randomization against our reproducible version.


D                   P ROOFS FOR RELIABLE PREDICTION SETS (S ECTION 5)

Recall the definition of the majority prediction sets from Section 5:
                                        (     kc
                                                                           )
                                             X
                         C M (xn+1 ) = y :       1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} > τ̂ (α)
                                                                  i=1

with τ̂ (α)=max {x ∈ [kc ] : F (x) ≤ α}, where F is the CDF of the Binomial distribution
Bin(kc , 1 − α) and [kc ] = {0, . . . , kc }. In the following, denote τ̂ ≜ τ̂ (α) for simplicity.
Theorem 2. Given any conformal score function s and test sample (xn+1 , yn+1 ) ∈ Dtest exchange-
able with Dcalib , the majority prediction set (Equation 3) – constructed from sets calibrated on
disjoint partitions – achieves marginal coverage on clean data: Pr[yn+1 ∈ C M (xn+1 )] ≥ 1−α.


Proof. Define the event ϕi ≜ 1{yn+1 ∈ Ci (xn+1 )}. The main argument is that the events ϕi and ϕj
are independent for i ̸= j. This holds since the prediction sets Ci and Cj are constructed on disjoint
partitions of a calibration set of independent datapoints and are thus independent. This allow us to
use an argument of Gasparin & Ramdas (2024) about majority voting in the context of uncertainty
sets: Specifically, ϕi are independent Bernoulli random variables with pi = Pr[ϕi = 1] ≥ 1 − α by
construction. Further define the random variable
                                                                 kc
                                                                 X
                                                         Skc =         1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} .
                                                                 i=1

First consider the special case pi = 1 − α for all i. Then Skc is a Binomial random variable,
Skc ∼ Bin(kc , 1 − α). Thus we have:
                                             "k                              #
                                              X c
                               M
                  Pr[yn+1 ∈ C (xn+1 )] = Pr        1{yn+1 ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} > τ̂              (5)
                                                                          i=1
                                                                 = Pr [Skc > τ̂ ]                                                                  (6)
                                                                 = 1 − Pr [Skc ≤ τ̂ ]                                                              (7)
                                                                 = 1 − F (τ̂ )                                                                     (8)
                                                                       | {z }
                                                                           ≤α
                                                                 ≥1−α                                                                              (9)
In the general case of pi ≥ 1 − α we have that Skc is distributed as a Poisson binomial random
                                                                     Qkc
variable, Skc ∼ P B(kc , [p1 , . . . , pkc ]). However, it holds that i=1 pi > (1 − α)kc , which implies
that the Poisson binomial distribution is stochastically larger than the Binomial distribution (Boland
et al., 2002; Tang & Tang, 2023). See (Gasparin & Ramdas, 2024) for details. Intuitively, this means
that the probability Pr [Skc > τ̂ ] can only increase in the general case where pi ≥ 1 − α.


                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Extended discussion. In the context of uncertainty sets, Gasparin & Ramdas (2024) proved that
merging independent uncertainty sets via majority voting can retain their 1−α marginal coverage
in general. However, note that their construction actually violates the marginal coverage guarantee:
They define the threshold in their majority set as q = sup{x ∈ R : F (x) ≤ α} (in contrast to our
threshold τ̂ = max{x ∈ [kc ] : F (x) ≤ α}). The problem with their construction is that F (q) > α
due to the definition of the supremum and the definition of the binomial CDF:

                                                 ⌊x⌋
                                                 X    kc
                             F (x; kc , 1 − α) =         (1 − α)i αkc −i
                                                 i=0
                                                       i

This means q = τ̂ + 1, which leads to smaller majority sets that violate the coverage guarantee since
Pr[Skc > q] < 1 − α due to F (q) > α. Beyond that, we propose a method for improving the reli-
ability of conformal prediction against worst-case poisoning attacks (by partitioning the calibration
set), and derive reliability guarantees.
Minimal calibration set size for majority prediction sets. Recall that desideratum VI (Section 4)
requires that the reliability of prediction sets must increase for larger calibration sets. Our majority
prediction sets fulfill this desideratum by construction since increasing the number of partitions kc
will decrease the influence of datapoints. However, we need enough data to construct prediction
sets: due to the finite-sample correction, the calibration partitions cannot become arbitrarily small.
This naturally bounds the number of partitions kc for a fixed calibration size n (and thus reliability):
Proposition 1. Let i∗ = arg mini∈{1,...,kc } |Pic | denote the partition of smallest size. Given cover-
age probability 1 − α, we can construct prediction sets for partition i provided that |Pic∗ | ≥ ( α1 − 1).


Proof. In general, constructing prediction sets given n calibration points requires, due to the finite
sample correction, that 0 ≤ αn = ⌊α(n+1)−1⌋/n holds (otherwise we cannot compute quantiles).
                                                          (1)
We have: 0 ≤ ⌊α(n + 1) − 1⌋/n ⇔ 1 ≤ ⌊α(n + 1)⌋ ⇔ 1 ≤ α(n + 1) ⇔ α1 − 1 ≤ n, where (1)
holds since the l.h.s. is a natural number.
Thus we need n ≥ α1 − 1 datapoints in our calibration set. If we partition     the calibration data into k
equally-sizes subsets of size nk , then we need at least n ≥ k α1 − 1 datapoints. If the partitions are


not equally-sized, then we require for the smallest partition i∗ that |Pic∗ | ≥ ( α1 − 1) holds.


E    P ROOFS FOR RELIABILITY CERTIFICATES (S ECTION 6)



Algorithm 3 Greedy algorithm for upper bounding the Algorithm 4 Greedy algorithm for lower bounding the
smoothed score function s                           smoothed score function s
Input: Score function s, x, y, kt , rt              Input: Score function s, x, y, kt , rt
 1: π = [π1 (x), . . . , πK (x)]                     1: π = [π1 (x), . . . , πK (x)]
 2: for i = 1 to rt do                               2: for i = 1 to rt do
 3:    ŷ = argmaxŷ̸=y πŷ                          3: if πy = 0 then
                                                     4:       y′ ← y
 4:    πŷ ← min(max(πŷ − 1/kt , 0), 1)             5: else
 5:    πy ← min(max(πy + 1/kt , 0), 1)               6:       y ′ ← argmin ′         πy′
                        PK                                                 y :πy′ >0
Output: s(x, y) = eπy /( i=1 eπi )                    7: πy′ ← min(max(πy′ − 1/kt , 0), 1)
                                                      8: ŷ = argmaxŷ̸=y πŷ
                                                      9: πŷ ← min(max(πŷ + 1/kt , 0), 1)
                                                     Output: s(x, y) = eπy /( K     πi
                                                                             P
                                                                               i=1 e )



Let C(xn+1 )={y ∈ Y : s(xn+1 , y) ≥ τ } be a prediction set for a new test point xn+1 derived using
conformal prediction (Section 3) under the clean dataset Dl and with the smoothed score function s.



                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 2. We can upper bound the score function for any D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ) as follows:
                                            eπy
    s(x, y) =           max               PK π       with π = [π1 (x) + ∆1 , . . . , πK (x) + ∆K ]      (10)
                      0≤πi ≤1
                                           i=1 e
                                                 i
                                   r
                ∆i ∈{0,± k1 ,...,± kt }
                    PK t             t
                      i=1 ∆i =0



Proof. Since adversaries can insert or delete at most rt datapoints, we know at most rt training
partitions can be affected in the worst-case. Thus at most rt of kt classifiers change their prediction.


This holds analogously for the lower bound on the smoothed score function:
                                            eπy
    s(x, y) =           min               PK π       with π = [π1 (x) + ∆1 , . . . , πK (x) + ∆K ]      (11)
                      0≤πi ≤1
                                           i=1 e
                                                 i
                                   r
                ∆i ∈{0,± k1 ,...,± kt }
                    PK t             t
                      i=1  ∆ i =0

Proposition 2. Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4 solve the discrete optimization problems in Equation 10
and Equation 11, respectively. The optimal solutions represent the worst-case bounds on the score
function s under any poisoned dataset D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ).

Proof. In the worst-case, the adversary controls at most rt partitions, which means the adversary
controls the predictions of at most rt classifiers and can consequently change at most krtt probability
mass in the vote-distribution π over classes Y, which is exactly what the two optimization problems
model. We now distinguish between the two cases:

       • For the upper bound s(x, y), the worst-case adversary redistributes the probability mass
         from the classes with the largest probability masses to the target class y, which is the
         worst-case upper bound since it maximizes the numerator and minimizes the denominator.
       • For the lower bound s(x, y), the worst-case adversary redistributes the probability mass
         from the target class to the class with the largest probability mass. If the target class has
         0 remaining probability mass, then the probability from the smallest class with probability
         mass larger than 0 is redistributed to the class with most of the probability mass. This is the
         worst-case lower bound since it minimizes the numerator and maximizes the denominator.

The argument holds since the space we are optimizing over is discrete, πi (x) ∈ {0, k1t , . . . , ktk−1
                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                        , 1}.
Both worst-cases are exactly what the Algorithms in Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4 compute.

Clearly, both greedy algorithms need rt iterations to terminate (due to the for loop).
Theorem 3. Given rc =0, the conformal prediction set C(x     ˜ n+1 ) derived with the smoothed score
function under                                                                     ˜ n+1 ) ⊇ C(xn+1 ),
                any poisoned dataset D̃l ∈Brt ,rc (Dl ) is coverage reliable, i.e. C(x
                                        ˜

if s x, y ≥ τ , and size reliable, i.e. C(xn+1 ) ⊆ C(xn+1 ), if s (x, y) < τ .

Proof. We consider training set poisoning. In the worst case, adversaries perturb at most rt training
partitions. Thus, the worst-case quantiles are given by:
                         τ = Quant(αn ; {zi }ni=1 )         τ = Quant(αn ; {zi }ni=1 )
where zi = s(xi , yi ) and zi = s(xi , yi ) are lower and upper bounds on the scores for all points
(xi , yi ) ∈ Dcalib in the calibration set. We treat coverage and size reliability separately:
Coverage reliability: We consider a prediction set as coverage reliable if no class can be removed
from the set. If adversaries cannot remove the “weakest” class y with the fewest votes πy among all
classes y ∈ C(xn+1 ) from the prediction set, then adversaries also cannot remove any other class
                                adversarial budget. In the worst-case, the lowest score for sample x
since they would need even more
and class y is given by s x, y . Thus, if this lowest score is still larger than or equal to the worst-case
quantile τ , then the weakest class cannot be removed and the prediction set is coverage reliable.


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Size reliability: We consider a prediction set as size reliable if no class can be added to the set. If
adversaries cannot add the “strongest” class y with the most votes πy among all classes y ∈    / C(xn+1 )
into the prediction set, then adversaries also cannot add any other class since they would need even
more adversarial budget. In the worst-case, the largest score for sample x and class y is given by
s (x, y). Thus, if this largest score is still smaller than the worst-case quantile τ , then the strongest
class cannot be added and the prediction set is size reliable.
Theorem 4. Given rt =0 and deterministic score function s, the majority prediction set C˜M (xn+1 )
derived under any dataset D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ) is coverage reliable, i.e. C˜M (xn+1 ) ⊇ C M (xn+1 ), if
m − rc > τ̂ (α), and size reliable, i.e. C˜M (xn+1 ) ⊆ C M (xn+1 ), if m + rc ≤ τ̂ (α), provided that
the smallest calibration partition i∗ is large enough |Pic∗ | − rc ≥ ( α1 − 1).

Proof. Coverage reliability: In the worst-case, adversaries control at most rc calibration partitions
                                  Pkc
and thus can change the support i=1      1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} for classes y ∈ C M (xn+1 ) by at most rc .
If removing rc from the support m of the class with the least support is not enough to remove the
class, m − rc > τ̂ , then the majority prediction set remains coverage reliable.
Size reliability: In the worst-case, adversaries control at most rc calibration partitions and thus can
                      Pkc
change the support i=1     1{y ∈ Ci (xn+1 )} for classes y ∈ / C M (xn+1 ) by at most rc . If adding rc
to the support m of the class with the most support is not enough to add the class, m + rc ≤ τ̂ , then
the majority prediction set remains size reliable.
This only holds if the smallest calibration partition i∗ is large enough |Pic∗ | − rc ≥ ( α1 − 1) under an
attack, otherwise the adversary could prevent us from computing the majority prediction set in the
first place by deleting datapoints from partition i∗ .
Theorem 5. Let βy denote the number of prediction sets Ci ∈ {C1 , . . . , Ckc } for which we can
guarantee y ∈ Ci under rt poisoned training datapoints. If βy − rc > τ̂ (α) for all y ∈ C M (xn+1 )
then the majority prediction set is coverage reliable under any dataset D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ), provided
that the smallest calibration partition i∗ is large enough |Pic∗ | − rc ≥ ( α1 − 1).

Proof. If there is a single class y ∈ C M (xn+1 ) for which we cannot guarantee that more than τ̂
prediction sets contain y under rt poisoned training and rc poisoned calibration points, then the
majority prediction set is not coverage reliable in the worst-case. Thus showing βy −rc >τ̂ for all
y ∈ C M (xn+1 ) as explained in the main text is a sufficient condition for coverage reliability.
Theorem 6. Let γy denote the number of prediction sets Ci ∈ {C1 , . . . , Ckc } for which we can
guarantee y ̸∈ Ci under rt poisoned training datapoints. If kc −γy +rc ≤ τ̂ (α) for all y ∈ / C M (xn+1 )
then the majority prediction set is size reliable under any dataset D̃l ∈ Brt ,rc (Dl ), provided that the
smallest calibration partition i∗ is large enough |Pic∗ | − rc ≥ ( α1 − 1).

                                    / C M (xn+1 ) for which we cannot guarantee that less than (or equal
Proof. If there is a single class y ∈
to) τ̂ prediction sets do not contain y under rt poisoned training points and rc poisoned calibration
points, then the majority prediction set is not size reliable in the worst-case. If γy denotes the number
of prediction sets for which we can guarantee y ̸∈ Ci under rt poisoned training datapoints, then
kc − γy is the number of prediction sets for which we cannot guarantee y ∈           / Ci (this entails the
number of prediction sets with y ∈ Ci ). Under consideration of additional calibration poisoning, we
cannot guarantee y ∈  / Ci for kc − γy + rc prediction sets. In the worst case, kc − γy + rc prediction
sets will contain the class. In other words, kc − γy + rc ≤ τ for all y ∈     / C M (xn+1 ) is a sufficient
condition for size reliability.

Computational complexity. For the training-poisoning certificates we have to compute the algo-
rithm for all n calibration points. Assuming we recompute the argmax every time, the certificates can
be computed in O(nrt K) (where K is the number of classes). Regarding our calibration-poisoning
certificates, the terms m, m can be computed efficiently in O(Kkc ) steps. To compute guarantees in
the general case, we mainly need to compute the terms βy and γy for all K classes y ∈ Y. This in-
volves computing the worst-case quantiles (O( knc rt K)) for each prediction set kc and the worst-case
score (O(rt K)). Thus overall the guarantees can be computed in O(Kkc ( knc rt K)) = O(K 2 nrt ).


                                                    25
