Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N OT A LL LLM-G ENERATED DATA A RE E QUAL :
R ETHINKING DATA W EIGHTING IN T EXT C LASSIFICA -
TION

 Hsun-Yu Kuo∗1,2,3,† , Yin-Hsiang Liao∗1,2,† , Yu-Chieh Chao1 , Wei-Yun Ma1,†,‡ , Pu-Jen Cheng2,†
 1
   Academia Sinica 2 National Taiwan University
 3
   Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL)
 hsun-yu.kuo@epfl.ch,
 {zenonliao, vpj870331, ma}@iis.sinica.edu.tw,
 pjcheng@csie.ntu.edu.tw



                                              A BSTRACT

         Synthetic data augmentation via Large Language Models (LLMs) allows re-
         searchers to leverage additional training data, thus enhancing the performance of
         downstream tasks, especially when real-world data is scarce. However, the gen-
         erated data can deviate from the real-world data, and this misalignment can bring
         about deficient results while applying the trained model to applications. There-
         fore, we proposed efficient weighted-loss approaches to align synthetic data with
         real-world distribution by emphasizing high-quality and diversified data generated
         by LLMs using merely a tiny amount of real-world data. We empirically assessed
         the effectiveness of our methods on multiple text classification tasks, and the re-
         sults showed that leveraging our approaches on a BERT-level model robustly out-
         performed standard cross-entropy and other data weighting approaches, providing
         potential solutions to effectively leveraging synthetic data from any suitable data
         generator.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The quantity and quality of data play a significant role in many tasks of Natural Language Processing
(NLP). However, due to the scarcity of data in a particular domain for a specific task, we may need
expertise to collect such data, resulting in budget limitations. Fortunately, Large Language Models
(LLMs) provide a practical solution to this problem. LLMs, such as GPT series (Brown et al.,
2020; OpenAI, 2022; OpenAI et al., 2024), can be leveraged to generate synthetic data that mimics
real-world examples, thereby enriching the training set (Wang et al., 2023). Taori et al. (2023), and
other works (Ye et al., 2022; West et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023) have shown the capability of using
LLM-generated data for the downstream tasks, and it seems to be a new cut-in solution to any NLP
downstream tasks. However, training models with LLM-generated data can lead to drawbacks such
as model collapse (Shumailov et al., 2023; Dohmatob et al., 2024), tail phenomena, reinforcing LM
biases (Wang et al., 2023). Moreover, based on our empirical study, the performance of models
trained on synthetic data without proper processing can be lower than models trained on much
smaller real-world data (Sec. 3.1), highlighting the uncertainty of using LLM-generated data.
Previous works took filtering strategy to get high quality or variant data (Dubey et al., 2024; MetaAI,
2024; Chiang et al., 2023; West et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022; 2023). Still, this strategy was mostly
human-crafted or needed efforts to train a judge model, and most importantly, filtering strategies
abandoned the potential of the filtered data that may contribute to the final performance. In contrast,
data weighting approaches leverage all the training data, including augmented and biased data, but
prioritize data by giving nonuniform weights to the loss of each data point. For example, Focal-Loss
(Lin et al., 2017) prioritized more diverse data; Hu et al. (2019) and SunGen (Gao et al., 2023)
    ∗
      Joint first authorship; † Data Science Degree Program, National Taiwan University and Academia Sinica;
Work done while Hsun-Yu Kuo and Yu-Chieh Chao were at Academia Sinica; ‡ Corresponding author; Code:
https://github.com/Hsun-Yu/DIMP-Loss


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


optimized the weights of training samples so that the model performs best on a small real-world
dataset. It is worth noting that while Hu et al. (2019) and SunGen steered the training toward higher
performance, using these methods in a large-scale scenario seems infeasible because the weights are
regarded as learnable parameters, the number of which increases as the training set grows.
Thus, inspired by the objective of Hu et al. (2019), we introduce two novel, efficient, automatic
weighted-loss approaches: Importance Loss (IMP-Loss) and Dynamic Importance Loss (DIMP-
Loss), which are designed to closely align the distribution of synthetic data with that of real-world
data. Furthermore, both IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss incorporate mechanisms as quality-checkers and
diversity-checkers, assigning higher quality and more diverse data points with greater weight. In
other words, these methods prioritize data points that are more relevant and more informative to
target downstream tasks, thereby reducing the impact of less valuable data on the fine-tuning model.
To validate our approaches, we conduct comprehensive empirical studies focusing on various text
classification tasks by comparing the performance of models trained with our novel weighted-loss
objectives under different conditions: 1) models trained exclusively on LLM-generated datasets
using few-shot prompts from a limited real-world dataset (Sec. 5.1); 2) models trained on large, real-
world datasets (Sec. 5.2); and 3) models trained on noisy datasets (Sec. G). Our findings indicate that
using a small real-world dataset to build the quality checkers and incorporating diversity checkers
highly enhances performance, even surpasses the few-shot prediction accuracy of the tremendous
data generator (Sec. 5.1). This demonstrates the efficacy of our methods in leveraging little real-
world data to improve models trained on LLM-generated datasets. Notably, DIMP-Loss is efficient
in terms of model size (Sec. 5.1), data requirements (Sec. 5.1), and computational resources (Sec.
4.4), making it a practical solution to enhance downstream performance.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   C ROSS E NTROPY L OSS ON R EAL -W ORLD DATASET

In supervised learning for text classification tasks, we consider a real-world dataset DP =
{(xi , yi )}M
            i=1 comprising M samples. Each pair (xi , yi ) is drawn independently and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) from the joint distribution P (X , Y), where xi represents the input sample and
yi ∈ Y = {1, 2, . . . , C} is the corresponding class label. This setup forms the basis for training
models using the empirical cross-entropy loss (CE-Loss), a standard loss function in such tasks.
The CE-Loss over the entire dataset DP is calculated as follows:
                                     M
                                  1 X                       p
                                                                h                 i
                 LCE (θ, DP ) = −       log P̂ (yi |xi ; θ) → EP − log P̂ (y|x; θ)                    (1)
                                  M i=1

where P̂ (yi |xi ; θ) is the predicted probability of the model with parameters θ for the true class label
yi given input xi . The CE-Loss converges in probability to the expected version of conditional cross-
entropy under the true joint distribution P (X , Y) by the law of large numbers. This convergence
is crucial because the minimizer of the CE-Loss occurs if and only if the predicted distribution
P̂ (y|x; θ) matches the true distribution P (y|x).

2.2   W EIGHTED C ROSS E NTROPY L OSS (WCE-L OSS )

WCE-Loss is a modification of the standard CE-Loss that assigns different weights to each data
point. It is defined as:

                                                        N
                                                  1 X
                          LWCE (θ, DP , w) = −          wi log P̂ (yi |xi ; θ)                        (2)
                                                  N i=1
Here, wi represents the weight assigned to the i-th data point (xi , yi ). A higher weight wi assigned
to a data point (xi , yi ) indicates the data point has a greater influence on the model’s learning or
adjustment of parameters, thereby being considered more important for the training process.
There have been several variants of the weight function, such as Focal Loss LFL (Lin et al., 2017). It
addressed class imbalance and reduced the impact of easily classified examples as its weight function


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


was defined as wi = (1 − P̂ (yi |xi ; θ))γ , where γ ≥ 1 was a focusing parameter that adjusted the
rate at which easy examples were down-weighted. Research has shown that models trained with
Focal Loss were better calibrated under the i.i.d. assumption and performed well under distribution
shifts (Mukhoti et al., 2020). This made Focal Loss a promising baseline for evaluating our proposed
weight function in the context of LLM-generated synthetic data training.
Additionally, a series of meta-learning approaches addressed these challenges by leveraging bi-level
optimization to dynamically adjust weights based on each instance’s contribution to the meta-set
from the real world. These methods handled class imbalance, noisy labels, and augmented data by
reweighting these instances based on their gradient direction or model outputs, providing a flexible
mechanism for weighting data points (Ren et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2023). While
effective, meta-learning-based approaches were computationally expensive, making them difficult
to scale up to larger datasets or complex models. In contrast, our methods share the same objective
of optimizing performance on real-world data but achieve it without meta-learning. This makes it
more computationally efficient and scalable while still maintaining high performance.


3       O PTIMIZATION ON LLM- GENERATED DATASET

LLMs are capable of generating synthetic datasets (Lu et al., 2023; West et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023), denoted as DQ = {(xi , yi )}N  i=1 , sourced from the distribution Q(X , Y). This distribution is
shaped by specific prompts comprising instruction prompts, system prompts, and few-shot examples
that guide the LLM’s output. This method offers a valuable alternative for acquiring training data,
especially when access to real-world data is limited. Moreover, the relevance of Q can be further
refined by incorporating few-shot examples from a small real-world dataset DP ′ , enhancing the
utility and applicability of the synthetic data (Li et al., 2023).
The CE-Loss on the LLM-generated dataset converges to the expected cross-entropy under Q:
                                        p
                                              h                i
                          LCE (θ, DQ ) → EQ − log P̂ (y|x; θ)                             (3)

A significant distributional shift between Q and P may lead to suboptimal predictive performance
on real-world data.

3.1       U NCERTAINTY OF LLM-G ENERATED DATA P ERFORMANCE

Our empirical study, shown in Table 1, demonstrates notable variability in the performance of CE-
Loss on LLM-generated datasets. Specifically, on the Financial (Malo et al., 2014) and MRPC
(Wang et al., 2018) benchmarks, CE-Loss on large LLM-generated datasets (> 3k samples) per-
forms worse than training on small real-world datasets, which contain only around 200-400 sam-
ples. In contrast, CE-Loss in LLM-generated data improves accuracy for the Twitter Irony (Van Hee
et al., 2018) benchmark. This variability underscores the uncertainty associated with using CE-Loss
on LLM-generated data. These findings are consistent with another research (West et al., 2022),
showing that when using CE-Loss, without proper filtering, LLM-generated data may lead to decent
results on downstream tasks, even though its size is considerably larger than that of real-world data.

3.2       P OTENTIAL OF LLM-G ENERATED DATA : M ODEL -BASED I NFORMATION
          M EASUREMENT

We employ information-theoretic metrics to evaluate the uncertainty within the conditional distribu-
tions of real-world data and LLM-generated data. A higher conditional entropy indicates a more
significant uncertainty given an input x, suggesting various outcomes. We estimate this by sepa-
rately fine-tuning a BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019) on both datasets. Higher conditional entropy
is often associated with greater diversity within the dataset, reflecting a broader range of informa-
tion that the model must learn to predict accurately. The conditional KL divergence1 quantifies the
difference between two conditional distributions, P (y|x) and Q(y|x), showing how well a model
trained on one dataset describes another.
    1
        It is also called conditional divergence or conditional relative entropy.


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We show these metrics for a financial benchmark scenario. The real-world dataset DP exhibits
significantly lower conditional entropy (HP (y|x) = 0.0365) compared with the LLM-generated
dataset Q (HQ (y|x) = 0.2299), indicating that DQ is more diverse. Furthermore, the condi-
tional KL divergence from P to Q (DKL (Q||P ) = 1.8781) is much greater than it from Q to
P (DKL (P ||Q) = 0.444), suggesting that models trained on real-world data struggle to capture
the complexity of the synthetic dataset. Those models trained on the synthetic dataset are rela-
tively efficient, requiring fewer additional nits on average to encode samples from the real-world
distribution P . This difference, along with the results from Sec. 3.1 highlights that, although the
synthetic dataset contains some points that are less representative of the real-world distribution, it
still includes a substantial proportion of relevant data points. This analysis indicates the potential to
improve modeling techniques to utilize LLM-generated data’s rich, informative content.

3.3   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

In this study, we devise a weighted loss function that transforms CE-Loss from an LLM-generated
data distribution Q to match the real-world data distribution P . We assumed the dataset DQ is i.i.d.
and the LLM can approximate the real-world input distribution P (x) through strategic prompting,
effectively simulating Q(x) ≈ P (x). For example, by using system prompts like ”Now you are a
journalist writing news articles,” it can produce synthetic texts that closely mimic authentic news
articles. Lastly, we use a small set DP ′ , approximately 200-400 samples from real-world datasets,
to facilitate the alignment process. These samples are i.i.d. from the distribution P . We use P ′ as
the probability function representing this small real-world dataset.
This approach leverages the rich diversity of LLM-generated data to bridge the distributional gap
between Q and P . By creating an effective weighted loss function, we aim to enhance model
performance on real-world tasks by better aligning synthetic data with real-world distributions.

4     M ETHODOLOGIES
In this section, we present our Importance Loss (IMP-Loss) and Dynamic Importance Loss (DIMP-
Loss) methods, which transform the CE-Loss to align with the real-world distribution P from the
LLM-generated distribution Q.

4.1   IMP-L OSS : T RANSFORMATION FROM Q TO P

To achieve convergence to the real-world data distribution P , we applied WCE-loss. Inspired by
the Monte Carlo method of Importance Sampling (Hesterberg, 1995), used to estimate expectation
values from a source distribution to a target distribution, we design the weight function as follows:
                                                   P (y|xi )
                                            wi =                                                   (4)
                                                   Q(y|xi )
By applying this weight function to WCE-Loss, the asymptotic convergence is approximately the
expectation under P (details in Appendix B):

                                     P (y|x)
                             EQ −             log P̂ (y|x; θ)
                                     Q(y|x)
                                    X          X
                              =−         Q(x)       P (y|x) log P̂ (y|x; θ)
                                    x∈X           y∈Y
                                    X             X                                                  (5)
                               ≈−         P (x)         P (y|x) log P̂ (y|x; θ)
                                    x∈X           y∈Y
                                     h                      i
                               = EP − log P̂ (y|x; θ)
The approximation in the penultimate step is based on the assumption stated in Sec. 3.3: the LLM
can simulate the real-world input distribution through careful and appropriate prompting. This trans-
formation ensures that the WCE-Loss effectively aligns Q with P .
Further, Q can be estimated by fitting a neural model Q̂, such as BERT, on the LLM-generated
dataset DQ using the CE-Loss; however, estimating the weight function is challenging because the


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


real-world distribution P is unknown. To address this, we fit a model Pˆ′ on small real-world dataset
DP ′ . Using Pˆ′ and Q̂, we define the Importance Loss LIMP (θ, DQ ) as follows:
                                                   Quality Checker
                                               z }| {
                                               N
                                         1     Pˆ′ (yi |xi )
                                               X
                       LIMP (θ, DQ ) = −                     log P̂ (yi |xi ; θ)                    (6)
                                         N i=1 Q̂(yi |xi )
                                               | {z }
                                                   Diversity Checker

Algorithm 1 outlines how we use IMP-Loss.

Algorithm 1 Training with Importance Loss
Require: Small real-world dataset DP ′ , synthetic dataset DQ , model P̂ , initial parameters θ
  Step 1: Pˆ′ ← Estimation of P ′ by fitting a model with CE-Loss on DP ′
  Step 2: Q̂ ← Estimation of Q by fitting a model with CE-Loss on DQ
                                         ˆ′
  Step 3: Compute the weights wi = PQ̂(y|x)
                                      (y|x)
                                            for each training sample (x, y) ∈ DQ
  Step 4: Optimize model parameters θ to minimize LIMP (θ, DQ ) by SGD



4.2   DIMP-L OSS : W HICH DATA POINT CAUSES THE MODEL TO BE CLOSEST TO P ?

In this section, drawing inspiration from online batch selection methods (Deng et al., 2023; Min-
dermann et al., 2022), we investigate which data point in DQ , when used for training, will most
effectively bring the distribution of the model closer to P in the subsequent optimization step. In
optimization formulation, this can be expressed as:
                                                h                                i
                      (x∗ , y ∗ ) = arg min EP − log P̂ (y|x; θt , {(x′ , y ′ )}) ,             (7)
                                     ′ ′
                                  (x ,y )∈DQ

where θt represents the model parameters at optimization step t. Consider a one-step optimization
algorithm f (e.g. SGD), where θt+1 ← f (θt , {(x′ , y ′ )}). The algorithm updates the model param-
eters θt using (x′ , y ′ ) to obtain the new parameters θt+1 after one optimization step. The Eq. 7
means the data point (x∗ , y ∗ ) is the optimal data point in DQ that leads to the lowest conditional
cross-entropy after one update step. Specifically, it identifies which data point is used for training
results in the model parameters that yield the model closest to the real-world distribution P .
In empirical settings, we may not have access to the complete real-world distribution P , but we can
approximate it by a small real-world dataset DP ′ , also denoted as (yP ′ , XP ′ ) in the perspective of
labels and inputs. This allows us to rewrite the objective as maximizing the probability:

                                                                       P̂ (y|x; θt , DP ′ )
                  arg max P̂ (yP ′ |XP ′ ; θt , {(x, y)}) = arg max                                 (8)
                  (x,y)∈DQ                                  (x,y)∈DQ      P̂ (y|x; θt )

Eq. 8 aims to maximize the joint likelihood of all data points in DP ′ . The joint likelihood involves
inferring all data points in DP ′ and multiplying their prediction probabilities (due to the i.i.d. as-
sumption). However, this optimization is infeasible, as it requires updating the model for each data
point in DQ , resulting in |DQ | models, and each needs evaluation on the whole DP ′ .
Notably, by applying Bayes’ rule, we derive the right-hand side of Eq. 8 (see Appendix C for
details), showing a more feasible calculation approach. This requires evaluating only two models
for each data point in DQ : the denominator P̂ (y|x; θt ) is the current model in step t, and the nu-
merator P̂ (y|x; θt , DP ′ ) would require additional training on DP ′ . To simplify, we approximate
P̂ (y|x; θt , DP ′ ) with Pˆ′ (y|x), the probability estimated from DP ′ as in Deng et al. (2023).
The approximation of Eq. 8 is then utilized as the weight in our loss function. Consequently, if a
data point brings the model closer to the real-world distribution P , its corresponding weight will be
higher, thus having a greater impact on training. Thus, we define the Dynamic Importance Loss


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(DIMP-Loss) LDIMP (θt , DQ ) as:
                                                             Quality Checker
                                                                z }| {
                                                      N
                                                  1   X         Pˆ′ (yi |xi )
                     LDIMP (θt , DQ ) = −                                 log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )               (9)
                                                  N i=1 P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )
                                                        |      {z      }
                                                            Diversity Checker

The approximation of Eq. 8 simplifies the calculation of the weight function, making the implemen-
tation of DIMP-Loss practical. We can observe this weight function dynamically changes at each
optimization step and adjust the weights based on the current parameters θt , thereby continually
refining the alignment between the model P̂θ and the real-world data distribution P . Algorithm 2
outlines how DIMP-Loss is used in training a model.

Algorithm 2 Training with DIMP-Loss
Require: Small real-world dataset DP ′ , synthetic dataset DQ , model P̂ , initial parameters θ
  Step 1: Pˆ′ ← Estimation P ′ (y|x) by fitting a model with CE-Loss on DP ′
  Step 2: Compute the Pˆ′ (y|x) for each training sample (x, y) ∈ DQ
  Step 3: Optimize model parameters θ to minimize LDIMP (θ, DQ ) by SGD

To better understand the properties of DIMP-Loss, we derived a lower bound for it (details can be
found in Appendix D). Precisely, we have:
                         N                                         N
                      2 X ˆ′                                    1 X
 LDIMP (θt , DQ ) ≥ −       P (yi |xi ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) +       P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) (10)
                      N i=1                                     N i=1
                    |               {z                     } |                     {z                      }
                         Empirical distilled cross-entropy loss                 Maximum entropy regularizer

DIMP-Loss can be interpreted as an upper bound on the regularized empirical distilled risk (Menon
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), where the ”teacher” model is the quality checker. The regularizer is
a maximum entropy term designed to prevent overconfidence in output distribution (Pereyra et al.,
2017). In this context, DIMP-Loss can also be viewed as a form of knowledge distillation, where
the knowledge from a model is trained on a small amount of real-world data. The objective is to
align the predicted distribution P̂θ with P ′ while promoting higher entropy in P̂θ to avoid overly
confident predictions.

4.3   Q UALITY AND D IVERSITY C HECKERS IN IMP-L OSS AND DIMP-L OSS

According to both Eq. 6 and 9, a high weight means the data point significantly influences the
model. The Quality Checker (Pˆ′ (yi |xi )) assesses the likelihood of a data point sampled from the
real-world distribution P . Higher values indicate the data point is, highly relevant, and unambiguous
for the real-world distribution P .
The Diversity Checker differs in the two losses, Q̂(yi |xi ) for IMP-Loss, and P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) for
DIMP-Loss. In the context of IMP-Loss, a low Diversity Checker value Q̂(yi |xi ) suggests the
data point contains a high amount of information within the LLM-generated dataset DQ , because a
redundant data point in DQ will have a high probability, indicating less diversity. Hence, it serves
as an indicator of diversity from the perspective of the LLM-generated distribution. In contrast, for
DIMP-Loss, a low Diversity Checker value P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) implies the data point is challenging to be
learned in previous steps, departing from the data points the model has already learned. Thus, Di-
versity Checker of DIMP-Loss reflects diversity from the perspective of a model. This distinction
highlights how each loss function prioritizes different aspects of data diversity during training. We
simulated defect and redundant situations for further exploration in the Appendix. G.3.

4.4   C OMPUTATIONAL C OST OF T RAINING WITH IMP-L OSS AND DIMP-L OSS

The analysis covers computational requirements and practical run-time detailed in Appendix E.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


IMP-Loss. According to Algorithm 1, the computational cost of training with IMP-Loss is approx-
imately (ignore the cost on DP ′ ) twice training plus twice forward pass on DQ . First, we estimate
P ′ (y|x) by fitting a model on DP ′ , and Q(y|x) by fitting a model on DQ , respectively. Second, we
compute the weights for each sample in DQ by Q̂(y|x) and Pˆ′ (y|x). Although the estimation of
P ′ (y|x) incurs minimal cost due to the small size of DP ′ , the primary additional overhead comes
from the repeated training on DQ and the additional forward passes needed to compute the weights.

DIMP-Loss. According to Algorithm 2, the computational cost of training with DIMP-Loss is
approximately (ignore the cost on DP ′ ) one training plus one forward pass on DQ . On the one hand,
we need to fit a model on the small real-world DP ′ to estimate P ′ (y|x), the numerator of the weight
coefficient, for each data point in DQ . On the other hand, we compute the weights for each sample
in DQ using the DIMP-Loss formulation, which involves evaluating the computed log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )
and hence getting P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ). Without the estimation to Q(y|x), DIMP-Loss is more efficient than
IMP-Loss. The computational overhead is only slightly higher than that of CE-Loss, because of the
additional step of estimating P ′ from the small dataset DP ′ and performing a single inference pass
on DQ , as the values of the quality checker for each data point remain constant in training.

5    E XPERIMENTS

                                                          Financial      Tweet Irony        MRPC
    Dataset             Method
                                                        Acc     F1      Acc     F1      Acc    F1
                        GPT-3.5 few-shot                79.46 81.6      63.39 69.39     69.28 71.75
                        CE-Loss (quality checker)       78.05 75.26     62.5    62.38   73.16 68.69
    Small real world    Focal-Loss                      78.47 76.2      67.73 62.32     73.10 66.64
                        DIMP-Loss (Ours)                79.87 77.05     69.01 67.05     74.84 66.80
                        CE-Loss                         77.39 74.01     76.91 76.8      72     65.47
                        Focal-Loss                      79.29 75.32     74.87 74.82     72.17 62.77
                        Hu et al.’s                     71.7    61.93   71.42 70.18     67.13 50.08
    GPT-3.5 generated
                        SunGen                          80.45 76.87     78.96 75.06     71.65 66.08
                        IMP-Loss (Ours)                 82.09 79.40     81.89 81.71     75.83 70.52
                        DIMP-Loss (Ours)                82.67 79.53     78.44 78.14     75.83 70.04
                        - w/o diversity checker         81.35 77.94     77.68 77.62     74.72 69.34
                        CE-Loss                         84.74 82.69     68.75 68.41     80.92 77.73
                        Focal-Loss                      84.98 81.98     67.6    67.19   80.35 76.28
    Large real world    Hu et al.’s                     80.19 76.58     60.33 37.63     71.36 67.78
                        SunGen                          84.65 82.51     63.9    62.66   80.81 78.78
                        IMP-Loss (Ours)                 85.3    83.27   70.15 70.08     81.33 78.3
                        DIMP-Loss (Ours)                85.4    82.79   69      68.78   82.84 80.49

Table 1: Performance metrics across datasets and methods. The table showcases each combination’s
accuracy (Acc) and macro F1 score (F1). The methods include GPT-3.5 few-shot, CE-Loss, Focal-
Loss, Hu et al.’s method, SunGen, IMP-Loss, and DIMP-Loss. Bold entries denote the performance
within 0.5%, compared to the best performance of each training source.

We assessed our proposed methods by comparing them with standard loss functions across several
text classification benchmarks, including Financial Phrasebank (Financial) (Malo et al., 2014), irony
detection (Tweet Irony) (Van Hee et al., 2018), and the MRPC dataset from GLUE (Wang et al.,
2018). Detailed descriptions and specifications are provided in Appendix H. In our experiments,
we referred the large real-world data DP to the original training set from each benchmark and the
small real-world data DP ′ to the original development set, with the sizes from approximately 200
to 400, as shown in Table 5. Our experiments explored three different scenarios: training solely on
synthetic data (Sec. 5.1), real-world data (Sec. 5.2), and noisy data (Sec. G). We evaluated Accuracy
(Acc) and Macro F1 score (F1) for every benchmark. These metrics were computed by comparing
the model’s predictions with the gold labels provided in the test sets. We used a BERT-based model
for fine-tuning and building the checkers. The Appendix F details the configurations.

Baselines. CE-Loss, Focal Loss, SunGen and Hu et al. (2019) are our baselines, detailed in
Sec. 2.1 and Sec. 2.2. Focal Loss addressed class imbalance and mitigated easily classified


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


data’s impact, preventing overconfidence. The weight function for Focal Loss was defined as
wi = (1 − P̂ (yi |xi ; θ))γ where γ controled the downweighting of easy examples. Mukhoti et al.
(2020) showed models trained with Focal Loss exhibited better calibration under the i.i.d. assump-
tion and performed robustly under distribution shifts. This made Focal Loss a strong baseline for
evaluating our proposed approaches. Both SunGen and Hu et al. (2019) are bilevel optimization
methods but differ in their weight update mechanisms and the objective functions of their outer
loops. They used meta-learning to dynamically adjust weights training data by maximizing the like-
lihood on a small real-world dataset, similar to IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss; however, our methods
directly adjust weights based on quality and diversity checkers, while Hu et al.’s method and SunGen
relied on meta-learning to optimize weights indirectly 2 .

5.1      T RAINING ON LLM- GENERATED DATA

We compared our proposed methods with standard loss functions on LLM-generated data.

Data Generation. We used GPT-3.5-turbo-1106 (OpenAI, 2022), given a system prompt, 8-shot
examples from the development set DP ′ , and the corresponding labels to generate the input text. For
the Financial and Tweet Irony, our generation prompt based on previous research (Li et al., 2023).
Similarly, for the MRPC benchmark, the prompt included pairs of sentences with answers, which
automatically guided the LLM in generating the answers. See Appendix I.1 for details.

IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss Outperform on LLM-Generated Data. As shown in Table 1, our
methods outperformed all baselines in all benchmarks. For instance, in Financial Phrasebank, IMP-
Loss achieved 82.09% in accuracy and 79.40% in F1 score, and DIMP-Loss reached 82.67% and
79.53% respectively, while the CE-Loss reached 77.39% / 74.01%. The result showed if we use
the baselines, CE-Loss, Focal-Loss, SunGen and Hu et al. (2019) to train a classifier on DQ , the
performance could be worse than that of using CE-Loss on much smaller DP ′ (quality checker). In
contrast, our methods consistently outperformed the small quality checker, encouraging the usage
of abundant LLM-generated data. Notably, even when the quality checker performs poorly, such
as on the Tweet Irony dataset, where the accuracy was 62.5%, which was lower than the 76.9%
achieved by directly training on generated data using CE-Loss, our methods still delivered strong
performance. This suggested that a high-performance quality checker was not a prerequisite for
the effectiveness of our methods. Although the performance of the meta-learning-based SunGen
method was, in some cases, close to that of our methods (though still slightly below), our approaches
have significant advantages in computational efficiency, making them more practical for large-scale
applications. Further details on computational efficiency are shown in the Appendix E.

IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss Surpass the Accuracy of the Data Generator. The GPT-3.5 few-
shot predictor generated predictions using 8 examples from the small real-world dataset in the input
prompt. GPT-3.5 achieved 79.46% in the Financial dataset and 68.82% in the MRPC dataset. Our
approaches consistently surpassed the GPT-3.5 few-shot prediction in accuracy. The parameter size
of the fine-tuned models using our methods was significantly lower than that of the GPT-3.5 data
generator, yet they delivered higher performance.

Superior and Robust Accuracy Across Epochs. The training dynamics in Figure 1 revealed our
methods outperformed CE-Loss and Focal-Loss across all benchmarks. Notably, both IMP-Loss and
DIMP-Loss achieved low variation by the end of training, indicating stable performance. Moreover,
DIMP-Loss showed higher variation in the initial epochs compared with IMP-Loss. This increased
variability could be attributed to the order of sampled data, which caused initial fluctuations. Nev-
ertheless, the Acc ultimately converged at a higher value than the baselines.

Quality Checkers are Data Efficient. Figure 2 illustrates the test accuracy on the Financial
benchmark with quality checkers trained on various proportions of the original training set. As
seen in this figure, even a small number of data points, e.g., 10%, was sufficient to enhance the
performance of both IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss. This suggested that a small amount of real-world
data was effective for building a quality checker, making our approach efficient and practical.
   2
       We implemented Focal-Loss, SunGen and Hu et al. (2019) by using their official code.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Training dynamics shows the testing accuracy over five epochs for benchmarks. This chart
displays the minimum, maximum, and average accuracy observed across four runs with different
random seeds, comparing our proposed methods with the standard CE-Loss and Focal-Loss.

                Model Size    Method                    Financial   Tweet irony   MRPC
                Base          Quality checker           78.05       62.5          73.16
                              CE-Loss                   80.45       78.83         74.2
                              IMP-Loss (base DC)        80.94       74.23         75.36
                Large
                              IMP-Loss (large DC)       81.93       78.83         76.41
                              DIMP-Loss                 83.25       81.25         77.04

Table 2: Accuracy of methods on benchmarks when training a larger model with smaller Quality
Checkers. ”base DC” and ”large DC” denote smaller and larger Diversity Checkers, respectively.
Bold entries highlight the top value of metrics within each dataset.


Diversity Checkers are Important. The results in Table 1 highlighted the importance of Diversity
Checkers in our proposed methods. When training on GPT-3.5 generated data, the performance of
the model trained with IMP-Loss without Diversity Checkers dropped compared with IMP-Loss
with Diversity Checkers. For instance, in the Financial dataset, the accuracy drops from 82.09%
to 81.35% and the F1 score from 79.40% to 77.94%. These results indicated that incorporating
Diversity Checkers helped effectively use LLM-generated data.

Smaller Quality Checker Still Enhances Performance by DIMP-Loss. The results in Table
2 illustrated the performance of each method on the benchmarks when training a larger classifier
(BERT-large) with smaller Quality Checkers (BERT-base). Notably, DIMP-Loss consistently per-
formed well even when the Quality Checker was small. This demonstrated the robustness of DIMP-
Loss in adapting to different model sizes for Quality Checkers. In contrast, IMP-Loss showed
inconsistent performance when using a smaller Diversity Checker compared with its training model,
indicating the choice of the Diversity Checker in size significantly impacted its efficacy. In short,
using a smaller Quality Checkers to guide the model was efficient in terms of both space and time.

5.2   T RAINING ON R EAL W ORLD DATA

Robust Performance of IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss on Real-World Data. As shown in Table 1,
IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss outperformed other baselines even when applied directly to real-world
data. Although the performance improvements are less than that of using GPT-3.5-generated data,
the results indicated our methods were versatile and able to handle multiple sources of training data
effectively. Specifically, in the Financial dataset, IMP-Loss achieved 85.3% Acc and 83.27% F1
score, while DIMP-Loss reached 85.4% Acc and 82.79% F1 score, surpassing CE-Loss, Focal-Loss,
and (Hu et al., 2019). From our perspective, the reduced improvement in this scenario was due to
the lack of a requirement to shift the training data distribution. Regarding the asymptotic viewpoint,
the optimal solution of cross-entropy is already the best solution when training on real-world data.
Nonetheless, our methods demonstrated robust performance across various conditions.

6     R ELATED W ORKS

We list some essential related works in this section and others in A.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Test accuracy on the Financial with varying percentages of the training set for the quality
checker. The graph shows the performance of each loss and the Quality Checker.


Weighting for Misalignment Data Importance weighting (IW) serves as a classical strategy for
addressing the issue of shifts between data distributions (Hesterberg, 1995). In traditional applica-
tions of IW, weights are derived by evaluating the degree of similarity between training and testing
distributions through various statistical techniques. These techniques include maximum mean dis-
crepancy (Schölkopf et al., 2007) and the estimation of KL divergence (Sugiyama et al., 2007).
Although effective in linear model contexts, the efficacy of these methods seems to significantly
diminish when applying IW to more complex deep learning frameworks (Byrd & Lipton, 2019).
Besides traditional methods, recent studies have explored approaches such as Focal Loss (Lin et al.,
2017) and meta-learning techniques (Hu et al., 2019; Meng et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023), which
take the weights of samples as trainable hyperparameters as discussed in Sec. 2.2.

Synthetic Data Generation from LMs Recent advancements in generative AI have spurred inter-
est in using LMs to generate synthetic data for specific tasks, particularly in low-resource settings.
Studies have explored zero-shot and few-shot settings for data generation, where LMs directly gen-
erate instances with distinct labels or use little real-world data as examples to create relevant and
diverse data (Li et al., 2023; West et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Taori et al., 2023).
LMs have the unique ability to generate both labels and diverse input instances, significantly en-
hancing the variety and quality of synthetic datasets. Approaches like ZEROGEN synthesized data
by pre-trained LMs to train smaller task models, achieving competitive performance in NLP tasks,
such as text classification (Ye et al., 2022).

LM-Generated Data for Training Text Classifier Several studies have investigated leveraging
LM-generated data for text classification. Some works maintain data quality by filtering strategy
(Stylianou et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2022; 2023; Li et al., 2023; West et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2022).
Another common approach is data reweighting. For example, SunGen (Gao et al., 2023) adopted a
bilevel optimization approach to learn weights for synthetic data, incorporating a noise-robust loss
in the outer loop to improve the reliability, and this benefited SunGen to outperform counterparts
using meta-learning for data reweighting, such as Hu et al. (2019). Despite its advantages, the
bilevel optimization process remains computationally expensive, making our approaches outstand
by their efficiency. Moreover, there exists novel research further enhancing the use of synthetic data.
For instance, UniGen (Choi et al., 2024) utilized contrastive learning to improve generalization
capabilities, but required a open-source pretrained LM, while FuseGen (Zou et al., 2024) combined
synthetic data from multiple LLMs to enhance performance. It is worth noting our approaches are
compatible with UniGen or FuseGen, and a potential complement and enhancement of these works.

7    C ONCLUSIONS AND D ISCUSSIONS
IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss are novel weighted-loss objectives that further enhance the performance
of models trained on LLM-generated data. Our empirical results demonstrated that both methods
outperformed traditional loss functions across various benchmarks. Notably, DIMP-Loss was partic-
ularly computationally efficient, requiring subtly additional resources while increasing performance.
These findings emphasized the potential of IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss in effectively leveraging syn-
thetic data for training machine learning models. In the future, we will extend our methods on
question answering, text generation, LLM pretraining, and other potential tasks, further exploring
how quality and diversity matter for learning.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To ensure reproducibility, we provided the source code and generated dataset in supplementary
materials, prompts used for generation in I.1, hyper-parameters and other training details in F, testing
datasets’ descriptions in H, and theoretical results in B, C, D. In addition, for the baselines, we
implemented the Focal Loss as in the source code and used the publicly available code provided by
Hu et al. (2019) but replaced the input data. We hope one can smoothly reproduce our results via
these materials.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We sincerely appreciate the insightful and valuable feedback from the anonymous reviewers. This
work is primarily supported by the National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under grant
number NSTC112-2221-E-001-025 and partially supported by E.SUN COMMERCIAL BANK. We
extend our special thanks to Chien-An Chen and Yi-Ren Yeh at E.SUN for their valuable input dur-
ing the preliminary discussions. Additionally, we thank the National Center for High-performance
Computing (NCHC), Taiwan, for providing essential computational and storage resources.

R EFERENCES
Zachary Ankner, Cody Blakeney, Kartik Sreenivasan, Max Marion, Matthew L. Leavitt, and Man-
  sheej Paul. Perplexed by perplexity: Perplexity-based data pruning with small reference models,
  2024.

Fred Bane, Celia Soler Uguet, Wiktor Stribiżew, and Anna Zaretskaya. A comparison of data filter-
  ing methods for neural machine translation. In Janice Campbell, Stephen Larocca, Jay Marciano,
  Konstantin Savenkov, and Alex Yanishevsky (eds.), Proceedings of the 15th Biennial Conference
  of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas (Volume 2: Users and Providers Track
  and Government Track), pp. 313–325, Orlando, USA, September 2022. Association for Machine
  Translation in the Americas. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.amta-upg.22.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.

Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning?
  In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 872–881. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
  byrd19a.html.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.

Juhwan Choi, Yeonghwa Kim, Seunguk Yu, JungMin Yun, and YoungBin Kim. UniGen: Univer-
  sal domain generalization for sentiment classification via zero-shot dataset generation. In Yaser
  Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1–14, Miami, Florida, USA, Novem-
  ber 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2024.emnlp-main.1.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhijie Deng, Peng Cui, and Jun Zhu. Towards accelerated model training via bayesian data selec-
  tion. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 8513–8527. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/1af3e0bf5905e33789979f666c31192d-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
  and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  N19-1423.
Elvis Dohmatob, Yunzhen Feng, Pu Yang, Francois Charton, and Julia Kempe. A tale of tails: Model
  collapse as a change of scaling laws, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vı́tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

Jiahui Gao, Renjie Pi, LIN Yong, Hang Xu, Jiacheng Ye, Zhiyong Wu, WEIZHONG ZHANG,
   Xiaodan Liang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. Self-guided noise-free data generation for
   efficient zero-shot learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
   URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=h5OpjGd_lo6.

Tim Hesterberg. Weighted average importance sampling and defensive mixture distributions.
  Technometrics, 37(2):185–194, 1995. doi: 10.1080/00401706.1995.10484303. URL https:
  //www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00401706.1995.10484303.

Zhiting Hu, Bowen Tan, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Tom M Mitchell, and Eric P Xing. Learn-
  ing data manipulation for augmentation and weighting. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/
  671f0311e2754fcdd37f70a8550379bc-Paper.pdf.
Angelos Katharopoulos and Francois Fleuret. Not all samples are created equal: Deep learning
  with importance sampling. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 2525–2534. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v80/katharopoulos18a.html.
Zhuoyan Li, Hangxiao Zhu, Zhuoran Lu, and Ming Yin. Synthetic data generation with large lan-
  guage models for text classification: Potential and limitations. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and
  Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing, pp. 10443–10461, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.647. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.emnlp-main.647.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2999–3007,
  2017. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.324.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Online batch selection for faster training of neural networks,
   2015.
Yingzhou Lu, Minjie Shen, Huazheng Wang, Xiao Wang, Capucine van Rechem, Tianfan Fu, and
  Wenqi Wei. Machine learning for synthetic data generation: A review, 2023.
Maggie, Phil Culliton, and Wei Chen. Tweet sentiment extraction. https://www.kaggle.
 com/competitions/tweet-sentiment-extraction, 2020. Accessed: 2024-11-18.
Pekka Malo, Ankur Sinha, Pekka Korhonen, Jyrki Wallenius, and Pyry Takala. Good debt or bad
  debt: Detecting semantic orientations in economic texts. J. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 65(4):
  782–796, apr 2014. ISSN 2330-1635. doi: 10.1002/asi.23062. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1002/asi.23062.
Max Marion, Ahmet Üstün, Luiza Pozzobon, Alex Wang, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara Hooker. When
 less is more: Investigating data pruning for pretraining llms at scale, 2023.
Yu Meng, Jiaxin Huang, Yu Zhang, and Jiawei Han. Generating training data with language mod-
  els: Towards zero-shot language understanding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.
Yu Meng, Martin Michalski, Jiaxin Huang, Yu Zhang, Tarek Abdelzaher, and Jiawei Han. Tuning
  language models as training data generators for augmentation-enhanced few-shot learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Aditya K Menon, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, Seungyeon Kim, and Sanjiv Kumar. A
  statistical perspective on distillation. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 7632–7642. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v139/menon21a.html.
MetaAI. Introducing meta llama 3: The most capable openly available llm to date. https://ai.
 meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3, 2024.
Sören Mindermann, Jan M Brauner, Muhammed T Razzak, Mrinank Sharma, Andreas Kirsch,
   Winnie Xu, Benedikt Höltgen, Aidan N Gomez, Adrien Morisot, Sebastian Farquhar, and Yarin
   Gal. Prioritized training on points that are learnable, worth learning, and not yet learnt. In Ka-
   malika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
   (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
   Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 15630–15649. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
   https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/mindermann22a.html.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jishnu Mukhoti, Viveka Kulharia, Amartya Sanyal, Stuart Golodetz, Philip Torr, and Puneet
   Dokania.    Calibrating deep neural networks using focal loss.      In H. Larochelle,
   M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
   formation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 15288–15299. Curran Associates, Inc.,
   2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
   file/aeb7b30ef1d024a76f21a1d40e30c302-Paper.pdf.
OpenAI. Openai. introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2022.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng,
  Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Work-
  man, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
  Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
  Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  ward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library, 2019.

Gabriel Pereyra, George Tucker, Jan Chorowski, Łukasz Kaiser, and Geoffrey Hinton. Regularizing
  neural networks by penalizing confident output distributions, 2017.

Mengye Ren, Wenyuan Zeng, Bin Yang, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning to reweight examples for
 robust deep learning. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th In-
 ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, pp. 4334–4343. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
 press/v80/ren18a.html.

Bernhard Schölkopf, John Platt, and Thomas Hofmann. Correcting Sample Selection Bias by Unla-
  beled Data, pp. 601–608. 2007.

Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Anderson.
   The curse of recursion: Training on generated data makes models forget, 2023.

Nikolaos Stylianou, Despoina Chatzakou, Theodora Tsikrika, Stefanos Vrochidis, and Ioannis Kom-
  patsiaris. Domain-aligned data augmentation for low-resource and imbalanced text classification.
  In Advances in Information Retrieval, pp. 172–187, Cham, 2023. Springer Nature Switzerland.
  ISBN 978-3-031-28238-6.

Masashi Sugiyama, Shinichi Nakajima, Hisashi Kashima, Paul von Bünau, and Motoaki Kawanabe.
 Direct importance estimation with model selection and its application to covariate shift adap-
 tation. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems, NIPS’07, pp. 1433–1440, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2007. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN
 9781605603520.

Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.

Cynthia Van Hee, Els Lefever, and Véronique Hoste. SemEval-2018 task 3: Irony detection in En-
  glish tweets. In Marianna Apidianaki, Saif M. Mohammad, Jonathan May, Ekaterina Shutova,
  Steven Bethard, and Marine Carpuat (eds.), Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on
  Semantic Evaluation, pp. 39–50, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/S18-1005. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  S18-1005.

Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. GLUE:
  A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In Tal Linzen,
  Grzegorz Chrupała, and Afra Alishahi (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop Black-
  boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 353–355, Brussels, Belgium,
  November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-5446. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/W18-5446.

Huan Wang, Suhas Lohit, Michael N Jones, and Yun Fu.             What makes a ”good” data
  augmentation in knowledge distillation - a statistical perspective. In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 13456–13469. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/57b53238ff22bc0dc62de08f53eb5de2-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions.
  In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 13484–
  13508, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2023.acl-long.754. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.754.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Conneau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzmán,
  Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. CCNet: Extracting high quality monolingual datasets from
  web crawl data. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Frédéric Béchet, Philippe Blache, Khalid Choukri,
  Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
  Mariani, Hélène Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 4003–4012, Marseille,
  France, May 2020. European Language Resources Association. ISBN 979-10-95546-34-4. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.494.
Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jack Hessel, Jena Hwang, Liwei Jiang, Ronan Le Bras, Ximing
  Lu, Sean Welleck, and Yejin Choi. Symbolic knowledge distillation: from general language mod-
  els to commonsense models. In Marine Carpuat, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir
  Meza Ruiz (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 4602–4625, Seat-
  tle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  naacl-main.341. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.341.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Qun Liu and David Schlangen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
  ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–
  45, Online, October 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-demos.6. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Jiacheng Ye, Jiahui Gao, Qintong Li, Hang Xu, Jiangtao Feng, Zhiyong Wu, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng
   Kong. ZeroGen: Efficient zero-shot learning via dataset generation. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa
   Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
   Natural Language Processing, pp. 11653–11669, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
   2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.801. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.801.
Tianyuan Zou, Yang Liu, Peng Li, Jianqing Zhang, Jingjing Liu, and Ya-Qin Zhang. FuseGen: PLM
  fusion for data-generation based zero-shot learning. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and
  Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 2172–2190, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.
  130.


A PPENDICES

A    OTHER R ELATED W ORK
Online Batch Selection Online batch selection (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2015; Katharopoulos &
Fleuret, 2018; Mindermann et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2023) is a method to speed up training conver-
gence by dynamically prioritizing the most informative data points, from the perspective of the min-
imizing loss function. This technique evaluates how informative a data point is and selects a batch
Bt of informative data during each training step. Unlike online batch selection methods substituting
uniformly sampled batches during training, this paper focused on developing a weight function to
enhance performance on downstream tasks by aligning the LLM-generated data distribution with
real-world data distribution.

Data Pruning. Data pruning approaches filter out noisy text data. Traditional methods took rule-
based filtering for high-quality data (Bane et al., 2022; Wenzek et al., 2020), while recent approaches
focused on diversification (Marion et al., 2023; Ankner et al., 2024), which used perplexity to build
a diverse dataset. In advance, our methods considered both quality and diversity, and this dual
focus made our weighting mechanism a possible pruning scorer. Our methods did not conflict with
existing pruning methods, thus becoming a potential complement.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    A SYMPTOTIC C ONVERGENCE OF IMP-L OSS

In this section, we provide the formal proof of the asymptotic convergence of IMP-Loss using
Chebyshev’s inequality. Specifically, we show that this approximately converges in probability to
the expected conditional cross-entropy under P .

Definition B.1 (Convergence in Probability) A sequence of random variables {Xn } converges in
                                                     p
probability to a random variable X, denoted as {Xn } → X, if for any ϵ > 0,


                                      lim P (|Xn − X| ≥ ϵ) = 0                                      (11)
                                     n→∞

Theorem B.1 (Chebyshev’s Inequality) Let X be a random variable with finite expected value
E[X] and variance Var(X). For any ϵ > 0,

                                                                 Var(X)
                                   P (|X − E[X]| ≥ ϵ) ≤                                             (12)
                                                                   ϵ2

A PPLYING C HEBYSHEV ’ S I NEQUALITY TO IMP-L OSS

Following the definition of IMP-Loss from Eq. 6 and considering the situation without using small
real-world data to approximate. Let
                                                   N
                                              1 X P (yi |xi )
                         LIMP (θ, DQ ) = −                     log P̂ (yi |xi ; θ)                  (13)
                                              N i=1 Q(yi |xi )

Assume that all data points (xi , yi ) are i.i.d. samples from the joint distribution Q(X , Y). Define
                                             P (yi |xi )
                                  Zi = −                 log P̂ (yi |xi ; θ)                        (14)
                                             Q(yi |xi )

The empirical mean of Zi over N samples is given by:

                                               N
                                      1 X
                                   Z=       Zi = LIMP (θ, DQ )                                      (15)
                                      N i=1

The expected value of Zi under the distribution Q is:


                                             P (y|x)
                               EQ [Z] = EQ −         log P̂ (y|x; θ)                                (16)
                                             Q(y|x)

Applying Chebyshev’s inequality to the sequence Z:

                                               VarQ (Z)   VarQ (Z1 )
                          P    Z − EQ [Z] ≥ ϵ ≤     2
                                                        =                                           (17)
                                                  ϵ         N ϵ2

As N grows large, the right-hand side converges to zero, implying that Z converges in probability
to EQ [Z].
Therefore,


                                         p     P (y|x)
                          LIMP (θ, DQ ) → EQ −         log P̂ (y|x; θ)                              (18)
                                               Q(y|x)

                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RANSFORMING FROM Q TO P

Next, we show that:


                                 P (y|x)
                            EQ −         log P̂ (y|x; θ)
                                 Q(y|x)
                                XX                P (y|x)
                            =−          Q(x, y)           log P̂ (y|x; θ)
                                                  Q(y|x)
                                x∈X y∈Y
                                X         X
                            =−      Q(x)       P (y|x) log P̂ (y|x; θ)                                            (19)
                                  x∈X           y∈Y
                                  X             X
                             ≈−         P (x)         P (y|x) log P̂ (y|x; θ)
                                  x∈X           y∈Y
                                 h                 i
                             = EP − log P̂ (y|x; θ)


Given that Q(x) ≈ P (x) by the assumption that the LLM is capable of simulating the real-world
input distribution through careful and appropriate prompting, we have:


                                 LIMP (θ, DQ )

                                  p         P (y|x)
                                 → EQ −             log P̂ (y|x; θ)                                               (20)
                                            Q(y|x)
                                        h                i
                                 ≈ EP − log P̂ (y|x; θ)


Thus, the asymptotic convergence of IMP-Loss ensures that the weighted loss function effectively
aligns the LLM-generated data distribution Q with the real-world data distribution P .


C    D ERIVATION OF DIMP-L OSS

In this section, we provide the formal derivation to address the question: Which data point in DQ ,
when used for training, will most effectively bring the model distribution closest to P ? Following
the optimization formulation in Eq. 7, we can empirically apply Monte Carlo estimation using a
small real-world dataset DP ′ , denoted as (yP ′ , XP ′ ). This allows us to reformulate the problem by
maximizing the joint probability of the data points in DP ′ , which leads to the following optimization
problem. This derivation is similar to the online batch selection techniques discussed in previous
research (Deng et al., 2023).

                                                                      Y
         arg max P̂ (yP ′ |XP ′ ; θt , {(x, y)}) = arg max                         P̂ (y ′ |x′ ; θt , {(x, y)})   (21)
         (x,y)∈DQ                                     (x,y)∈DQ
                                                                 (x′ ,y ′ )∈DP ′



This formulation leverages the joint probability of the dataset DP ′ , ensuring that the selected data
points in DQ are those that, when used for training, most effectively align the model’s distribution
with the small real-world distribution P ′ . This also implies that the chosen data point leads the
model to perform well on DP ′ , enhancing the likelihood of better generalization to real-world data.


A PPLYING BAYES RULE

By applying Bayes’ rule to the joint probability of the dataset DP ′ , we obtain:


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                P̂ (yP ′ |XP ′ ; θt , {(x, y)})
                                     P̂ (DP ′ , x, y, θt )
                                 =
                                     P̂ (XP ′ , x, y, θt )
                                     P̂ (yP ′ |XP ′ , x, θt )P̂ (y|x, DP ′ , θt )                                              (22)
                                 =                                                      , θt )
                                                     P̂ (y|x, XP ′
                                     P̂ (yP ′ |XP ′ , θt )P̂ (y|x; DP ′ , θt )
                                 =
                                            P̂ (y|x; θt )
The final equality holds because x alone cannot perform a model update, leading to the conditional
independence assumption. Since P̂ (yP ′ |xP ′ , x, θt ) is a constant for this optimization problem and
does not influence the result, we can further simplify the optimization as follows:

                                     arg max P̂ (yP ′ |XP ′ ; θt , {(x, y)}) =
                                     (x,y)∈DQ
                                                                                                                               (23)
                                                 P̂ (y|x; θt , DP ′ )
                                     arg max
                                     (x,y)∈DQ        P̂ (y|x; θt )
Similar to the online batch selection work, we use P ′ (y|x) to approximate P̂ (y|x; θt , DP ′ ). This
approximation is then utilized as the weight in our loss function. Consequently, if a data point
brings the model closer to the real-world distribution P , its corresponding weight will be higher,
thus impacting the model’s training.

D    L OWER B OUND OF DIMP-L OSS
The Lower Bound
                         N
                         X Pˆ′ (yi |xi )
N LDIMP (θt , DQ ) = −                           log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )
                         i=1 P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )
                                              1
                    (By *AM-GM inequality:       ≥ 2 − a for a = P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ))
                                              a
                     N
                     X
                  ≥−   Pˆ′ (yi |xi ) 2 − P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )
                         i=1
                          N
                          X                                                N
                                                                           X
                  = −2          Pˆ′ (yi |xi ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) −            Pˆ′ (yi |xi )P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )
                          i=1                                              i=1
                    (By Hölder’s Inequality ∥f g∥1 ≤ ∥f ∥∞ ∥g∥1 )
                          N
                          X                                                                      N
                                                                                                 X
                  ≥ −2          Pˆ′ (yi |xi ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) − max Pˆ′ (yi |xi )                P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )
                                                                             i
                          i=1                                                                    i=1
                         N
                         X                                             N
                                                                       X
                  ≥−           Pˆ′ (yi |xi ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) +         P̂ (yi |xi ; θt ) log P̂ (yi |xi ; θt )
                         i=1                                           i=1
                     |                    {z                      }    |                     {z                     }
                         Empirical distilled cross-entropy loss                  Maximum entropy regularizer
                                                                                                                               (24)

*AM-GM Inequality The derivation shown illustrates the application of the Arithmetic Mean -
Geometric Mean (AM-GM) inequality, which states that for any two positive√      numbers x and y,
the arithmetic mean is greater than or equal to the geometric mean, i.e., a+b
                                                                           2  ≥  ab, ∀a, b > 0.
In this specific case, b is set to a1 , simplifying the inequality to:
                                                 a + a1  √
                                                        ≥ 1 = 1.
                                                   2

                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Multiplying both sides by 2 yields:
                                                  1
                                             a+     ≥ 2,
                                                  a
and rearranging the inequality gives:
                                              1
                                                ≥ 2 − a.
                                              a
This result is a classic application of the AM-GM inequality, demonstrating that the sum of a number
and its reciprocal is always greater than or equal to 2 for any positive x.

E    C OMPUTATIONAL T IME C OMPARISON


Figure 3: Total running time (in seconds) for CE-Loss, IMP-Loss, and DIMP-Loss on the LLM-
generated Financial benchmark.

       Method         Build QC     Build DC     Precalculate weights    Training     Total
       CE-Loss        -            -            -                       333.242s     333.242s
       SunGen         -            -            -                       2680s        2680s
       IMP-Loss       8.824s       333.516s     57.695s                 333.328s     733.363s
       DIMP-Loss      8.824s       -            29.274s                 333.426s     371.524s

Table 3: Total running time of each component (in seconds) for CE-Loss, SunGen, IMP-Loss,
and DIMP-Loss on the LLM-generated financial benchmark. The table breaks down the time spent
building the Quality Checker (QC), building the Diversity Checker (DC), precalculating weights,
and training. The total time combines all these components.

In this computational time experiment, we evaluated the running times on the LLM-generated Finan-
cial benchmark dataset, which includes 10,012 training samples (DQ ) and 242 development samples
(small real-world data, DP ′ ). Our comparison focused on four methods: CE-Loss, SunGen, IMP-
Loss, and DIMP-Loss. We have broken down the total process into four components: building the
Quality Checker (QC), building the Diversity Checker (DC), precalculating constant weights, and
the actual training time for each respective loss function. For all experiments, the downstream mod-
els and checkers were trained for 5 epochs with a batch size of 32. The batch size was set to 64
during the precalculating constant weights phase. The inner loop epochs were set to 1 for SunGen.
The results of this breakdown are presented in Table 3, and the total time is in Figure 3. The results
indicate that IMP-Loss requires approximately 2.2 times the running time of CE-Loss. In contrast,
This demonstrates that DIMP-Loss is highly efficient, requiring only a slight overhead compared to
CE-Loss, while SunGen’s computational time is approximately 7 times higher, further underscoring
the efficiency of our methods for large-scale applications.

F    T RAINING D ETAILS AND H YPERPARAMETERS
For our experiments, we used a pre-trained BERT-base model (Devlin et al., 2019) from Hugging-
face’s transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020) as the encoder, utilizing the representation embedding
from the last layer as input to our classification models. We fine-tuned the model with hyperparam-
eters selected from the following ranges: learning rate {6e-6, 6e-5}, epochs {5, 7}, and batch size


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


{32, 64}. Other hyperparameters were set to the default values provided by Huggingface’s trainer
for text classification. The best checkpoint was selected based on the accuracy of the development
set. We repeated each experiment with four random seeds. We reported the best accuracy run on
tables (Table 1), while also providing the minimum, maximum, and average in the training dynamics
section (Sec. 5.1). To train the quality checker, we used the small real-world dataset (development
split) not included in the training data and trained the quality checker for five epochs. Similarly,
the diversity checker of IMP-Loss was also trained for five epochs. This approach aligns with our
setup, where access to real-world data is limited, and thus, we reuse the development set to build
the quality checker and perform model selection. All experiments were conducted using PyTorch
(Paszke et al., 2019) and Huggingface (for models and datasets) on V100 GPUs with 32GB memory.

G     T RAINING ON NOISY DATA

                                                    Financial        Tweet Irony        MRPC
 Dataset             Method
                                                  Acc    F1         Acc     F1       Acc   F1
                     GPT-3.5 few-shot             79.46 81.6        63.39 69.39      69.28 71.75
 Small real world    CE-Loss (quality checker)    78.05 75.26       62.5    62.38    73.16 68.69
                     CE-Loss                      78.38 73.44       60.46 60.14      74.03 67.5
                     Focal-Loss                   78.55 74.97       62.11 61.12      74.72 69.59
 Noisy Data
                     IMP-Loss (Ours)              81.6   78.24      64.8    64.51    76    70.46
                     DIMP-Loss (Ours)             82.59 80.28       64.16 64.09      76.58 71.32

Table 4: Performance metrics on the noisy data. The table showcases the accuracy (Acc) and macro
F1 score (F1) for each method applied on three distinct datasets: Financial, Tweet Irony, and MRPC.
The methods include CE-Loss, GPT-3.5 few-shot, Focal-Loss, IMP-Loss, and DIMP-Loss. Notably,
bold entries indicate the best-performing metrics within each training dataset category.

In this section, we evaluate the robustness of our proposed methods, IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss, by
training on noisy datasets. We aim to simulate real-world scenarios where LLM-generated data may
be imperfect due to labeling errors (low quality), duplicate entries (low diversity), and unrelated
inputs (low quality). This allows us to analyze the effects of the Quality Checker and Diversity
Checker in IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss.

G.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

To create noisy datasets, we start with the original training set from each benchmark (Financial,
Tweet Irony, and MRPC) and split it into three parts:

      1. Original Data: This part remains unchanged and serves as the control set.
      2. Random Swapped Label Noise: In this part, the labels are randomly altered, introducing
         label noise and reducing data quality.
      3. Duplicated Data: In this part, each data point is duplicated once, introducing redundancy
         and reducing data diversity.
      4. Unrelated Input Data (Only for Financial): For the financial benchmark, we introduce
         out-of-domain input noise by randomly selecting 452 data points from the Tweet Senti-
         ment Extraction benchmark (Maggie et al., 2020). While this dataset is also a sentiment
         classification task, it is unrelated to the financial domain.

G.2   P ERFORMANCE R ESULTS

The results in Tabel 4 indicated that our proposed methods, IMP-Loss and DIMP-Loss, consistently
outperform the baselines across all benchmarks, even when the training data is noisy. Specifically,
in the Financial dataset, IMP-Loss achieves 81.6% Acc and 78.24% F1 score, while DIMP-Loss
reaches 82.59% Acc and 80.28% F1 score, surpassing the CE-Loss and Focal-Loss baselines. In the
Tweet Irony dataset, the performance improvement is more pronounced, with IMP-Loss achieving
64.8% Acc and 64.51% F1 score, and DIMP-Loss achieving 64.16% Acc and 64.09% F1 score,


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


significantly higher than CE-Loss and Focal-Loss. For the MRPC dataset, IMP-Loss and DIMP-
Loss show robust performance with 76% Acc and 70.46% F1 score and 76.58% Acc and 71.32% F1
score, respectively, outperforming the GPT-3.5 few-shot approach, which achieves 69.28% Acc and
71.75% F1 score.

G.3   A NALYSIS OF C HECKER S CORES AND W EIGHTS

IMP-Loss Figure 4 and Figure 5 illustrate the Quality Checker Score P ′ (y|x), Diversity Checker
Score Q(y|x), and the corresponding weights of the IMP-Loss for the Financial and the Tweet Irony
dataset, across three different data conditions: original, swapped labels, and duplicated entries.
The Quality Checker Score is highest for the original data and significantly lower for the swapped
label data, indicating that the model correctly identifies the labels as lower quality. The Diversity
Checker Score (where lower values are better) is lower for the original data than the duplicated data,
indicating the impact of duplication on diversity. Additionally, the swapped label data achieves the
highest diversity because the altered labels create data points that are substantially distinct from the
rest of the dataset. Similarly, the unrelated input data exhibits relatively high diversity due to its
out-of-domain nature. However, data points from both the swapped label and unrelated input cate-
gories have low Quality Checker Scores, resulting in their lower assigned weights. Consequently, the
weights assigned to the original data are higher compared to the swapped label data and the dupli-
cated data, demonstrating the effectiveness of IMP-Loss in recognizing and appropriately weighting
high-quality, diverse data.


Figure 4: Average Quality Checker Score, Diversity Checker Score, and Weights of IMP-Loss for
Financial Dataset: Comparison between Original, Swapped Label, Duplicated Data and Unrelated
Input Data.


Figure 5: Average Quality Checker Score, Diversity Checker Score, and Weights of IMP-Loss for
Tweet Irony Dataset: Comparison between Original, Swapped Label, and Duplicated Data


DIMP-Loss In contrast, Figure 6 shows the diversity scores P̂ (y|x; θt ) and the weights for the
DIMP-Loss method on Financial benchmark across epoch, where the diversity checker is the training
model itself. The Diversity Checker Score (lower is better) is also lower for the original data than
the duplicated data and Unrelated input data. In the end, The weights (Figure 7) assigned by the
DIMP-Loss method are consistently higher for the original data than the swapped label, Unrelated


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Average Diversity Checker Score of DIMP-Loss for Original, Swapped label, Unrelated
input data, and Duplicated data on the Financial Dataset across Epoch.


Figure 7: DIMP-Loss Weight for Original, Swapped label, Unrelated input data, and Duplicated
Data on the Financial Dataset across Epoch.


input data, and duplicated data across epochs. This pattern aligns with the results observed for the
IMP-Loss method.

H    DATASET D ESCRIPTIONS
The size of each split and the generated data in Table 5.

                                        Financial      Tweet Irony    MRPC
                           Train        3392           2862           3668
                           Dev          242            200            408
                           Test         1212           784            1,725
                           Generated    10012          3000           3005

                                   Table 5: Data size of each split

The description of each dataset is following:

Financial Phrasebank: This benchmark involves categorizing finance-related sentences into pos-
itive, negative, or neutral sentiment categories. These sentences, numbering 4,840, are extracted
from financial news articles. Since the dataset does not come with predefined training, validation,
and testing splits, we randomly divided it into training (70%), validation (5%), and testing (25%)
sets like the previous work (Li et al., 2023).

Tweet Irony: This task requires sorting tweets into two groups: ironic and non-ironic. The dataset
containing tweets in English has been explicitly annotated for these categories. It comprises 2,862
instances for training and 784 instances for testing. Initially, there were 955 instances in the valida-
tion set, but due to limited access to real-world data in our scenario, we have randomly selected 200
instances for our validation sets.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Task       Prompt
                  System Prompt: Now you are a person using Twitter. You are asked to write an irony or non-irony
                  tweet to express your feelings. Your writing style must be consistent with the texts in the tweet. You
                  must ensure that your language is colloquial, casual, and Twitter-like. You are given a length require-
                  ment. You must ensure your tweet meets the length requirement.
    Tweet irony   Data Generation Prompt: Write a tweet expressing {label} feeling and ensure that the length of the
                  tweet is about {num of words} words. Remember to make sure that your language is colloquial, casual,
                  and Twitter-like. Be creative and write unique tweets.
                  For example:
                  {Examples of the label from small-real world dataset}...
                  Can you provide something more diverse than the previously generated data?
                  Context Prompt: You are now a journalist writing financial news. You need to write some financial
                  news that expresses polar sentiments. The financial news you generate needs to be considered from
                  an investor’s viewpoint only, i.e., whether the news may have a positive, negative, or neutral influence
                  on the stock price. As a result, sentences with a sentiment irrelevant from an economic or financial
                  perspective are considered neutral. You are given one of the polar sentiments and a length requirement.
                  You must write financial news that expresses the corresponding sentiment and meets the length require-
     Financial    ment.
                  Data Generation Prompt: Write financial news with {label} sentiment and ensure that the length of
                  the financial news is about {num of words} words. Be creative and write unique financial news.
                  For example:
                  {Examples of the label from small-real world dataset}...
                  Can you provide something more diverse than the previously generated data?
                  Context Prompt: Generate {num of examples} data points like the following examples. A label of 1
                  means they are semantically similar, and a label of 0 means they are not. Try to balance the number
                  of each category (Please just output the format like what I provide, and the output MUST be different
                  from input):
                  Data Generation Prompt:
                  For example:
      MRPC        sentence1: Amrozi accused his brother, wh—om he called ” the witness ”, of deliberately distorting
                  his evidence .—— sentence2: Referring to him as only ” the witness ”, Amrozi accused his brother of
                  deliberately distorting his evidence .—— label: 1
                  sentence1: They had published an advertisement on the Internet on June 10, offering the cargo for
                  sale, he added .—— sentence2: On June 10, the ship’s owners had published an advertisement on the
                  Internet, offering the explosives for sale. —— label: 1
                  {Other examples from small-real world dataset}...
                  Can you provide something more diverse than the previously generated data?

                       Table 6: Detailed prompts for each task for data generation.


MRPC: The Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (MRPC) consists of 5,801 sentence pairs
sourced from news articles. Human annotators manually labeled each pair to determine whether
the sentences were paraphrased from each other. We employ the official MRPC dataset available
through Huggingface’s datasets library, segmented into training, validation, and testing sets contain-
ing 3,668, 408, and 1,725 instances, respectively.

I     DATA G ENERATION
I.1     P ROMPT

The prompts used for data generation across different benchmarks are provided in Table 6. The
prompts for Tweet Irony and Financial datasets are based on those used in previous work (Li et al.,
2023).

I.2     DATA G ENERATION B UDGET

We used OpenAI GPT-3.5-turbo-1106 (OpenAI, 2022) to generate a dataset for the three bench-
marks, adhering to OpenAI’s terms of service and usage policies. The total cost is $38.74.


                                                       25
