Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON DATA ATTRIBUTION
 Xinhe Wang                                               Pingbang Hu
 University of Michigan                                   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
 sevenmar@umich.edu                                       pbb@illinois.edu

 Junwei Deng                                              Jiaqi W. Ma
 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign                  University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
 junweid2@illinois.edu                                    jiaqima@illinois.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Data attribution aims to quantify the contribution of individual training data points
         to the outputs of an AI model, which has been used to measure the value of training
         data and compensate data providers. Given the impact on financial decisions and
         compensation mechanisms, a critical question arises concerning the adversarial
         robustness of data attribution methods. However, there has been little to no sys-
         tematic research addressing this issue. In this work, we aim to bridge this gap by
         detailing a threat model with clear assumptions about the adversary’s goal and ca-
         pabilities and proposing principled adversarial attack methods on data attribution.
         We present two methods, Shadow Attack and Outlier Attack, which generate ma-
         nipulated datasets to inflate the compensation adversarially. The Shadow Attack
         leverages knowledge about the data distribution in the AI applications, and derives
         adversarial perturbations through “shadow training”, a technique commonly used
         in membership inference attacks. In contrast, the Outlier Attack does not assume
         any knowledge about the data distribution and relies solely on black-box queries
         to the target model’s predictions. It exploits an inductive bias present in many
         data attribution methods—outlier data points are more likely to be influential—
         and employs adversarial examples to generate manipulated datasets. Empirically,
         in image classification and text generation tasks, the Shadow Attack can inflate
         the data-attribution-based compensation by at least 200%, while the Outlier At-
         tack achieves compensation inflation ranging from 185% to as much as 643%.
         Our implementation is ready at https://github.com/TRAIS-Lab/adversarial-attack-
         data-attribution.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Data attribution aims to quantify the contribution of individual training data points to the outputs
of an Artificial Intelligence (AI) model (Koh & Liang, 2017). A key application of data attribution
is to measure the value of training data in AI systems, enabling appropriate compensation for data
providers (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019). With the rapid advancement of generative AI,
these methods have gained increased relevance, particularly in addressing copyright concerns. Re-
cent studies have explored economic frameworks using data attribution for copyright compensation,
showing promising preliminary results (Deng & Ma, 2023; Wang et al., 2024).
Given the significant potential of data attribution methods for data valuation and compensation,
an important question arises regarding their adversarial robustness. As these methods influence
financial decisions and compensation mechanisms, they may attract malicious actors seeking to
manipulate the system for personal gain. This underscores the need to investigate whether data
attribution methods can be manipulated and exploited, as their vulnerabilities could lead to unfair
compensation, undermining the trustworthiness of the solutions built on top of these methods.
However, adversarial attacks on data attribution methods have received little to no exploration in
prior literature. Along with the proposal of a data-attribution-based economic solution for copyright
compensation, Deng & Ma (2023) briefly experimented with a few heuristic approaches (e.g., dupli-


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cating data samples) for attacking data attribution methods. A systematic study that clearly defines
the threat model and develops principled adversarial attack methods has yet to be conducted.
This work presents the first comprehensive study to fill this gap. We first outline the threat model
by detailing the data compensation workflow and specifying the assumptions we made. One key as-
sumption is that the data contribution is periodic, and there is certain persistence across consecutive
iterations of data contributions, which is the source of knowledge that the adversary could exploit.
We also assume that the adversary may either have access to the distribution of the data used by the
target model of the AI system or can get black-box queries of the target model’s predictions, both
are commonly seen in the AI security literature (Shokri et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017).
Subsequently, we propose two adversarial attack strategies, Shadow Attack and Outlier Attack, re-
spectively relying on different assumptions about the adversary’s capabilities. The Shadow Attack
relies on the access to data distribution and employs the “shadow training” technique commonly
used in membership inference attacks (Shokri et al., 2017) to train “shadow models” that imitate the
target model. The adversary can then directly perturb their dataset to achieve a higher compensation
on these shadow models. The Outlier Attack, instead, does not assume knowledge about the data dis-
tribution but only relies on black-box queries of the target model’s predictions. The key idea behind
this method lies in an inductive bias of many data attribution methods—outlier data points are more
likely to be more influential. The proposed Outlier Attack utilizes adversarial examples (Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2017) to generate realistic outliers in a black-box fashion.
We conduct extensive experiments, including both image classification and text generation settings,
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed attack methods. Our results show that by only
adding imperceptible perturbations to real-world data features, the Shadow Attack can inflate the
adversary’s compensation to at least 200% and up to 456%, while the Outlier Attack can inflate the
adversary’s compensation to at least 185% and up to 643%.
Overall, our study reveals a critical practical challenge—adversarial vulnerability—in deploying
data attribution methods for data valuation and compensation. Moreover, the design of the proposed
attack methods, especially the Outlier Attack that exploits a common inductive bias of data attri-
bution methods, offers deeper insights into these vulnerabilities. These findings provide valuable
directions for future research to enhance the robustness of data attribution methods.


2   R ELATED WORK

Data Attribution for Data Valuation and Compensation. Data attribution methods have been
widely used for quantifying the value of training data in AI applications and compensating data
providers (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019; Yoon et al., 2020; Kwon & Zou, 2022; Feldman
& Zhang, 2020; Xu et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022; Kwon & Zou, 2023; Just et al., 2023; Wang
& Jia, 2023; Deng & Ma, 2023; Wang et al., 2024). With the rapid advancement of generative
AI, these methods have gained increasing relevance due to the growing concerns around copyright.
Recent studies have proposed economic solutions using data attribution for copyright compensation,
yielding promising preliminary results (Deng & Ma, 2023; Wang et al., 2024). Given the significant
potential of data attribution methods for data valuation and compensation, a critical question arises
regarding their adversarial robustness. Aside from one earlier exploration using heuristic approaches
to attack data attribution methods (Deng & Ma, 2023), no systematic study has addressed this issue.
This work presents the first comprehensive study that outlines a detailed threat model and proposes
principled and effective approaches for adversarial attacks on data attribution methods.

Membership Inference Attack. Membership inference attacks aim to infer whether a specific
data point was used during the training of a machine learning model, typically without knowing the
actual training dataset or having white-box access to the model (Shokri et al., 2017). The general
strategy involves leveraging information such as model architecture, training data distribution, or
black-box model predictions (Shokri et al., 2017; Song & Mittal, 2021). We refer the readers to Hu
et al. (2022) for a detailed survey on this topic. One of the proposed attack methods, the Shadow
Attack, is inspired by the “shadow training” technique (Shokri et al., 2017) commonly used in
membership inference attacks, where the adversary draws “shadow samples” following the same
distribution as the actual training dataset used by the target model to be attacked, and trains “shadow
models” based on the shadow samples to imitate the target model.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adversarial Example. Adversarial example (Goodfellow et al., 2015) is a well-known phe-
nomenon where small, often imperceptible perturbations to input features can significantly alter
the predictions of machine learning models, particularly deep neural networks. These perturbations
can be generated through black-box queries to the model predictions (Chen et al., 2017; Ilyas et al.,
2018; Guo et al., 2019). For a comprehensive review of adversarial examples, see Yuan et al. (2019);
Chakraborty et al. (2021). In the proposed Outlier Attack, we employ black-box adversarial attack
methods for generating adversarial examples to generate realistic outliers relative to the training
dataset of the target model, without needing access to the training dataset or the model details.


3     T HE THREAT MODEL

3.1   T HE DATA COMPENSATION SCENARIO

We consider a scenario where there is an AI Developer, and a (potentially large) set of Data
Providers. The Data Providers supply training data for the AI Developer to develop
an AI model. In return, the Data Providers are compensated based on their data’s contribution
to the model, as measured by a specific data attribution method.
Periodic Data Contribution. We assume that the Data Providers contribute data to the AI
Developer periodically, a common practice in many AI applications. For example, large lan-
guage models need periodic updates to stay aligned with the latest factual knowledge about the
world (Zhang et al., 2023); recommender systems must adapt to evolving user preferences (Zhang
et al., 2020); quantitative trading firms rely on up-to-date information to power their predictive
models1 ; and generative models for music or art benefit from fresh, innovative works by artists to
diversify their creative outputs (Smith et al., 2024). However, such periodic data contribution intro-
duces risks: a malicious Data Provider (referred to as an Adversary thereafter) could exploit
information from previous iterations to adversarially manipulate their future data contribution, po-
tentially inflating their compensation unfairly.
To formalize this scenario, without loss of generality, we consider two consecutive iterations of data
contribution, denoted as time steps t = 0 and t = 1. At t = 0, there is no Adversary and
the training dataset consists solely of contributions from benign Data Providers. This dataset
is represented as Z0 ∈ Z, where Z is the set of all possible training datasets. At t = 1, the
training dataset is Z1 = Z1b ∪ Z1a , where Z1b ∈ Z represents the training data provided by benign
Data Providers, while Z1a ∈ Z is the set provided by the Adversary. We also assume that
Z1b ∩ Z1a = ∅, meaning there is no overlap between the two datasets. Finally, for a dataset Z ∈ Z,
each data point z ∈ Z is represented as a pair z = (x, y), where x ∈ X is the input feature and y ∈ Y
is the prediction target, with X and Y referring to the feature space and target space, respectively.
AI Training and Data Attribution. Let M represent the set of AI models, and let T : Z → M
denote a training algorithm, mapping a training dataset Z ∈ Z to a model T (Z) ∈ M.
In data attribution, we aim to understand how individual data points from a training dataset Z ∈ Z
contribute to the model output on a target (validation) data point from a validation dataset V . Given
Z and V , a data attribution method derives a contribution function τ : Z × V → R that assigns a
real value τ (z, v) to each training data point z ∈ Z for a given validation data point v ∈ V . Denote
the set of all such function τ ’s as C, and the set of all possible validation sets as V. Therefore, a data
attribution method can be formalized as a function A : Z × M × V → C. In most cases, we will
consider A(Z, T (Z), V ), hence Z and V alone suffice to specify the resulting τ .
Compensation Mechanism. In practice, the contribution function τ derived from data attribution
methods may not reliably measure the contributions of all training data points due to the inherent
randomness in AI model training and the need for efficiency (Wang & Jia, 2023; Nguyen et al.,
2024). Specifically, measurements of data points with smaller contributions are often less reliable
than those of the most influential contributors. Following Deng & Ma (2023), we consider a com-
pensation mechanism where only the top-k influential training data points for each validation data
point v ∈ V receive a fixed amount of compensation.
  1
    See, for example, the Bloomberg market data feed: https://www.bloomberg.com/
professional/products/data/enterprise-catalog/market/.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   T HE ADVERSARY

We now discuss the Adversary’s objective and capability under the data compensation scenario.
The Objective of the Adversary. Let V1 be the validation dataset used at step t = 1. The objective
of the Adversary is to construct a dataset Z1a that maximizes the compensation share received by
the Adversary, which is defined as
                         1 X X
             c(Z1a ) =                 1[τ1 (z, v) ∈ Topk ({τ1 (z ′ , v) | z ′ ∈ Z1 })],       (1)
                       k|V1 |   a
                                z∈Z1 v∈V1

where τ1 = A(Z1 , T (Z1 ), V1 ) is the contribution function at t = 1; Topk (·) extracts the top-k
elements from a finite set of real numbers; and 1[·] is the indicator function.
The Capabilities of the Adversary. We first outline the limitations imposed on the Adversary.
In realistic scenarios, the Adversary does not have access to any of the following:
       • the exact training datasets (Z0 and Z1b ) and the exact validation datasets (V0 and V1 );
       • white-box access to the trained models T (Z0 ) and T (Z1 );
       • the contribution functions A(Z0 , T (Z0 ), V0 ) and A(Z1 , T (Z1 ), V1 ).
Then we make the following assumptions to characterize the capabilities of the Adversary.
Assumption 1 (Persistence). Assume that Z0 ⊆ Z1b and |Z0 |/|Z1b | is close to 1. Additionally,
assume that V0 and V1 are independently sampled from the same distribution.
Assumption 2 (Access to data distribution and training algorithm). Assume that the Adversary
has access to the distributions of Z0 and V0 . Additionally, assume that the Adversary has knowl-
edge about the training algorithm T (but not the model T (Z0 )).
Assumption 3 (Black-box access to model). Assume that the Adversary has access to black-box
query to the model T (Z0 ) to query the model predictions on any input feature x ∈ X .
Intuitively, Assumption 1 assumes persistence between time steps t = 0, 1, so that information
gained from t = 0 can inform the attack at t = 1. In Assumption 2 and Assumption 3, it is worth
noting that the Adversary’s access to information is limited to what is available at t = 0 only.
In practice, Assumption 1 is realistic in many real-world applications. For example, in applica-
tions that have periodic model updates, such as large language models or recommender systems, a
substantial portion of the training data often remains consistent across consecutive iterations, with
only incremental changes. Moreover, Assumption 2 is a common assumption in the membership
inference attack literature (Shokri et al., 2017), while Assumption 3 reflects a common setup for
generating adversarial examples against neural network models (Chakraborty et al., 2021).
The two proposed attack methods in Section 4 and Section 5 respectively rely on Assumption 2 and
Assumption 3, but do not depend on both simultaneously. As a result, the first method is a gray-box
attack method while the second method is a black-box attack method.
The Action Space of the Adversary. We assume that the Adversary is restricted to making
only small perturbations to an existing set of real data points to construct the adversarial dataset Z1a .
This implies that the Adversary cannot introduce entirely synthetic or arbitrary data, but rather,
can modify real data points subtly. This reflects a realistic adversarial scenario as overly large or
unnatural alterations would be easily detectable.

4     S HADOW ATTACK
In this section, we introduce the proposed Shadow Attack, which leverages Assumption 1 and As-
sumption 2, and exploits the knowledge about the data distribution at t = 0 to perform attacks.
At a high level, the Adversary first performs a shadow training process, where models are trained
on data drawn from a distribution similar to that of the training dataset Z0 , allowing the Adversary
to approximate the target model T (Z0 ). The Adversary then applies adversarial perturbations to
the data points they plan to contribute to the AI Developer at t = 1. The adversarial perturba-
tions are derived by maximizing the data attribution values on the models obtained through shadow
training. See Figure 1 for an illustration.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           T                 τ (i)
                                                     M (i)
      Z (i) =
                                                                       If converge
                                     Z ∪ Z (i)               c′s (Z)                 Z1a =   +
     Z=
  Sampled from Z                  Update                       Gradient Ascent
                                                  +∇c′s

Figure 1: An illustration of the Shadow Attack method. Shadow training datasets Z (i) ’s are sam-
pled to estimate the compensation share of a set of data points Z if it were contributed to the AI
Developer, which can be leveraged to perturb data points in Z to get a higher compensation share.


4.1     S HADOW TRAINING

Given a dataset Z ∈ Z (that the Adversary may eventually contribute to the AI Developer as
Z1a ), the goal of the shadow training process is to estimate the data attribution values of the elements
in Z as if this dataset were contributed to the AI Developer at t = 1.
We first sample m shadow training datasets, denoted as Z (1) , Z (2) , . . . , Z (m) . These datasets are
independent of the actual training dataset used by the AI Developer but follow the same dis-
tribution. For each shadow training dataset Z (i) , i = 1, . . . , m, we train a corresponding shadow
model M (i) ∈ M. The shadow model M (i) is trained on Z (i) ∪ Z using the same training algorithm
T as by the AI Developer.2 i.e., M (i) = T (Z (i) ∪ Z).
In order to estimate the data attribution values, we further sample a shadow validation dataset V (0)
following the same distribution as V0 . We can estimate a shadow contribution function using each
shadow training dataset Z (i) ∪ Z, the corresponding shadow model M (i) , and the shadow validation
dataset V (0) , resulting in τ (i) = A(Z (i) ∪ Z, M (i) , V (0) ). Similar to Eq. (1), we consider the
following shadow compensation share for the dataset of interest Z:
                           m X X
                   1      X                 h
                                                (i)                   (i) ′          ′     (i)
                                                                                                    i
    cs (Z) =                              1   τ     (z, v) ∈ Topk ({τ    (z , v) | z   ∈ Z     ∪ Z})  . (2)
               mk|V (0) | i=1 z∈Z     (0)
                                  v∈V


4.2     A DVERSARIAL MANIPULATION BY MAXIMIZING SHADOW COMPENSATION RATE

Given the shadow compensation rate, the natural idea is to apply adversarial perturbations to Z
by solving Z1a = arg maxZ ′ ∈N (Z) cs (Z ′ ), where N (Z) specifies the space of datasets with unde-
tectable perturbations. In practice, however, solving this optimization problem has two technical
challenges. Firstly, the objective cs (·) is discrete and can be difficult to optimize. Secondly, when
doing iterative-style optimization, such as gradient ascent, τ (i) ’s need to be updated and re-evaluated
at every step as it depends on Z and hence M (i) = T (Z (i) ∪ Z). This leads to two problems: On
the one hand, updating M (i) ’s requires retraining, which is computationally heavy; on the other
hand, many data attribution methods are computationally expensive, even with all the data and (re-
trained) models available. Hence, maximizing cs (·) requires repeatedly retraining and running data
attributions on perturbed datasets, which may be infeasible for many cases.
To address the first challenge, we replace cs (·) with the following surrogate objective
                                                     m X X
                                            1       X
                             c′s (Z) =                          τ (i) (z, v),                          (3)
                                         mk|V (0) | i=1 z∈Z (0)
                                                             v∈V

which aims to directly maximize the contribution values of the data points in Z on the shadow
validation set V (0) . To address the second challenge, we first approximate the retrained models by
the initial models trained with the original Z (before any gradient ascent steps) for computational
   2
     In our experiment in Section 6.2, we demonstrate that the Shadow Attack remains effective when the
shadow models have a slightly different architecture compared to the target model.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


efficiency, and we further adopt Grad-Dot (Charpiat et al., 2019), one of the most efficient data
attribution methods when evaluating the contribution function.3 Using this method, the contribution
value τ (i) (z, v) for any training data point z and validation data point v equals the dot product
between the gradients of the loss function on z and that on v, evaluated with model M (i) .
With such simplification, the adversarial perturbation can be derived by maximizing Eq. (3), which
can be solved efficiently through gradient ascent. Note that since Eq.(3) is a constrained optimization
problem, when N (Z) is bounded, gradient ascent is guaranteed to converge to some local optimums.
In practice, we perform a fixed number of iterations and carefully control the overall perturbation
budgets when solving Eq.(3). The computation cost for each iteration is approximately the same as
one forward and one backward pass on each of the m shadow models.

5     O UTLIER ATTACK
For large-scale AI applications such as generative AI services, Assumption 2 might be overly strong
as it could be difficult for the Adversary to guess the distribution of the full training data. How-
ever, in this case, Assumption 3 often holds. In this section, we further propose Outlier Attack,
which only relies on Assumption 1 and Assumption 3. See Figure 2 for an illustration.


                         Black-Box Query                      Prediction
                                                    T (Z0 )
                                                                     If increase a          +
              Z=                        Z                     ℓ(Z)              Z1 =
                                                                       enough
            Collect from Z
                                   Update                      Black-Box Attack
                                                   +

Figure 2: An illustration of the Outlier Attack method. Here, ℓ(Z) denotes the loss used by the
model T (Z0 ) when evaluated on the dataset Z. The data points in Z are perturbed by maximizing
the loss ℓ(Z) through black-box attack methods designed to generate adversarial examples.


5.1   T HE OUTLIER INDUCTIVE BIAS OF DATA ATTRIBUTION

The core idea behind Outlier Attack leverages an inherent inductive bias present in many data attri-
bution methods: outlier data points in the training dataset tend to be more influential. Indeed, one of
the very first applications of the Influence Function developed in the statistic literature was to detect
outliers in training data (Cook, 1977). Consequently, if the Adversary contributes a set of outlier
data points, they are more likely to get higher compensation, especially given that the compensation
mechanism focuses on the top influential data points.
However, translating this intuition into a practical adversarial manipulation strategy poses two sig-
nificant challenges. Firstly, the contributed data points must closely resemble real-world data; oth-
erwise, they could be easily flagged by data quality filters employed by the AI Developer. Sec-
ondly, we aim to develop an attack method that does not rely on direct knowledge about the training
dataset or its underlying distribution. This makes it challenging to determine whether certain data
points truly qualify as outliers relative to the training dataset gathered by the AI Developer.

5.2   G ENERATING REALISTIC OUTLIERS WITH ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS

To tackle the first challenge, we propose starting with a set of real-world data and transforming
them into outliers through small adversarial perturbations. With careful design, this strategy also
addresses the second challenge: if after the perturbation, an AI model has low confidence in correctly
predicting its target, then this perturbed data point likely behaves as an outlier relative to the model’s
training dataset. We discuss two key design aspects for achieving these goals:
  3
    Empirically, this works well even when the actual data attribution method used by the AI Developer is
more advanced ones, as shown in Section 6.2.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. Data component to be perturbed. Recall that a data point z = (x, y) consists of both
         the input feature x and the prediction target y. To obtain an outlier data point from z,
         we perturb the feature x only, without modifying the target y. Intuitively, flipping the
         target y could easily result in an outlier data point through mislabeling, such an outlier
         typically degrades model performance and is likely to be identified as negatively influential.
         Moreover, mislabeled data points are easier for the AI Developer to detect. Therefore,
         it is more effective to perturb only the feature x while keeping the target y unchanged.
      2. Objective of perturbation. For each data point z = (x, y), we aim to decrease the model
         confidence in predicting the annotated target y by perturbing x. In most cases, this is
         equivalent to increasing the loss ℓ between the model prediction and the target y.

Combining these two design choices, the resulting perturbed data points coincide with what is com-
monly referred to as adversarial example in the literature of adversarial attacks against neural net-
work models. Consequently, existing adversarial attack methods for deriving adversarial examples
can be leveraged to generate realistic outliers in our problem setup. Notably, this strategy is very
general and can be applied to a variety of data modalities and models by leveraging different off-
the-shelf black-box adversarial attack methods.
Choices of Adversarial Attack Methods. We consider two concrete machine learning settings,
image classification, and text generation, and discuss the choices of adversarial attack methods. For
smaller-scale image classification settings, we leverage Zeroth Order Optimization (ZOO) (Chen
et al., 2017) based adversarial attacks, which approximates the gradient ascend on the loss function
with respect to the data features using black-box queries to the target model T (Z0 ). For larger-scale
image classification settings, we employ a more advanced black-box adversarial attack method,
Simba (Guo et al., 2019), which is computationally more efficient. At a high level, Simba sequen-
tially perturbs each scalar pixel value in the image by trying to perturb in both directions and accept
the perturbation once it increases the loss. For the text generation setting, we utilize TextFooler (Jin
et al., 2020), a black-box adversarial attack method tailored for text data. In all the methods of
choice, the attack only requires black-box queries to get the predictions of the target model.

5.3   T HEORETICAL UNDERSTANDING

The following theorem further provides theoretical insights about the effectiveness of the proposed
Outlier Attack. The formal statement, notations, and the proof can be found in Appendix A.
Theorem 5.1 (Informal). Consider a model trained by ERM on a dataset of size n with a smooth
loss ℓ with respect to model parameters θ. Assume its corresponding influence score τ , gradient
∇θ ℓ(θ, z), and Hessian ∇2θ ℓ(θ, z) are all bounded, i.e., |τ |, ∥∇θ ℓ∥2 , ∥∇2θ ℓ∥op = Θn (1). Assume
the influence score τ is based on the influence function by Koh & Liang (2017), which takes the form
                                                           " n                #−1
                                                            1 X
                τIF (zj , ztest ; θ̂) = −∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest )⊤       ∇2 ℓ(θ̂, zi )    ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zj ),   (4)
                                                            n i=1 θ

where ztest is a test data point while {zi }ni=1 are the training data points and θ̂ is the model param-
eters trained on {zi }ni=1 . Then, for any ztest , when zj in {zi }ni=1 is perturbed to zj′ ,

       • τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂′ ) = τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂) + O(1/n) for all i ̸= j, and

       • τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂′ ) = τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂) + O(1/n),

where θ̂′ refers to the model parameters trained on the perturbed dataset {zi }i̸=j ∪ {zj′ }.

Intuitively, perturbing zj through adversarial attack will increase the magnitude of the gradi-
ent ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zj ), which tends to also increase the influence score on the original model θ̂, i.e.,
τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂) ≫ τIF (zj , ztest ; θ̂). However, in order to get a higher compensation share, the per-
turbed data point zj′ needs to have a high influence score on the model θ̂′ trained on the perturbed
dataset, i.e., τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂′ ), which is not guaranteed by the adversarial attack without characteriz-
ing the new model θ̂′ . Theorem 5.1 exactly does this and asserts that τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂′ ) will be close


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂) when the datasets used to train θ̂ and θ̂′ are close. It further guarantees that the
influence scores of the rest unchanged data points will also remain similar. This explains why the
effect of adversarial attacks on the original model can successfully translate to the new model. The
results in Theorem 5.1 can be generalized to the case where more than one data point is perturbed,
and a small set of clean data is also added to train the new model. The bound will change from
O(1/n) to O(k/n), where k is the total number of changed data points in the dataset.

6     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed attack methods by the increase of
compensation share after manipulating the data with the proposed attack methods.

6.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Tasks, Datasets, Target Models, and Data Attribution Methods. We consider two machine-
learning tasks: image classification and text generation. For image classification, we experiment
on MNIST (LeCun, 1998), Digits (Jiang et al., 2023) and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009)
datasets, with different target models including Logistic Regression (LR), Multi-layer Perceptron
(MLP), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), and ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016). We also em-
ploy three popular data attribution methods, including Influence Function (Koh & Liang, 2017),
TRAK (Park et al., 2023), and Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019). For text generation, we
conduct experiments on NanoGPT (Karpathy, 2022) trained on the Shakespeare dataset (Karpathy,
2015), with TRAK as the data attribution method. Finally, for the image classification settings, we
evaluate both Shadow Attack and Outlier Attack, while for the text generation setting, we evaluate
Outlier Attack only as Assumption 2 usually does not hold for generative AI settings. For the data
attribution algorithms, we adopt the implementation from the dattri library (Deng et al., 2024). The
experimental settings are summarized in Table 1.

                            Table 1: Summary of the experimental settings.

      Setting             Task                Dataset        Target Model       Attribution Method
        (a)      Image Classification        MNIST                LR             Influence Function
        (b)      Image Classification         Digits             MLP                Data Shapley
        (c)      Image Classification        MNIST               CNN                   TRAK
        (d)      Image Classification       CIFAR-10           ResNet-18               TRAK
        (e)        Text Generation         Shakespeare         NanoGPT                 TRAK

Data Contribution Workflow. For the image classification settings (a), (c), and (d), we set
|Z0 | = 10000, |Z1a | = 100, and |Z1 | = 11000. This setup simulates the following data contribution
workflow: At t = 0 when there is no Adversary, and 10000 training points are used to train the
model T (Z0 ). At t = 1, the Adversary contributes 100 perturbed training points and other Data
Providers contribute 900 new training data points. Together with the previous 10000 training
points, a total of 11000 training points are used to train the model T (Z1 ). For image classification
setting (b), due to the size of the dataset, we set |Z0 | = 1100, |Z1a | = 30 and |Z1 | = 1100 for Outlier
Attack, |Z0 | = 800, |Z1 |a = 30 and |Z1 | = 850 for Shadow Attack. The text generation setting
follows a similar workflow with |Z0 | = 4706, |Z1a | = 20, and |Z1 | = 6274.
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate the proposed attack methods using two metrics, where we set
k = 100 when counting the top-k influential data points in both cases. The first is the Compensation
Share (Eq. (1)) where for each attack method, we calculate c(Z1a ) respectively when the original
dataset without perturbation is contributed as Z1a (Original) and when the manipulated dataset after
perturbation is contributed as Z1a (Manipulated). The increase of c(Z1a ) after the perturbation
measured by the Ratio reflects the effectiveness of the attack.
To gain a more refined understanding of how the adversarial perturbations affect the top-k influential
data points for individual validation data points in V1 , we consider the second evaluation metric
named Fraction of Change. For each validation data point v ∈ V1 , it measures how many data
points in Z1a appear in the top-k influential data points for v. In comparison to when the original


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dataset without perturbation is contributed as Z1a , we calculate the fraction of validation data points
in V1 that contain more data points from Z1a in the top-k influential data points when the manipulated
dataset after perturbation is contributed as Z1a . Similarly, we calculate the fraction of validation
points that contain the same number of or fewer data points from Z1a after perturbation. We report
the three fractions under the categories More, Tied, and Fewer, where the higher fraction for the
More category indicates that the attack method influences the validation data points more broadly.

6.2     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS : S HADOW ATTACK

The results of the proposed Shadow Attack method are shown in Table 2. We conduct experiments
on all three image classification settings outlined in Table 1. For each of the settings, we first
consider the case that the shadow models have the same architecture as the target model, as shown
in the first three rows of Table 2. Additionally, for setting (d) where the target model is ResNet-18
(forth row), we further consider using ResNet-9 as the shadow model (last row), which simulates
scenarios where the Adversary’s knowledge about the training algorithm is limited.

Table 2: Results of the Shadow Attack method. The target models used for evaluation in each setting
are listed in Table 1 while the shadow models used in the attack are listed under Shadow Model.
The proportion |Z1a |/|Z1 | of the data contributed by the Adversary relative to the full dataset at
t = 1 is also reported. A higher Ratio indicates a more effective attack, and a higher fraction under
More means that the attack influences the validation data points more broadly.

                                                  Compensation Share               Fraction of Change
 Setting    Shadow Model     |Z1a |/|Z1 |
                                            Original       Manipulated   Ratio    More    Tied    Fewer
      (a)       LR            0.0098        0.0098           0.0477      456.1%   0.955   0.038   0.007
      (b)      MLP            0.0352        0.0152           0.0435      286.2%   0.533   0.333   0.134
      (c)      CNN            0.0098        0.0112           0.0467      417.0%   0.781   0.195   0.024
      (d)    ResNet-18        0.0098        0.0095           0.0213      217.3%   0.655   0.259   0.086
      (d)    ResNet-9         0.0098        0.0095           0.0196      206.3%   0.622   0.310   0.068

The Shadow Attack method is highly effective in increasing the Compensation Share across all the
settings. The Ratio of the Manipulated to the Original ranges from 206.3% to 456.1%, represent-
ing a substantial increase. Notably, the last row corresponds to the setup where the shadow models
have the ResNet-9 architecture while the target model is a ResNet-18, and the Shadow Attack re-
mains significantly effective (206.3%,) although being slightly worse than the case where shadow
model and target model shares the same architecture (forth row, 217.3%.).
The Shadow Attack is also uniformly effective across a wide range of validation data points, as
measured by the metrics of Fraction of Change. The attack is able to increase the number of top-k
influential points from Z1a for more than 60% of the validation points. In contrast, only less than 9%
of the validation data points have fewer top-k influential points from Z1a after the attack.

6.3     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS : O UTLIER ATTACK

The results of the proposed Outlier Attack method are presented in Table 3, where we include all
four settings summarized in Table 1. The black-box attack method for generating the adversarial
examples is chosen according to the discussion in Section 5.2.
On experimental settings (a) and (c), the Outlier Attack performs even better than the Shadow At-
tack in terms of both Compensation Share and Fraction of Change, achieving a higher Ratio and
a larger fraction under More. Across all four settings, the Ratio ranges from 185.2% to 643.9%,
demonstrating the exceptional effectiveness of the Outlier Attack. Finally, the results of text gener-
ation setting (e) further highlight the applicability of the proposed method to generative AI models.

6.4     BASELINE REFERENCE

To better understand the significance of the results in Table 2 and Table 3, we compare them with a
baseline random perturbation method in Table 4 on the three image classification settings such that
the baseline method applies pixel-wise random perturbation to the images, with the perturbation


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Results of the Outlier Attack method. The black-box adversarial attack methods for gener-
ating adversarial examples are listed under Attack Method. See Table 2 for more context.

                                                     Compensation Share                 Fraction of Change
 Setting    Attack Method       |Z1a |/|Z1 |
                                               Original    Manipulated     Ratio    More      Tied    Fewer
    (a)          ZOO             0.0098        0.0098          0.0631      643.9%   0.980     0.017   0.003
    (b)          Simba           0.0250        0.0112          0.0218      194.6%   0.440     0.380   0.180
    (c)          Simba           0.0098        0.0112          0.0668      596.4%   0.799     0.173   0.028
    (d)          Simba           0.0098        0.0095          0.0176      185.2%   0.562     0.354   0.084
    (e)        TextFooler        0.0013        0.0035          0.0092      262.9%   0.392     0.461   0.147


budget matched to that of the proposed attack methods. As shown in the results, the Compensation
Share of the dataset with Random Perturbation is nearly identical to that of the Original. The
fraction under More is also close to that under Fewer. These results highlight the effectiveness of
the proposed attack methods comes from the careful design of adversarial perturbation.

          Table 4: Results of the random perturbation baseline. See Table 2 for more context.

                                  Compensation Share                     Fraction of Change
               Setting
                            Original     Random Perturbation            More    Tied      Fewer
                 (a)        0.0098                0.0097                0.203   0.586     0.211
                 (c)        0.0112                0.0117                0.385   0.326     0.289
                 (d)        0.0095                0.0125                0.367   0.430     0.203


7    C ONCLUSION
This work addresses a significant gap in the current understanding of the adversarial robustness of
data attribution methods, which are increasingly influential in data valuation and compensation ap-
plications. By introducing a well-defined threat model, we have proposed two novel adversarial at-
tack strategies, Shadow Attack and Outlier Attack, which are designed to manipulate data attribution
and inflate compensation. The Shadow Attack utilizes knowledge of the underlying data distribu-
tion, while the Outlier Attack operates without such knowledge, relying on black-box queries only.
Empirical results from image classification and text generation tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of
these attacks, with compensation inflation ranging from 185% to 643%. These findings underscore
the need for more robust data attribution methods to guard against adversarial exploitation.

R EFERENCES
Anirban Chakraborty, Manaar Alam, Vishal Dey, Anupam Chattopadhyay, and Debdeep Mukhopad-
  hyay. A survey on adversarial attacks and defences. CAAI Transactions on Intelligence Technol-
  ogy, 6(1):25–45, 2021.
Guillaume Charpiat, Nicolas Girard, Loris Felardos, and Yuliya Tarabalka. Input similarity from the
  neural network perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Pin-Yu Chen, Huan Zhang, Yash Sharma, Jinfeng Yi, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Zoo: Zeroth order
  optimization based black-box attacks to deep neural networks without training substitute mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, AISec
  ’17, pp. 15–26, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  9781450352024.
R Dennis Cook. Detection of influential observation in linear regression. Technometrics, 19(1):
  15–18, 1977.
Junwei Deng and Jiaqi Ma. Computational copyright: Towards a royalty model for ai music gener-
  ation platforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06646, 2023.


                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Junwei Deng, Ting-Wei Li, Shiyuan Zhang, Shixuan Liu, Yijun Pan, Hao Huang, Xinhe Wang,
  Pingbang Hu, Xingjian Zhang, and Jiaqi Ma. dattri: A library for efficient data attribution.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:136763–136781, 2024.
Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the
  long tail via influence estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2881–
  2891, 2020.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceed-
  ings, 2015.
Chuan Guo, Jacob Gardner, Yurong You, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Kilian Weinberger. Simple
  black-box adversarial attacks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 2484–2493. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Hongsheng Hu, Zoran Salcic, Lichao Sun, Gillian Dobbie, Philip S Yu, and Xuyun Zhang. Mem-
  bership inference attacks on machine learning: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54
  (11s):1–37, 2022.
Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Anish Athalye, and Jessy Lin. Black-box adversarial attacks with
  limited queries and information. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2137–
  2146. PMLR, 2018.
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nick Hynes, Nezihe Merve Gürel, Bo Li,
  Ce Zhang, Dawn Song, and Costas J Spanos. Towards efficient data valuation based on the
  shapley value. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  1167–1176. PMLR, 2019.
Kevin Jiang, Weixin Liang, James Y Zou, and Yongchan Kwon. Opendataval: a unified benchmark
  for data valuation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Di Jin, Zhijing Jin, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and Peter Szolovits. Is BERT really robust? A strong baseline
  for natural language attack on text classification and entailment. In The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Arti-
  ficial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances
  in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020, pp. 8018–8025.
  AAAI Press, 2020.
Hoang Anh Just, Feiyang Kang, Tianhao Wang, Yi Zeng, Myeongseob Ko, Ming Jin, and Ruoxi
  Jia. LAVA: data valuation without pre-specified learning algorithms. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023.
  OpenReview.net, 2023.
Andrej Karpathy. char-rnn. https://github.com/karpathy/char-rnn, 2015.
Andrej Karpathy. nano-gpt, 2022.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1885–1894.
  PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Mas-
  ter’s thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2009.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yongchan Kwon and James Zou. Beta shapley: a unified and noise-reduced data valuation frame-
  work for machine learning. In Gustau Camps-Valls, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, and Isabel Valera (eds.),
  Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume
  151 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8780–8802. PMLR, 28–30 Mar 2022.
Yongchan Kwon and James Zou. Data-oob: Out-of-bag estimate as a simple and efficient data value.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18135–18152. PMLR, 2023.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits. http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.
Jinkun Lin, Anqi Zhang, Mathias Lécuyer, Jinyang Li, Aurojit Panda, and Siddhartha Sen. Mea-
   suring the effect of training data on deep learning predictions via randomized experiments. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 13468–13504. PMLR, 2022.
Aleksander Mkadry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. stat, 1050(9), 2017.
Elisa Nguyen, Minjoon Seo, and Seong Joon Oh. A bayesian approach to analysing training data
  attribution in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Sung Min Park, Kristian Georgiev, Andrew Ilyas, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry.
  TRAK: Attributing model behavior at scale. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th In-
  ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 27074–27113. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference at-
  tacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
  pp. 3–18, 2017. doi: 10.1109/SP.2017.41.
James Seale Smith, Yen-Chang Hsu, Lingyu Zhang, Ting Hua, Zsolt Kira, Yilin Shen, and Hongxia
  Jin. Continual diffusion: Continual customization of text-to-image diffusion with c-loRA. Trans-
  actions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856.
Liwei Song and Prateek Mittal. Systematic evaluation of privacy risks of machine learning models.
  In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp. 2615–2632, 2021.
G W Stewart and Ji-Guang Sun. Matrix Perturbation Theory. Computer Science and Scientific
  Computing. Academic Press, June 1990. ISBN 9780080926131.
Jiachen T Wang and Ruoxi Jia. Data banzhaf: A robust data valuation framework for machine
   learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6388–6421.
   PMLR, 2023.
Jiachen T. Wang, Zhun Deng, Hiroaki Chiba-Okabe, Boaz Barak, and Weijie J. Su. An economic
   solution to copyright challenges of generative ai, 2024.
Xinyi Xu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Chuan Sheng Foo, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Validation free and repli-
  cation robust volume-based data valuation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:10837–10848, 2021.
Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, and Tomas Pfister. Data valuation using reinforcement learning. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10842–10851. PMLR, 2020.
Xiaoyong Yuan, Pan He, Qile Zhu, and Xiaolin Li. Adversarial examples: Attacks and defenses for
  deep learning. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 30(9):2805–2824,
  2019.
Yang Zhang, Fuli Feng, Chenxu Wang, Xiangnan He, Meng Wang, Yan Li, and Yongdong Zhang.
  How to retrain recommender system? a sequential meta-learning method. In Proceedings of
  the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
  Retrieval, pp. 1479–1488, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zihan Zhang, Meng Fang, Ling Chen, Mohammad-Reza Namazi-Rad, and Jun Wang. How do
  large language models capture the ever-changing world knowledge? a review of recent advances.
  In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8289–8311, Singapore, December 2023.
  Association for Computational Linguistics.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     F ORMAL STATEMENT OF T HEOREM 5.1 AND ITS PROOF
A.1    S ETUP AND THE STATEMENT

Let the original training set be Z = {zi }ni=1 . Given a data point z, assume the loss ℓ(θ, z) is twice
differentiable. Then, the empirical loss and the Hessian is given by
                                               n                                   n
                                          1X                                    1X
                                ℓ(θ) =          ℓ(θ, zi ),          H(θ) =            h(θ, zi ),
                                          n i=1                                 n i=1

where we define h(θ, z) = ∇2θ ℓ(θ, z). Moreover, we consider the ERM to be
                                                                       n
                                                                    1X
                                              θ̂ = arg min                ℓ(θ, zi )
                                                         θ          n i=1

Consider the training data attribution to be the influence estimated by the influence function (Koh &
Liang, 2017) τIF . In particular, for a train test pair (zi , ztest ), Eq.(4) can be succinctly written as
                             τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂) = −∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )⊤ H −1 (θ̂)∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest ).

Consider perturbing the j th training point such that zj becomes zj′ . Then, the training set turns to
{z1 , . . . , zj′ , . . . , zn }, which in turn changes the empirical loss and its hessian to
                         1X            1                                        1X            1
              ℓ′ (θ) =      ℓ(θ, zi ) + ℓ(θ, zj′ ),                 H ′ (θ) =      h(θ, zi ) + h(θ, zj′ ).
                         n             n                                        n             n
                            i̸=j                                                   i̸=j

It also follows that the minimizer for this perturbed training set is given by
                                             1X                1
                              θ̂′ = arg min         ℓ(θ, zi ) + ℓ(θ, zj′ ),
                                        θ    n                 n
                                                             i̸=j

with the corresponding influence score being

        • τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂′ ) = −∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , ztest )⊤ (H ′ (θ̂′ ))−1 ∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , zi ) for all i ̸= j; and
      • τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂′ ) = −∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , ztest )⊤ (H ′ (θ̂′ ))−1 ∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , zj′ ).
Remark 1. From our definition of data attribution methods, τ should take the form of Z × V → R
for some training dataset Z and validation dataset V . In the above notation, we are essentially
                                                                                   ′
considering two different training attribution functions τIF and τIF                   where τIF = A(Z, T (Z), V ) and
τIF = A(Z , T (Z ), V ) where Z is the perturbed dataset, θ̂ = T (Z) and θ̂′ = T (Z ′ ). For clarity,
  ′         ′        ′                 ′
                                                         ′
we explicitly write τIF (·, ·) = τIF (·, ·; θ̂) and τIF    (·, ·) = τIF (·, ·; θ̂′ ) to avoid confusion.

Under this setup, we can now state the theorem formally.
Theorem A.1. Under the above setup, consider a model trained by ERM with a loss ℓ that is
twice-differentiable, m-strongly convex, and L-Lipschitz continuous with respect to θ. Assume its
corresponding influence score τIF , gradient ∇θ ℓ(θ, z), and h(θ, z) are all bounded, i.e., |τIF | =
Θ(1), ∥∇θ ℓ∥2 = Θ(1), ∥h∥op = Θ(1). Then, given any test data point ztest , we have

        • τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂′ ) = τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂) + O(1/n) for all i ̸= j, and

        • τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂′ ) = τIF (zj′ , ztest ; θ̂) + O(1/n).

A.2    T ECHNICAL LEMMAS

We first establish several technical lemmas toward proving Theorem A.1.
Lemma 1. Let θ̂, θ̂′ be the minimizer for ℓ(θ), ℓ′ (θ) respectively, then
                                                                        4L
                                                     ∥θ̂ − θ̂′ ∥ ≤         .
                                                                        mn

                                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Firstly, we recall that from definition, f (x) being m-strongly convex means that for any x, y,
                                                                m
                           f (y) ≥ f (x) + ∇f (x)⊤ (y − x) + ∥y − x∥22 .
                                                                2
Denote x⋆ = arg minx f (x), then since ∇f (x⋆ ) = 0, for all x, we have
                                                  m
                                f (x) ≥ f (x⋆ ) + ∥x − x⋆ ∥22 .
                                                  2
Hence, by strong convexity of ℓ(θ, z) and the fact that θ̂ is the minimizer of ℓ(θ), we have
                                    n                   n
                                 1X ′                1X                m
                                       ℓ(θ̂ , zi ) ≥       ℓ(θ̂, zi ) + ∥θ̂ − θ̂′ ∥22 .
                                 n i=1               n i=1             2

On the other hand, we have
       n
   1X ′                1X ′                1               1
         ℓ(θ̂ , zi ) =        ℓ(θ̂ , zi ) + ℓ(θ̂′ , zj′ ) + (ℓ(θ̂′ , zj ) − ℓ(θ̂′ , zj′ ))
   n i=1               n                   n               n
                         i̸=j
                       |              {z                }
                                        ℓ′ (θ̂ ′ )
                         1X                          1              1
                     ≤            ℓ(θ̂, zi ) +         ℓ(θ̂, zj′ ) + (ℓ(θ̂′ , zj ) − ℓ(θ̂′ , zj′ ))   (θ̂′ is a minimizer of ℓ′ )
                         n                           n              n
                           i̸=j
                         |               {z                      }
                                       ℓ′ (θ̂)
                             n
                         1X                1                             1
                     =         ℓ(θ̂, zi ) + (ℓ(θ̂′ , zj ) − ℓ(θ̂, zj )) + (ℓ(θ̂, zj′ ) − ℓ(θ̂′ , zj′ ))
                         n i=1             n                             n
                             n
                         1X                2
                     ≤         ℓ(θ̂, zi ) + L∥θ̂ − θ̂′ ∥2 .                                  (ℓ(θ, z) is L-Lipschitz w.r.t. θ)
                         n i=1             n

Combine the above results, we see that
                                             m                 2L
                                               ∥θ̂ − θ̂′ ∥22 ≤    ∥θ̂ − θ̂′ ∥2 ,
                                             2                  n
which proves the desired result.
Lemma 2 (Section 2.4, Part III (Stewart & Sun, 1990)). For any A, E ∈ Rd×d with both A and
                          P∞
A + E being invertible, if k=0 ∥E∥kop converges, we have

                                 (A + E)−1 = A−1 − A−1 EA−1 + O(∥E∥2op ).
Lemma 3. Let H and H ′ be the Hessian of ℓ and ℓ′ , respectively, then

                                ′−1      −1              4LM
                             ∥H     − H ∥op ≤ O
                                                         m3 n

Proof. Since h(θ, z) is M -Lipschitz w.r.t. θ, we know that
                                                                                     4LM
                                     ∥H ′ − H∥op ≤ M ∥θ̂′ − θ̂∥2 ≤                       .
                                                                                      mn
With Lemma 2 (let A = H and E = H ′ − H, it’s easy to verify the conditions of Lemma 2 hold),
we have H ′−1 = H −1 − H −1 (H ′ − H)H −1 + O(1/n2 ), which gives
                   ∥H ′−1 − H −1 ∥op ≤ ∥H −1 ∥op ∥H ′ − H∥op ∥H −1 ∥op + O(1/n2 ).
Since ℓ(θ, z) is m-strongly convex w.r.t. θ, it’s easy to show that ∥H −1 ∥op ≤ 1/m. In all, we have

                                                              4LM
                                ∥H ′−1 − H −1 ∥op = O                .
                                                              m3 n



                                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM A.1

We can now prove Theorem A.1.

Proof of Theorem A.1. For all i ̸= j, we want to prove that τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂′ ) = τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂) +
O(1/n). Indeed, since

                 τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂′ ) = −∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , ztest )⊤ (H ′ (θ̂′ ))−1 ∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , zi )
                                                                                 ⊤
                                         = ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest ) − ∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , ztest ) (H ′ (θ̂′ ))−1 ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )
                                            − ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest ) (H ′ (θ̂′ ))−1 − H −1 (θ̂) ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )


                                               − ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest )H −1 (θ̂)∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )
                                                                               ⊤
                                       = ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest ) − ∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , ztest ) (H ′ (θ̂′ ))−1 ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )
                                          − ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest ) (H ′ (θ̂′ ))−1 − H −1 (θ̂) ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )


                                                      + τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂).
Applying Lemmas 1 and 3, and by noting that when the Hessian is M -Lipschitz, so is the gradient
in terms of θ, hence we have the desired result. Specifically, we have

        |τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂′ ) − τIF (zi , ztest ; θ̂)|
         ≤ ∥∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest ) − ∇θ ℓ(θ̂′ , ztest )∥2 ∥H ′−1 ∥op ∥∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )∥2
            + ∥∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest )∥2 ∥H ′−1 − H −1 ∥op ∥∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )∥2
         ≤ ∥∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )∥2 ∥H −1 ∥op + ∥H ′−1 − H −1 ∥op · M ∥θ̂′ − θ̂∥2


            + ∥∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest )∥2 ∥H ′−1 − H −1 ∥op ∥∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zi )∥2

                    1           4LM             4L                   4LM                1
         = Θ(1) ·     +O                  · M ·      + Θ(1)   · O           · Θ(1) = O     .
                    m           m3 n            mn                   m3 n               n
For the second case, the proof is the same by replacing zi with zj′ in the above calculation.

B     E XPERIMENT DETAILS

In this section, we introduce the experiment details.

B.1    DATASETS AND MODELS

Logistic Regression and Convolutional Neural Network on MNIST. For experiments on
MNIST, we consider two different target models, Logistic Regression (LR) and convolutional neu-
ral network (CNN). The CNN comprises two convolutional layers: the first with 32 filters and the
second with 64 filters (size 3 × 3, stride 1, padding 1), both followed by ReLU and max-pooling
layers. The output is flattened into a vector of size 64 × 7 × 7, which is then passed through a fully
connected layer with 128 units before reaching the output layer with 10 classes. Both target models
are trained on the first 10000 training points of the MNIST dataset. For shadow models, we train 50
of them, each on a randomly sampled subset of 5000 among the second 10000 training data points
to ensure no overlaps with the first 10000 training data points used for target model training.
In both the target model training and shadow model training, we train LR for 30 epochs with SGD
and a learning rate of 0.01. We train CNN for 50 epochs with Adam and a learning rate of 0.001.
MLP on Digits. For experiments on Digits, we consider the target MLP model with 5 hidden
layers, each has 10 hidden neurons. Due to the size limit of the Digits dataset, we train the target
model for an Outlier Attack using the first 1100 training points, while for the shadow attack, we
train the target model on the first 800 data points and the shadow models on the second 800 data
points. In all training, we again train the MLP for 30 epochs using Adam with an initial learning
rate of 0.001.


                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ResNet18 on CIFAR-10. For experiments on CIFAR-10, we consider the classical ResNet18
model without dropouts. We use 10000 training points for training the target model. For shadow
model training, we consider the classical ResNet-9 and ResNet-18 as the shadow models separately,
again without dropouts. We train 50 shadow models, and each on a subset of 10000 training points
that are disjoint with the training set of the target model. In all training, each model is trained for
100 epochs using Adam, with a learning rate of 0.001.

NanoGPT on Shakespeare. For experiments on the Shakespeare dataset, we consider the
NanoGPT model, which is a character-level GPT model with 4 layers, 4 heads, and 128 dimen-
sion of the embedding. The block size is 64, and the batch size is 32. For both training at t = 0 and
t = 1, we train the model for 2000 epochs, both using Adam with a learning rate of 6 × 10−4 . Note
that since we only consider Outlier Attack for this setup, hence there is no shadow model training
involved.

B.2    T RAINING DATA ATTRIBUTION METHODS

In this section, we briefly introduce the attribution methods that are included in the evaluation. Given
a training dataset {zi }ni=1 , we are interested in the data attribution of a particular training data point
zj and a test data point ztest .

Influence Function based on the Conjugate Gradients. As we have seen, the original definition
of influence function (Koh & Liang, 2017) is given by Eq.(4), i.e.,

                         τIF (zj , ztest ; θ̂) = −∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zj )⊤ H(θ̂)−1 ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest )

where ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, z) is the gradient of loss of the data point w.r.t. model parameters, and H(θ̂)−1 is
the inverse of the Hessian w.r.t. model parameters. We implement the conjugate gradients (CG)
approach to compute the inverse-Hessian-vector-product (IHVP).

Tracing with the Randomly-projected After Kernel (TRAK). Introduced by Park et al. (2023),
TRAK computes the attribution score for a training test pair by first linearizing the model and then
applying random projection to make the computation efficient. Denote the output (e.g., raw logit) of
the model θ̂ to be f (z; θ̂), then the naive TRAK influence can be formulated as
                                                                               −1
                       τTRAK (zj , ztest ; θ̂) = −(1 − p⋆j )ϕ(zj )⊤ Φ⊤ Φ            ϕ(ztest ),

where ϕ(z) = P ⊤ ∇θ f (z; θ̂) is the random projection of ∇θ f (z; θ̂) ∈ Rp by some Gaussian random
projection matrix P ∼ N (0, 1)p×k , and Φ is the matrix formed by stacking all the ϕ(zi ), and p⋆j is
the predicted correct-class probability of zj at θ̂. Compare it with τIF :

      1. The additional factor 1 − p⋆j in τTRAK is due to linearizing the model.
      2. For linear model with feature matrix X of the training set, its Hessian is exactly X ⊤ X. For
         for a linearized the model, each feature xi of training sample zi corresponds to the gradient
         ∇θ f (zi ; θ̂), i.e., X = [∇θ f (zi ; θ̂)]ni=1 .
      3. With random projection, the linearized features xj = ∇θ f (zi ; θ̂) becomes ϕ(zi ) =
         P ∇θ f (zi ; θ̂), which induces a new feature matrix Φ = [ϕ(zi )]ni=1

Hence, overall, τTRAK is nothing but the influence function applied to the linearized model with ran-
dom projection. We note that the original TRAK influence includes a step called ensembling, which
is simply averaging the above TRAK influence over multiple τTRAK with models independently
trained on a subset of the training set.

Grad-Dot. Introduced by Charpiat et al. (2019), the dot product of gradient, known as Grad-Dot,
is a simple, easy-to-compute training data attribution method. It is given by

                          τGrad-Dot (zj , ztest ; θ̂) = −∇θ ℓ(θ̂, zj )⊤ ∇θ ℓ(θ̂, ztest ).


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Data Shapley. Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) quantifies the influence of individual data
points by considering its marginal contribution to different subsets of the training set. It is motivated
by the so-called leave-one-out (LOO) influence: specifically, given any aspect ϕ(θ̂) we care about
for the learned model θ̂ (e.g., the loss ℓ(θ̂, ztest ) of some test data point ztest ), LOO measures the
influence of every individual data point zj on ϕ by the difference ϕ(θ̂−zj ) − ϕ(θ̂), where θ̂−zj is
the model learned with the dataset {zi }i̸=j that excludes zj . Data Shapley builds on top of LOO by
requiring additional equitable conditions, resulting in the following formulation
                                                         X          ϕ(θ̂S , ztest ) − ϕ(θ̂S∪{j} , ztest )
                  τData-Shapley (zj , ztest ; θ̂) =                                  n−1
                                                                                                          ,
                                                      S⊆{zi }i̸=j                    |S|


where we let ϕ(θ̂, ztest ) = ℓ(θ̂, ztest ) and θ̂S for some S ⊆ {zi }ni=1 \ {zj } denotes the model learned
on the subset S. This can be viewed as an averaged version of LOO while satisfying several equitable
conditions, which we refer to Ghorbani & Zou (2019) for details.
Remark 2. We note that in the above formulations, we incorporate a negative sign in front of τTRAK ,
τGrad-Dot to make them consistent to the original formulation of τIF . Specifically, in Koh & Liang
(2017), the influence change is measured as the difference between the perturbed model and the
original model, while others consider the opposite.

B.3   ATTACK METHODS

In this section, we detail the implementation of all the attack methods we have used throughout the
experiments.
Shadow Attack. Shadow attack is a classical adversarial attack method that originates from
(Shokri et al., 2017). The details of shadow model training can be found in Appendix B.1. As
introduced in Section 4, after 50 shadow models are trained, we optimize Eq. (3) using gradient
ascent with respect to input feature x with 10 iterations and a step size of ϵ = 0.01.
Outlier Attack. For Outlier Attack, we utilize the following black-box attack methods to produce
adversarial examples:

       • Zeroth Order Optimization (ZOO): ZOO is a black-box attack method that approximates
         gradient through finite numerical methods. In our experiment, given an input z = (x, y),
         we perturb it by x′ ← x + ϵ · sgn(g(θ̂, z)), where g(θ̂, z) is an estimation of the loss of the
         gradient with respect to x, given by the symmetric difference quotient
                                              ℓ(θ̂, (x + hei , y)) − ℓ(θ̂, (x − hei , y))
                                 g(θ̂, z) i =                                             ,
                                                                  2h
         along the ith standard basis direction ei with h ∈ R. We note that ℓ(θ̂, (x, y)) can be
         obtained by black-box queries of the target model. In experiments, we set ϵ = 0.03.
       • Simba: Introduced by Guo et al. (2019), Simba proposes a black-box attack method to
         perturb each input pixel sequentially after permutation. More precisely, each input pixel
         is attempted to be perturbed in both directions, i.e., (x′ )i ← xi ± ϵ, respectively. After a
         perturbation is attempted, the target model is queried again, and the perturbation is accepted
         as long as this perturbation increases the loss. In practice, we set ϵ = 0.1.
       • TextFooler: TextFooler is originally an attack method for text classification task (Jin et al.,
         2020). It perturbs texts following a two-step approach: for a piece of text that it wants to
         perturb, it first sorts the words by their importance, and then replaces the influential words
         to increase the loss of prediction while preserving text similarity.
         We modify the method as follows. Firstly, for a character-level GPT model (in our case,
         NanoGPT), we work on characters rather than words. Secondly, as we work on text gen-
         eration task, for a sequence of characters that we want to perturb, we take the sum of the
         negative log-likelihood of predicting its m future characters as a loss. We then sort the
         characters by their importance, where importance is measured by the loss increase after the
         character is masked. Finally, the k-most important characters are replaced by characters
         that maximize the increment of the loss. In experiments we set m = 20 and k = 15.


                                                             18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C      A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct additional experiments under various settings, including ablation studies
and more.

C.1     A BLATION STUDY: CHANGING VALUE OF |Z0 | AND |Z0 !|

We test the performance of our methods under different sizes of |Z0 | and |Z1 | to understand the effect
of data set sizes. For settings (a), (c), and (d) in Table 1, we consider decreasing (|Z0 |, |Z1 |) from
(10000, 11000) to (5000, 6000) and increasing (|Z0 |, |Z1 |) from (10000, 11000) to (15000, 16000),
experimenting with both the Shadow Attack and the Outlier Attack. For the setting (e), i.e., the
text generation setup, the original |Z0 | was already small (originally, (|Z0 |, |Z1 |) = (4706, 6274)),
which takes only 30% of the data. Hence, we consider increasing the data size to two different
extents. Note that since the Shadow Attack is infeasible in this setting, only the Outlier Attack’s
results are shown for setting (2). The results for the two attack methods are respectively shown in
Tables 5 and 6. We see that the results demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods across different
sizes of the dataset. Overall, with a few exceptions, the Ratio of the Compensation Share appears
to become even higher when the dataset size is larger.

                Table 5: Results of Shadow Attack for various (|Z0 |, |Z1 |) settings.

                                         Compensation Share                   Fraction of Change
 Setting      (|Z0 |, |Z1 |)
                                Original     Manipulated         Ratio       More      Tied   Fewer
             (5000, 6000)        0.0153          0.0764          499.3%      0.996    0.003    0.001
      (a)   (10000, 11000)       0.0098          0.0477          456.1%      0.955    0.038    0.007
            (15000, 16000)       0.0050          0.0373          746.0%      0.963    0.036    0.001
             (5000, 6000)        0.0168          0.0539          320.7%      0.857    0.129    0.014
      (c)   (10000, 11000)       0.0112          0.0467          417.0%      0.781    0.195    0.024
            (15000, 16000)       0.0002          0.0062         3100.0%      0.431    0.568    0.001
             (5000, 6000)        0.0206          0.0413          200.7%      0.696    0.174    0.130
      (d)   (10000, 11000)       0.0095          0.0213          217.3%      0.655    0.259    0.086
            (15000, 16000)       0.0057          0.0092          161.5%      0.264    0.616    0.120


                 Table 6: Results of Outlier Attack for various (|Z0 |, |Z1 |) settings.

                                         Compensation Share                   Fraction of Change
 Setting      (|Z0 |, |Z1 |)
                                Original     Manipulated         Ratio       More      Tied   Fewer
             (5000, 6000)        0.0153          0.0747          488.9%      0.998    0.002    0.000
      (a)   (10000, 11000)       0.0098          0.0631          643.9%      0.980    0.017    0.003
            (15000, 16000)       0.0050          0.0400          800.0%      0.964    0.036    0.000
             (5000, 6000)        0.0168          0.0334          198.8%      0.720    0.241    0.039
      (c)   (10000, 11000)       0.0112          0.0668          596.4%      0.799    0.173    0.028
            (15000, 16000)       0.0002          0.0051         2550.0%      0.397    0.603    0.000
             (5000, 6000)        0.0206          0.0411          199.5%      0.761    0.133    0.106
      (d)   (10000, 11000)       0.0095          0.0176          185.2%      0.562    0.354    0.084
            (15000, 16000)       0.0057          0.0219          384.2%      0.731    0.192    0.077
             (4706, 6274)        0.0031          0.0035          262.9%      0.392    0.461    0.147
      (e)    (7843, 9411)        0.0016          0.0064          400.0%      0.420    0.507    0.073
            (12549, 14116)       0.0029          0.0214          737.9%      0.400    0.543    0.057


C.2     A BLATION STUDY: DATA ATTRIBUTION METHOD

Next, we conduct an ablation study by varying the data attribution methods used in the evaluation
under the experiment setting (b) in Table 1. Specifically, apart from Data Shapley, we consider


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


two additional data attribution methods, Influence Function, and TRAK, for evaluating the com-
pensation share, experimenting with both the Shadow Attack and the Outlier Attack. Note that
the Adversary has no knowledge about what data attribution method will be used by the AI
Developer. The results are shown in Tables 7 and 8. The results below show that the proposed
attack methods are highly effective for all three data attribution methods, as reflected by the Ratio
of the Compensation Share.

       Table 7: Results of Shadow Attack with different data attribution methods of setting (b).

                                               Compensation Share               Fraction of Change
 Attribution Method       |Z1a |/|Z1 |
                                         Original   Manipulated     Ratio     More       Tied    Fewer
     Data Shapley           0.0352       0.0152          0.0435     286.2%    0.533      0.333   0.134
  Influence Function        0.0352       0.0496          0.1004     202.4%    0.980      0.000   0.020
        TRAK                0.0352       0.0392          0.0936     238.8%    0.820      0.100   0.080


        Table 8: Results of Outlier Attack with different data attribution methods of setting (b).

                                               Compensation Share               Fraction of Change
 Attribution Method       |Z1a |/|Z1 |
                                         Original   Manipulated     Ratio     More       Tied    Fewer
     Data Shapley           0.0250       0.0112          0.0218     194.6%    0.440      0.380   0.180
  Influence Function        0.0250       0.0186          0.0442     237.6%    0.920      0.060   0.020
        TRAK                0.0250       0.0160          0.0412     257.5%    0.780      0.180   0.040


C.3     W HITE - BOX ATTACK

In this section, we further consider white-box attacks as an oracle reference, where the Adversary
has full knowledge of the target model and has access to the model parameters. For the choice of
attack method under the white-box threat model, we experiment with the Fast Gradient Sign Method
(FGSM) (Goodfellow et al., 2015) for setting (a) and the Projected Gradient Descent(PGD) (Mkadry
et al., 2017) for setting (d). The results are shown in Table 9. Overall, compared to this oracle white-
box attack, the proposed black-box attacks are only slightly worse in terms of the Ratio of the
Compensation Share. This further confirms that the proposed methods are highly effective.

                    Table 9: Results of white-box attacks under settings (a) and (d).

                                           Compensation Share                 Fraction of Change
 Setting      Attack Method
                                   Original     Manipulated       Ratio      More       Tied     Fewer
      (a)          FGSM              0.0098         0.0649        662.2%     0.990      0.007    0.003
      (d)           PGD              0.0095         0.0222        233.7%     0.689      0.204    0.107


C.4     A DVERSARIAL ATTACK UNDER DATA AUGMENTATION

In this section, we test the performance of our proposed attack methods when the AI Developer
utilize data augmentation techniques when training the model. Specifically, after the AI
Developer gathers data, the training dataset is then formed by a combination of the gathered
data and its augmented version. For simplicity, we consider settings (a), (c), and (d) in Table 1 and
consider standard image augmentation methods such as random cropping and random affine trans-
formation to images. With data augmentation, the compensation share will be attributed back to
the original data point if its augmented version is identified as influential. The results are shown in
Tables 10 and 11. Compared to the original setting without data augmentation, we cannot draw a
definite conclusion on whether data augmentation helps defend the proposed attacks since the trend
is unclear. However, overall, we can conclude that the proposed attacks are still highly effective
even when data augmentation is utilized by the AI Developer.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Table 10: Results of Shadow Attack under data augmentation

                                      Compensation Share                    Fraction of Change
 Setting      |Z1a |/|Z1 |
                             Original     Manipulated          Ratio      More       Tied     Fewer
      (a)      0.0098         0.0099          0.0209          211.1%      0.632     0.244      0.124
      (c)      0.0098         0.0084          0.0516          614.3%      0.894     0.095      0.011
      (d)      0.0098         0.0091          0.0747          820.9%      0.959     0.035      0.006


                    Table 11: Results of Outlier Attack under data augmentation.

                                      Compensation Share                    Fraction of Change
 Setting      |Z1a |/|Z1 |
                             Original     Manipulated          Ratio      More       Tied     Fewer
      (a)      0.0098         0.0099          0.0287          289.9%      0.776     0.158      0.066
      (c)      0.0098         0.0084          0.0691          822.6%      0.853     0.113      0.034
      (d)      0.0098         0.0091          0.0481          528.6%      0.916     0.065      0.019



C.5     C OMPENSATING ONLY CORRECT PREDICTION

In this section we consider the setup when the AI Developer only rewards training data points
that are highly influential to validation samples with correct predictions. In detail, after training the
model and before calculating of compensation share, the AI Developer will test the model on
a private validation set, select those validation points that are correctly predicted, and only attribute
compensation to influential training points for these validation points. We test this on settings (a),
(c), and (d). Note that the Fraction of Change metric is no longer feasible in this setup since the
model trained on the original and manipulated training set may not share the same validation set.
The results are shown in Table 12. Overall, our proposed attacks are still highly effective based on
the Ratio of Compensation Share.


             Table 12: Results when compensating only correctly predicted data points.

                                                               Compensation Share
            Attack Type       Setting    |Z1a |/|Z1 |
                                                         Original   Manipulated       Ratio
                                (a)        0.0098        0.0050        0.0382        764.0%
            Shadow Attack       (c)        0.0098        0.0090        0.0752        835.6%
                                (d)        0.0098        0.0110        0.0353        320.9%
                                (a)        0.0098        0.0050        0.0273        546.0%
            Outlier Attack      (c)        0.0098        0.0090        0.0552        613.3%
                                (d)        0.0098        0.0110        0.0227        206.4%


C.6     A DVERSARIAL ATTACK ON LARGE - SCALE SETUP

In this section, we scale up our experiment and see how the proposed attacks generalize in this
large-scale experiment. Specifically, we consider the ResNet-18 model (He et al., 2016) on the Tiny
ImageNet dataset (Le & Yang, 2015) with |Z0 |, |Z1 |) = (50000, 60000), and we perturb |Z1a | = 100
training points. Both the Shadow Attack and Outlier Attack are tested, and the results are shown in
Table 13. It is evident that from the Ratio of Compensation Share, two proposed attacks are still
highly effective in a large-scale experiment.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 13: Results of Shadow Attack and Outlier Attack under large-scale setup .

                                            Compensation Share                      Fraction of Change
    Attack Type     |Z1a |/|Z1 |
                                      Original   Manipulated            Ratio     More       Tied     Fewer
 Outlier Attack       0.0017          0.0009         0.0056             622.2%    0.456     0.498     0.046
 Shadow Attack        0.0017          0.0009         0.0181            2011.1%    0.855     0.131     0.014


D     V ISUALIZATION OF THE PERTURBATION
Finally, Figure 3 provides visualizations of two examples of the adversarial perturbed images from
MNIST and CIFAR-10. In both cases, the perturbations are barely visible to human eyes, however,
they are highly effective in terms of the success of the attack.


            (a)     Original.               (b) Shadow Attack.             (c) Outlier Attack.
            Influential for 0 vali-         Influential for 75 vali-       Influential for 105
            dation data points.             dation data points.            validation data points.


            (d)     Original.               (e) Shadow Attack.             (f) Outlier Attack.
            Influential for 1 vali-         Influential for 38 vali-       Influential for 29 vali-
            dation data points.             dation data points.            dation data points.

     Figure 3: Visualization of MNIST (Top) and CIFAR-10 (Bottom), before and after attacks.


                                                      22
