Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RACK -O N : T RANSFORMER - BASED O NLINE P OINT
T RACKING WITH M EMORY
    Görkay Aydemir1 Xiongyi Cai3 Weidi Xie3 † Fatma Güney1,2 †
    1
      Department of Computer Engineering, Koç University 2 KUIS AI Center
    3
      School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
    gaydemir23@ku.edu.tr † denotes equal supervision



                                             A BSTRACT

          In this paper, we consider the problem of long-term point tracking, which requires
          consistent identification of points across multiple frames in a video, despite changes
          in appearance, lighting, perspective, and occlusions. We target online tracking
          on a frame-by-frame basis, making it suitable for real-world, streaming scenarios.
          Specifically, we introduce Track-On, a simple transformer-based model designed
          for online long-term point tracking. Unlike prior methods that depend on full tem-
          poral modeling, our model processes video frames causally without access to future
          frames, leveraging two memory modules —spatial memory and context memory—
          to capture temporal information and maintain reliable point tracking over long
          time horizons. At inference time, it employs patch classification and refinement to
          identify correspondences and track points with high accuracy. Through extensive
          experiments, we demonstrate that Track-On sets a new state-of-the-art for online
          models and delivers superior or competitive results compared to offline approaches
          on seven datasets, including the TAP-Vid benchmark. Our method offers a robust
          and scalable solution for real-time tracking in diverse applications.1


1      I NTRODUCTION

Motion estimation is one of the core challenges in computer vision, with applications spanning video
compression (Jasinschi et al., 1998), video stabilization (Battiato et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2009), and
augmented reality (Marchand et al., 2015). The objective is to track physical points across video
frames accurately. A widely used solution for motion estimation is optical flow, which estimates
pixel-level correspondences between adjacent frames. In principle, long-term motion estimation can
be achieved by chaining together these frame-by-frame estimations.
Recent advances in optical flow techniques, such as PWC-Net (Sun et al., 2018) and RAFT (Teed
& Deng, 2020), have improved accuracy for short-term motion estimation. However, the inherent
limitations of chaining flow estimations remain a challenge, namely error accumulation and the
difficulty of handling occlusions. To address long-term motion estimation, Sand & Teller (2008)
explicitly introduced the concept of pixel tracking, a paradigm shift that focuses on tracking individual
points across a video, rather than relying solely on pairwise frame correspondences. This concept,
often referred to as “particle video” has been revisited in recent deep learning methods like PIPs
(Harley et al., 2022) and TAPIR (Doersch et al., 2023), which leverage dense cost volumes, iterative
optimization, and learned appearance updates to track points through time.
Despite the advancements, the existing methods for long-term point tracking face two major limi-
tations. First, they primarily rely on offline processing, where the entire video or a large window
of frames is processed at once. This allows models to use both past and future frames to improve
predictions but inherently limits their applicability in real-world scenarios (Karaev et al., 2024b;
Harley et al., 2022). Second, these approaches struggle with scalability, as they often require full
attention computation across all frames, leading to significant memory overhead, especially for long
videos or large frame windows. These limitations hinder their use in real-world applications, like
robotics or augmented reality, where efficient and online processing of streaming video is crucial.
1
    Project page: https://kuis-ai.github.io/track_on


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Offline vs. Online Point Tracking. We propose an online model, tracking points frame-by-
frame (right), unlike the dominant offline paradigm where models require access to all frames within
a sliding window or the entire video (left). In contrast, our approach allows for frame-by-frame
tracking in videos of any length. To capture temporal information, we introduce two memory modules:
spatial memory, which tracks changes in the target point, and context memory, which stores broader
contextual information from previous states of the point.

In this paper, we address the challenge of long-term point tracking in an online processing setting
(Fig. 1, right), where the model processes video frames sequentially, without access to future frames
(Vecerik et al., 2023). We propose a simple transformer-based model, where points of interest are
treated as queries in the transformer decoder, attending the current frame to update their features.
Unlike existing methods that aggregate temporal information across video frames, we achieve
temporal continuity by updating the query representations with information from two specialized
memory modules: spatial memory and context memory. This design enables the model to maintain
reliable point tracking over time while avoiding the high computational and memory costs associated
with full temporal modeling across entire video sequences.
Specifically, spatial and context memory play distinct but complementary roles. The former aims to
reduce tracking drift by updating the query representation with information from the latest frames.
This ensures that the query reflects the most recent visual appearance of the tracked point, by storing
the content around the model’s predictions in previous frames, rather than relying on features of
the initial point. On the other hand, context memory provides a broader view of the track’s history,
storing the point’s embeddings from past frames. This allows the model to consider changes to visual
content including key information about the point’s status, such as whether the point was occluded
in previous frames. Overall, spatial memory focuses on positional changes in predictions over time
while context memory ensures temporal continuity by providing a full perspective of the track’s
evolution. Together, these two memory modules aggregate useful temporal information across video.
At training time, the queries from the transformer decoder identify the most likely location by
computing embedding similarity with each patch, and are trained using similarity-based classification,
akin to contrastive learning. The prediction is then refined by estimating an offset within the local
region to find the final correspondence. We conduct extensive experiments demonstrating that our
simple patch-classification and refinement approach serves as a strong alternative to the dominant
iterative update paradigm (Karaev et al., 2024b; Harley et al., 2022; Doersch et al., 2023). Our method
sets a new state-of-the-art among online models and either matches or surpasses offline approaches
on seven datasets including the TAP-Vid benchmark.
In summary, our contributions are as follows: (i) a simple architecture that treats points of interest
as queries in the transformer decoder, identifying correspondences through patch classification and
refinement; (ii) memory modules that effectively store past content and address feature drift in an
online manner; (iii) extensive experiments and ablations that demonstrate state-of-the-art performance
among online models and competitive results to offline models.


2     M ETHODOLOGY

2.1   P ROBLEM S CENARIO

Given an RGB  video of T frames, V = I1 , I2 , . . . , IT ∈ RT ×H×W ×3 , and a set of N predefined


queries, Q = (t1 , p1 ), (t2 , p2 ), . . . , (tN , pN ) ∈ RN ×3 , where each query point is specified


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Overview. We introduce Track-On, a simple transformer-based method for online, frame-
by-frame point tracking. The process involves three steps: (i) Visual Encoder, which extracts features
from the given frame; (ii) Query Decoder, which decodes interest point queries using the frame’s
features; (iii) Point Prediction (highlighted in light blue), where correspondences are estimated
in a coarse-to-fine manner, first through patch classification based on similarity, then followed by
refinement through offset prediction from a few most likely patches. Note that the squares refer to
point queries, while the circles represent predictions, either as point coordinates or visibility.

by the start time and pixel’s spatial location, our goal is to predict the correspondences p̂t ∈ RN ×2
and visibility v̂t ∈ {0, 1}N for all query points in an online manner, i.e. using only frames up to the
current target frame t. To address this problem, we propose a transformer-based point tracking model,
that tracks points frame-by-frame, with dynamic memories M to propagate temporal information
along the video sequence:
                                 p̂t , v̂t , Mt = Φ (It , Q, Mt−1 ; Θ)                              (1)

In the following sections, we start by describing the basic transformer architecture for point tracking
in Sec. 2.2, then introduce the two memory modules and their update mechanisms in Sec. 2.3.

2.2     T RACK -O N : P OINT T RACKING WITH A T RANSFORMER

Our model is based on transformer, consisting of three components, as illustrated in Fig. 2: Visual
Encoder is tasked to extract visual features of the video frame, and initialize the query points; Query
Decoder enables the queried points to attend the target frame to update their features; and Point
Prediction, to predict the positions of corresponding queried points in a coarse-to-fine (Doersch et al.,
2023) manner.

2.2.1    V ISUAL E NCODER

We adopt a Vision Transformer (ViT) as visual backbone, specifically, DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024),
and use ViT-Adapter (Chen et al., 2022b) to obtain dense features at a higher resolution than the
standard ViT. We then add learnable spatial positional embeddings γ s to the frame-wise features:
                                                              H   W
                                 ft = Φvis-enc (It ) + γ s ∈ R S × S ×D                               (2)

where D denotes the feature dimension, and S refers to the stride. We use a single-scale feature map
from ViT-Adapter for memory efficiency, specifically with a stride of S = 4.
Query Initialization: To initialize  the query features (qinit ), we apply bilinear sampling to the
feature map at the query position pi :
                                                         N
                               qinit = sample(fti , pi ) i=1 ∈ RN ×D



In practice, we initialize the query based on the features of the start frame ti for i-th query, assuming
they can start from different time point, and propagate them to the subsequent frames.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Top-k Points. In certain
cases, a patch with high similarity, Figure 4: Ranking Module. The features around the top-k
though not the most similar, is closer points (p̂top
                                                   t ) with the highest similarity are decoded using
to the ground-truth patch. The top-3 deformable attention to extract the corresponding top-k fea-
patch centers, ranked by similarity, are tures (qtop ). These features are then fused with the decoded
                                                 t
marked with dots, while the ground- query qdec using a transformer decoder.
                                                 t
truth is represented by a diamond.


2.2.2   Q UERY D ECODER
After extracting the visual features for the frame and query points, we adopt a variant of transformer
decoder (Vaswani et al., 2017), with 3 blocks, i.e. cross-attention followed by a self-attention, with an
additional feed forward layer between attentions:
                                  qdec  = Φq-dec qinit , ft ∈ RN ×D

                                   t                                                                  (3)
The points of interest are treated as queries, which update their features by iteratively attending to
visual features of the current frame with cross attention. These updated queries are then used to
search for the best match within the current frame, as explained in the following section.

2.2.3   P OINT P REDICTION
Unlike previous work that regresses the exact location of the points, we formulate the tracking as a
matching problem to one of the patches, that provides a coarse estimate of the correspondence. For
exact correspondence with higher precision, we further predict offsets to the patch center. Additionally,
we also infer the visibility v̂t ∈ [0, 1]N and uncertainty ût ∈ [0, 1]N for the points of interest.
Patch Classification: We first pass the visual features into 4-layer MLPs, and downsample the
                                                                                    H  W
resulting features into multiple scales, i.e., ft → ht ∈ R S × S ×D → hlt ∈ R 2l .S × 2l .S ×D . We
                                                            H   W


compute the cosine similarity between the decoded queries and patch embeddings in four scales,
and the similarity map Cdect   is obtained as the weighted average of multi-scale similarity maps
with learned coefficients (details in Appendix Sec. B.2). We then apply a temperature to scale the
similarity map and take softmax spatially over the patches within the current frame. The resulting
Cdec
  t   provides a measure of similarity for each query across the patches in the frame.
We train the model with a classification objective, where the ground-truth class is the patch with the
point of interest in it. In other words, we perform a P -class classification, P is the total number of
patches in the frame.
Re-ranking: We observed that the true target patch might not always have the highest similarity
on Cdec
     t , however, it is usually among the top-k patches. For example, in Fig. 3, the patch with the
second-highest similarity (top-2) is closer to the true correspondence than the most similar patch
(top-1). To rectify such cases, we introduce a re-ranking module Φre-rank :
                              qt = Φre-rank qdec         dec
                                                               ∈ RN ×D

                                              t , ht , Ct                                       (4)
where qt denotes the refined queries after ranking.
In the re-ranking module (Fig. 4), we identify the top-k patches with the highest similarities and
retrieve their corresponding features with a deformable attention decoder. Then, we integrate them


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                    12.5


                                                                   Scaled Dot Product
                                                                                    10.0
                                                                                     7.5
                                                                                     5.0
                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                           0      5    10     15     20    25        30   35   40
                                                                                                                   Frame


Figure 5: Offset Head. Starting with a rough
estimation from patch classification (left), where                      Figure 6: Feature Drift. For the tracks shown
lighter colors indicate higher correlation, we refine                   below (start, middle, and final frames), the plot
the prediction using the offset head (right). The                       above illustrates the decreasing similarity be-
selected patch center and the final prediction are                      tween the features of the initial query and its
marked by a blue dot and a red dot, respectively,                       correspondences over time, with the initial sim-
with the ground-truth represented by a diamond.                         ilarity indicated by horizontal dashed lines.


into the original query features via a transformer decoder to produce refined queries. Using these
refined queries, we calculate the final similarity map Ct and apply a classification loss. Finally, we
select the center of the patch with the highest similarity (p̂patch
                                                              t     ∈ RN ×2 ) as our coarse prediction.
Additionally, we compute an uncertainty score for each top-k location, i.e. ûtop    t   ∈ RN ×k , by
processing their corresponding features with a linear layer (see Appendix Sec. B.2 for details).
Offset Prediction: For the exact correspondence (p̂t ∈ RN ×2 ), we further predict an offset
ôt ∈ RN ×2 to the patch center by incorporating features from the local region around the inferred
patch, as shown in Fig. 5:
                         ôt = Φoff (qt , ht , p̂patch
                                                 t     ),                                      p̂t = p̂patch
                                                                                                       t     + ôt                             (5)
Here, Φoff is a deformable transformer decoder (Zhu et al., 2021) block with 3 layers, excluding
self-attention. In this decoder, the query qt is processed using the key-value pairs ht , with the
reference point set to p̂patch
                         t     . To limit the refinement to the local region, the offsets are constrained
by the S (stride) and mapped to the range [−S, S] using a tanh activation.
In addition, we predict the visibility v̂t and uncertainty ût , using visibility head Φvis . We first decode
the region around the predicted location p̂t (Eq. 5) using a deformable decoder layer. Then, we
predict visibility and uncertainty by applying a linear layer to the decoded queries. At training time,
we define a prediction to be uncertain if the prediction error exceeds a threshold (δu = 8 pixels) or
if the point is occluded. During inference, we classify a point as visible if its probability exceeds a
threshold δv . Although we do not directly utilize uncertainty in our predictions during inference, we
found predicting uncertainty to be beneficial for training.
Training: We train our model using the ground-truth trajectories pt ∈ RN ×2 and visibility
information vt ∈ {0, 1}N . For patch classification, we apply cross-entropy loss based on the
ground-truth class, patch cpatch . For offset prediction ôt , we minimize the ℓ1 distance between
the predicted offset and the actual offset. We supervise the visibility v̂t and uncertainty ût using
binary cross-entropy loss. Additionally, we supervise the uncertainties of the top-k points, ûtop
                                                                                               t , at
re-ranking. The total loss is a weighted combination of them:

              L = λ LCE Ct , cpatch + LCE Cdec   patch

                                           t , c          ·vt
                   |                 {z                 }
                                       Patch Classification Loss
                                                                                                                                               (6)
                    + Lℓ1 (ôt , ot ) ·vt + LCE (v̂t , vt ) + LCE (ût , ut ) + LCE (ûtop  top
                                                                                       t , ut )
                      |    {z      }        | {z } |               {z      } |         {z      }
                         Offset Loss             Visibility Loss                        Uncertainty Loss    Top-k Uncertainty Loss

Discussion: Till this point, our model has exclusively considered relocating the queried points
within the current frame. However, as the appearance of points consequently changes over time, the
embedding similarity between the initial query point and future correspondences tends to decrease


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Memory Modules. Spatial memory Mst−1 (left) is used to update the initial query qinit
from the first frame to qinit
                         t    on the current frame. The goal is to resolve feature drift by storing the
content around the model’s predictions in previous frames. Context memory Mct−1 (right) is input to
the query decoder which updates qinitt   to qt . It provides a broader view of the track’s history with
appearance changes and occlusion status by storing the point’s embeddings from past frames.


gradually (Fig. 6). This problem, known as feature drift, leads to inaccurate predictions, when solely
relying on the feature similarity with the initial point.

2.3     T RACK -O N WITH M EMORY

Here, we introduce two types of memories: spatial memory and context memory. Spatial memory
stores information around the predicted locations, allowing us to update the initial queries based
on the latest predictions. Context memory preserves the track’s history states by storing previously
decoded queries, ensuring continuity over time and preventing inconsistencies. This design enables
our model to effectively capture temporal progressions in long-term videos, while also adapting to
changes in the target’s features to address feature drift.
We store the past features for each of the N queries independently, with up to K embeddings per
query in each memory module. Once fully filled, the earliest entry from the memory will be obsoleted
as a new entry arrives, operating as a First-In First-Out (FIFO) queue.

2.3.1    S PATIAL M EMORY
Here, we introduce the spatial memory module that stores fine-grained local information from previous
frames, enabling continuous updates to the initial query points. This adaptation to appearance changes
helps mitigate feature drift.
Memory Construction: We zero-initialize the memory, Ms0 , update its content with each frame.
For the first frame, we make a prediction using initial query qinit without memory.
Memory Write (Φq-wr ): To update the memory with the new prediction, Mst−1 → Mst , we extract a
feature vector around the predicted point p̂t on the current feature map ft , and add it to the memory:
                             Mst = [Mst−1 , Φq-wr [qinit , qt ], ft , p̂t ]

                                                                                                    (7)
Φq-wr is a 3-layer deformable transformer decoder without self-attention, using the concatenated
qinit and qt as the query, attending a local neighborhood of predicted point for update. Utilizing
deformable attention for the local summarization process helps prevent error propagation over time,
as the query can flexibly select relevant features from any range.
Query Update (Φq-up ): In such scenario, before passing into the query decoder to estimate the
correspondence, the initial query points first visit the spatial memory Mst−1 for an update:

            qinit = Φq-up qinit , Mst−1 = qinit + ϕqqm qinit , ϕmm (Mst−1 + γ s )

             t                                                                               (8)


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ϕmm is a transformer encoder layer that captures dependencies within the memory, and ϕqqm is a
transformer decoder layer without initial self-attention, where qinit attends to updated memory,
followed by a linear layer, and γ s ∈ RK×D is learnable position embeddings. Instead of sequentially
updating the query embeddings at each time step, e.g. extracting qinit
                                                                    t   using qinit
                                                                                t−1 , we update them
                                    init
with respect to the initial query q , conditioned on all previous predictions stored in the memory.
This prevents error propagation by taking into account the entire history of predictions.

2.3.2    C ONTEXT M EMORY
In addition to spatial memory, we introduce a context memory that incorporates historical information
of the queried points from a broader context, enabling the model to capture past occlusions and
visual changes. Specifically, we store the decoded query features from previous time steps in context
memory, Mct−1 . We then integrate it by extending the query decoder with an additional transformer
decoder layer without self-attention, where queries attend to memory with added learnable position
embeddings (γ c ∈ RK×D ):
                                qt = Φq-dec qinit  , ft , Mct−1 + γ c

                                               t                                                   (9)
Changes to the query decoder with memory are shown in red. For the writing operation, we add
the most recent qt to Mct−1 and remove the oldest item, following the same procedure as in the
spatial memory. Our experiments demonstrate that incorporating past content temporally with context
memory enables more consistent tracking with additional benefits over spatial memory, especially in
visibility prediction, since spatial memory focuses only on the regional content where the point is
currently visible.

2.3.3    I NFERENCE -T IME M EMORY E XTENSION
Although the memory size K is fixed at training time, the number of video frames at inference can be
different from the training frame limit. To address this, we extend the memory size during inference
by linearly interpolating the temporal positional embeddings, γ s and γ c , to a larger size Ki . In
particular, we train our model with memory size K = 12, and extend it to Ki ∈ {16, . . . , 96} at
inference time.

3     E XPERIMENTS
3.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets: We use TAP-Vid (Doersch et al., 2022) for both training and evaluation, consistent with
previous work. Specifically, we train our model on TAP-Vid Kubric, a synthetic dataset of 11k video
sequences, each with a fixed length of 24 frames. For evaluation, we use three other datasets from
the TAP-Vid benchmark: TAP-Vid DAVIS, which includes 30 real-world videos from the DAVIS
dataset; TAP-Vid RGB-Stacking, a synthetic dataset of 50 videos focused on robotic manipulation
tasks, mainly involving textureless objects; TAP-Vid Kinetics, a collection of over 1,000 real-world
online videos. We provide comparisons on four additional datasets in Appendix Sec. C.
Metrics: We evaluate tracking performance with the following metrics of TAP-Vid benchmark:
                                                                                   x
Occlusion Accuracy (OA), which measures the accuracy of visibility prediction; δavg   , the average
proportion of visible points tracked within 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 pixels; Average Jaccard (AJ), which
jointly assesses visibility and localization precision.
Evaluation Details: We follow the standard protocol of TAP-Vid benchmark by first downsampling
the videos to 256 × 256. We evaluate models in the queried first protocol, which is the natural setting
for causal tracking. In this mode, the first visible point in each trajectory serves as the query, and the
goal is to track that point in subsequent frames. For DAVIS evaluation, we set the memory size Ki to
48, 80, and 96 for DAVIS, RGB-Stacking, and Kinetics, to accommodate a larger temporal span.

3.2     R ESULTS

As shown in Table 1, we categorize models into online and offline settings. Offline models, with
bidirectional information flow, use either a fixed-size window—where half of the window spans past


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Quantitative Results on TAP-Vid Benchmark. This table shows results in comparison
                                                                                      x
to the previous work on TAP-Vid under queried first setting, in terms of AJ, δavg        , and OA. The
models are categorized into online and offline schemes, the former setting grants access to any frame
regardless of video length, thus providing a clear advantage. While online models process one frame
at a time, enable frame-by-frame inference. For training datasets, Kub and Kub-L(ong), refer to
the TAP-Vid Kubric dataset with 24-frame and 64-frame videos, respectively; and R indicates the
inclusion of a large number of real-world videos, we highlight these models in gray . MFT is a long-
term optical flow method trained on a combination of Sintel (Butler et al., 2012), FlyingThings (Mayer
et al., 2016), and Kubric datasets.
                                               DAVIS            RGB-Stacking              Kinetics
 Model              Input      Train          x                x                x
                                        AJ ↑ δavg ↑ OA ↑ AJ ↑ δavg ↑ OA ↑ AJ ↑ δavg ↑ OA ↑
 Offline
 TAPIR              Video    Kub        56.2   70.0    86.5   55.5   69.7   88.0   49.6    64.2      85.0
 TAPTR             Window    Kub        63.0   76.1    91.1   60.8   76.2   87.0   49.0    64.4      85.2
 TAPTRv2           Window    Kub        63.5   75.9    91.4   53.4   70.5   81.2   49.7    64.2      85.7
 SpatialTracker    Window    Kub        61.1   76.3    89.5   63.5   77.6   88.2   50.1    65.9      86.9
 LocoTrack          Video    Kub        62.9   75.3    87.2   69.7   83.2   89.5   52.9    66.8      85.3
 CoTracker3        Window   Kub-L       64.5   76.7    89.7   71.1   81.9   90.3   54.1    66.6      87.1
 CoTracker3         Video   Kub-L       63.3   76.2    88.0   74.0   84.9   90.5   53.5    66.5      86.4
 BootsTAPIR         Video  Kub + R      61.4   73.6    88.7   70.8   83.0   89.9   54.6    68.4      86.5
 CoTracker3        Window Kub-L + R     63.8   76.3    90.2   71.7   83.6   91.1   55.8    68.5      88.3
 CoTracker3         Video Kub-L + R     64.4   76.9    91.2   74.3   85.2   92.4   54.7    67.8      87.4
 Online
 DynOMo            Frame        -       45.8   63.1    81.1    -      -      -      -       -         -
 MFT               Frame       SFK      47.3   66.8    77.8    -      -      -     39.6    60.4      72.7
 Online TAPIR      Frame       Kub      56.7   70.2    85.7   67.7    -      -     51.5    64.4      85.2
 Track-On (Ours)   Frame       Kub      65.0   78.0    90.8   71.4   85.2   91.7   53.9    67.3      87.8


frames and the other half future frames—or the entire video, granting access to any frame regardless
of video length and providing a clear advantage. In contrast, online models process one frame at a
time, enabling frame-by-frame inference. In the following discussion, we mainly focus on the setting
using similar training set to ours, i.e., the models without using real-world videos.
Comparison on DAVIS. Our model outperforms all existing online models across every evaluation
metric, achieving an 8.3 AJ improvement over the closest competitor, Online TAPIR. Additionally, it
                                                             x
surpasses all offline models in both AJ (65.0 vs. 64.5) and δavg (78.0 vs. 76.7), outperforming even
the concurrent CoTracker3, which was trained on longer videos (24 vs. 64 frames). Notably, our
model also outperforms models fine-tuned on real-world videos by a significant margin. These results
are particularly impressive because our model is an online approach, processing the video frame by
frame, yet it exceeds the performance of offline models that process the entire video at once.
Comparison on RGB-Stacking. The dataset consists of long video sequences, with lengths of up
to 250 frames, making it ideal for evaluating models’ long-term processing capabilities. Our model
surpasses Online TAPIR by 3.7 AJ and outperforms offline competitors, achieving improvements of
        x
0.3 in δavg and 1.2 in OA compared to CoTracker3, which utilizes video-level input. The results of
offline models on this dataset highlight a significant limitation of the windowed inference approach,
which struggles with long video sequences due to restricted temporal coverage. In contrast, models
with full video input perform considerably better. By effectively extending the temporal span through
our memory mechanisms, our model achieves comparable or superior performance on long videos
using only frame-by-frame inputs, despite the inherent disadvantage of not having bidirectional
connections across the entire video sequence.
Comparison on Kinetics. The dataset comprises a variety of long internet videos. Our model
outperforms Online TAPIR across all metrics by a considerable margin, while also surpassing offline
             x                                                             x
models in δavg   and OA. Specifically, it achieves a 0.5 improvement in δavg   over LocoTrack (with
video inputs) and a 0.7 improvement in OA over CoTracker3 (with window inputs). Despite the
significant difference in training data between CoTracker3 and our model, ours ranks second in AJ,
with only a small gap of 0.2. Additionally, models fine-tuned on real-world data demonstrate superior


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Model Components. Removing individ- Table 3: Memory Components. The effect
ual components of our model without (inference-time of spatial memory (Ms ), context memory
memory extension)—namely, the re-ranking module (Mc ), and inference-time memory extension
(Φrank ), offset head (Φoff ), and visibility head (Φvis ) (IME). All metrics are higher-is-better.
one at a time. All metrics are higher-is-better.
                                                                         Model Ms Mc IME       x
                                                                                           AJ δavg OA
                                   1px       16px           x
Model                          δ         δ          AJ     δavg   OA
                                                                          A   ✗   ✗   ✗    52.0   67.6   78.1
Full Model (without IME)       45.5      95.9       64.9   77.7   90.6    B   ✓   ✗   ✗    63.5   77.0   89.0
- No re-ranking (Φre-rank )    43.8      95.5       62.8   76.3   89.7    C   ✗   ✓   ✗    64.3   77.8   90.3
- No offset head (Φoff )       27.6      96.1       60.1   73.0   90.5    D   ✓   ✓   ✗    64.9   77.7   90.6
- No visibility head (Φvis )   45.4      96.1       64.0   77.4   90.6    E   ✓   ✓   ✓    65.0   78.0   90.8



performance, underscoring the potential benefits of training on large-scale real-world datasets, which
seem particularly advantageous for datasets like Kinetics compared to others.

3.3   A BLATION S TUDY

Components: We conducted an experiment to examine the impact of each proposed component in
the correspondence estimation section (Sec. 2.2), we remove them one at a time while keeping other
modules unchanged. First, we removed the re-ranking module Φrank . Second, we removed the offset
head Φoff , eliminating the calculation of additional offsets. Instead, we used the coarse prediction,
i.e. the selected patch center, as the final prediction. A more detailed analysis of the offset head is
provided in Appendix Sec. D. Lastly, we replaced the additional deformable attention layer in the
visibility head Φvis with a 2-layer MLP. Note that, we do not apply inference-time memory extension
to models in this comparison.
From the results in Table 2, we can make the following observations: (i) The re-ranking module
improves all metrics, notably increasing AJ by 2.1, as it introduces specialized queries for identifying
correspondences. Errors larger than 16 pixels are also more frequent without it, showing its role
in reducing large errors. (ii) The offset head is crucial for fine-grained predictions. While δ 16px
values remain similar without the offset head, lower error thresholds (i.e. less than 1 pixel) show a
significant difference (45.5 vs. 27.6), highlighting the importance of predicted offsets for fine-grained
localization. (iii) Replacing the deformable attention layer in Φvis with an MLP does not affect OA
but reduces AJ. The deformable head ensures more consistent visibility predictions by conditioning
them on accurate point predictions, leading to higher AJ. Despite this, OA remains robust even when
an MLP is used for visibility prediction.
Memory Modules: To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed memory modules, we
conduct an ablation study, as shown in Table 3. We start by evaluating the model without memory
(Model-A), which corresponds to the vanilla model described in Sec. 2.2. As expected, due to the
model’s lack of temporal processing, Model-A performs poorly, particularly in OA. Introducing
temporal information through either spatial memory (Model-B) or context memory (Model-C) leads
to significant performance improvements. Model-C, in particular, achieves higher OA by providing a
more comprehensive view of the track’s history, including occlusions. Combining both memory types
(Model-D) further boosts performance, highlighting the complementary strengths of the two memory
modules. Lastly, incorporating the memory extension at inference time yields slight improvements in
all metrics, leading to an overall enhancement in performance. We provide more detailed analysis on
spatial memory in Appendix Sec. E.
Efficiency: We plot the inference speed (frames per second, FPS), maximum GPU memory usage
during video processing, and AJ performance on the TAP-Vid DAVIS dataset as a function of memory
size Ki (indicated near the plot nodes) in Fig. 8. The results are based on tracking approximately
400 points on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. Unlike offline methods, our approach does not utilize
temporal parallelization in the visual encoder, processing frames sequentially in an online setting. As
the memory size K increases, the model’s inference speed decreases due to the higher computational
cost of temporal attention in memory operations, correspondingly increasing GPU memory usage.
For instance, the FPS decreases from 19.2 with K = 12 to 16.8 with K = 48, and further down to
14.1 with K = 96.


                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Additionally, our model demonstrates
high memory efficiency, with GPU                12
                                        19       16                                       65.0
memory usage ranging from 0.61 GB
(K = 12) to a maximum of 1.03 GB                                                          64.9
                                        18
(K = 96). At the default memory


                                                                                                  AJ (TAP-Vid DAVIS)
size of K = 48, where our model per-              32
                                        17               48                               64.8
forms best on this dataset, it achieves


                                        FPS
16.8 FPS with a maximum GPU mem-        16                                                64.7
ory usage of 0.73 GB. This highlights
the efficiency of our frame-by-frame    15                       64                       64.6
tracking approach, making it well-                                          80
suited for consumer GPUs and real-                                                  96
                                        14                                                64.5
time applications. Moreover, we ob-
                                            0.6      0.7     0.8       0.9      1.0
serve that performance improves as                   Max GPU Memory (in GB)
the memory size increases up to K =
48, but declines beyond this point. Figure 8: Efficiency. Inference speed (frames per second,
This suggests that excessively large FPS) vs. maximum GPU memory usage (in GB) where color
memory sizes can hurt performance represents the performance in AJ for different memory sizes
by storing unnecessary information. (indicated near the nodes), while tracking approximately 400
Additional analysis of memory size is points on the DAVIS dataset.
provided in Appendix Sec. D.


4   R ELATED W ORK

Tracking Any Point: Point tracking presents significant challenges, particularly in long-term
scenarios involving occlusions and appearance changes. Early methods like PIPs (Harley et al., 2022)
relied on iterative updates, while TAPIR (Doersch et al., 2023) focused on refining initialization
and improving temporal accuracy. CoTracker (Karaev et al., 2024b) leveraged spatial correlations
to jointly track multiple points, and TAPTR (Li et al., 2024b) adopted a DETR-inspired design for
tracking. More recent approaches, such as LocoTrack (Cho et al., 2024) and CoTracker3 (Karaev et al.,
2024a), introduced region-to-region similarity for enhanced matching and utilized pseudo-labeled data
to boost performance. However, most of these methods operate offline, requiring access to entire video
frames or fixed windows. In contrast, our approach focuses on online tracking, employing memory
modules to effectively capture temporal information. Additionally, we diverge from regression-based
iterative updates, instead adopting a patch classification and refinement paradigm.
Causal Processing in Videos: Online models process frames sequentially, without access to future
frames, making them well-suited for streaming and real-time tasks (Xu et al., 2021; Zhou et al.,
2024). This has been explored in tasks like pose estimation (Nie et al., 2019), action detection (Wang
et al., 2021), and video segmentation (Cheng & Schwing, 2022). To enhance efficiency, approaches
such as XMem (Cheng & Schwing, 2022) and LSTR (Xu et al., 2021) incorporate memory modules
to balance long-term and short-term contexts. Similarly, we employ an attention-based memory
mechanism tailored for point tracking, with spatial and contextual memories for capturing both local
and global information.

5   C ONCLUSION & L IMITATION
In this work, we presented Track-On, a simple yet effective transformer-based model for online point
tracking. To establish correspondences, our model employs patch classification, followed by further
refinement with offset prediction. We proposed two memory modules that enable temporal continuity
efficiently while processing long videos. Our model significantly advances the state-of-the-art in
online point tracking with fast inference and narrows the performance gap between online and offline
models across a variety of public datasets.
Despite the strengths of our proposed model, there remain certain limitations. Specifically, the model
may suffer from precision loss on thin surfaces and struggle to distinguish between instances with
similar appearances, as observed in our failure cases (see Appendix). Future work could address
these challenges by exploring learnable upsampling techniques to achieve higher-resolution feature
maps and improve feature sampling accuracy.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Shadi Hamdan and Merve Rabia Barın for their remarks and assistance. This
project is funded by the European Union (ERC, ENSURE, 101116486) with additional compute
support from Leonardo Booster (EuroHPC Joint Undertaking, EHPC-AI-2024A01-060). Views and
opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the
European Union or the European Research Council. Neither the European Union nor the granting
authority can be held responsible for them. Weidi Xie would like to acknowledge the National Key
R&D Program of China (No. 2022ZD0161400).

R EFERENCES
Görkay Aydemir, Weidi Xie, and Fatma Güney. Can visual foundation models achieve long-term
  point tracking? In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops, 2024.
Ivana Balazevic, Yuge Shi, Pinelopi Papalampidi, Rahma Chaabouni, Skanda Koppula, and Olivier J
  Henaff. Memory consolidation enables long-context video understanding. In Proc. of the Interna-
  tional Conf. on Machine learning (ICML), 2024.
Sebastiano Battiato, Giovanni Gallo, Giovanni Puglisi, and Salvatore Scellato. SIFT features tracking
  for video stabilization. In Proc. of the International Conference on Image Analysis and Processing
  (ICIAP), 2007.
Benjamin Biggs, Thomas Roddick, Andrew Fitzgibbon, and Roberto Cipolla. Creatures great and
  SMAL: Recovering the shape and motion of animals from video. In Proc. of the Asian Conf. on
  Computer Vision (ACCV), 2019.
Shyamal Buch, Victor Escorcia, Chuanqi Shen, Bernard Ghanem, and Juan Carlos Niebles. SST:
  Single-stream temporal action proposals. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
Daniel J Butler, Jonas Wulff, Garrett B Stanley, and Michael J Black. A naturalistic open source
  movie for optical flow evaluation. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  2012.
Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey
  Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In Proc. of the European Conf. on
  Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Junwen Chen, Gaurav Mittal, Ye Yu, Yu Kong, and Mei Chen. GateHUB: Gated history unit with
  background suppression for online action detection. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022a.
Zhe Chen, Yuchen Duan, Wenhai Wang, Junjun He, Tong Lu, Jifeng Dai, and Yu Qiao. Vision
  transformer adapter for dense predictions. In Proc. of the International Conf. on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022b.
Ho Kei Cheng and Alexander G Schwing. XMem: Long-term video object segmentation with an
  atkinson-shiffrin memory model. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  2022.
Seokju Cho, Jiahui Huang, Jisu Nam, Honggyu An, Seungryong Kim, and Joon-Young Lee. Local
  all-pair correspondence for point tracking. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), 2024.
Roeland De Geest, Efstratios Gavves, Amir Ghodrati, Zhenyang Li, Cees Snoek, and Tinne Tuytelaars.
  Online action detection. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2016.
Carl Doersch, Ankush Gupta, Larisa Markeeva, Adria Recasens, Lucas Smaira, Yusuf Aytar, Joao
  Carreira, Andrew Zisserman, and Yi Yang. TAP-Vid: A benchmark for tracking any point in a
  video. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Carl Doersch, Yi Yang, Mel Vecerik, Dilara Gokay, Ankush Gupta, Yusuf Aytar, Joao Carreira,
  and Andrew Zisserman. TAPIR: Tracking any point with per-frame initialization and temporal
  refinement. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.

Carl Doersch, Pauline Luc, Yi Yang, Dilara Gokay, Skanda Koppula, Ankush Gupta, Joseph Heyward,
  Ignacio Rocco, Ross Goroshin, João Carreira, and Andrew Zisserman. BootsTAP: Bootstrapped
  training for tracking-any-point. Proc. of the Asian Conf. on Computer Vision (ACCV), 2024.

Hyunjun Eun, Jinyoung Moon, Jongyoul Park, Chanho Jung, and Changick Kim. Learning to
  discriminate information for online action detection. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.

Zhipeng Fan, Jun Liu, and Yao Wang. Motion adaptive pose estimation from compressed videos. In
  Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.

Adam W Harley, Zhaoyuan Fang, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Particle video revisited: Tracking
  through occlusions using point trajectories. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision
 (ECCV), 2022.

Anfeng He, Chong Luo, Xinmei Tian, and Wenjun Zeng. A twofold siamese network for real-time
  object tracking. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.

Radu S Jasinschi, T Na Veen, et al. Motion estimation methods for video compression—a review.
  Journal of the Franklin Institute, 1998.

Nikita Karaev, Ignacio Rocco, Benjamin Graham, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian
  Rupprecht. DynamicStereo: Consistent dynamic depth from stereo videos. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

Nikita Karaev, Iurii Makarov, Jianyuan Wang, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian
  Rupprecht. CoTracker3: Simpler and better point tracking by pseudo-labelling real videos. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2410.11831, 2024a.

Nikita Karaev, Ignacio Rocco, Benjamin Graham, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian
  Rupprecht. CoTracker: It is better to track together. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), 2024b.

Dan Kondratyuk, Liangzhe Yuan, Yandong Li, Li Zhang, Mingxing Tan, Matthew Brown, and Boqing
  Gong. MoViNets: Mobile video networks for efficient video recognition. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.

Markus Käppeler, Kürsat Petek, Niclas Vödisch, Wolfram Burgard, and Abhinav Valada. Few-shot
 panoptic segmentation with foundation models. In Proc. IEEE International Conf. on Robotics
 and Automation (ICRA), 2024.

Ken-Yi Lee, Yung-Yu Chuang, Bing-Yu Chen, and Ming Ouhyoung. Video stabilization using robust
  feature trajectories. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2009.

Hongyang Li, Hao Zhang, Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Feng Li, Tianhe Ren, Bohan Li, and Lei
  Zhang. TAPTRv2: Attention-based position update improves tracking any point. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024a.

Hongyang Li, Hao Zhang, Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, and Lei Zhang.
 TAPTR: Tracking any point with transformers as detection. In Proc. of the European Conf. on
 Computer Vision (ECCV), 2024b.

Yongqing Liang, Xin Li, Navid Jafari, and Jim Chen. Video object segmentation with adaptive feature
  bank and uncertain-region refinement. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2020.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In Proc. of the Interna-
   tional Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eric Marchand, Hideaki Uchiyama, and Fabien Spindler. Pose estimation for augmented reality: a
  hands-on survey. In IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer Graphics (VCG), 2015.

Nikolaus Mayer, Eddy Ilg, Philip Hausser, Philipp Fischer, Daniel Cremers, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and
  Thomas Brox. A large dataset to train convolutional networks for disparity, optical flow, and scene
  flow estimation. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.

Michal Neoral, Jonáš Šerỳch, and Jiřı́ Matas. MFT: Long-term tracking of every pixel. In Proc. of
 the IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2024.

Xuecheng Nie, Yuncheng Li, Linjie Luo, Ning Zhang, and Jiashi Feng. Dynamic kernel distillation
  for efficient pose estimation in videos. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer
 Vision (ICCV), 2019.

Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Theo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Russell Howes, Po-Yao
 Huang, Hu Xu, Vasu Sharma, Shang-Wen Li, Wojciech Galuba, Mike Rabbat, Mido Assran, Nico-
 las Ballas, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand
 Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without supervision.
 Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2024. ISSN 2835-8856.

Peter Sand and Seth Teller. Particle video: Long-range motion estimation using point trajectories. In
  International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2008.

Jenny Seidenschwarz, Qunjie Zhou, Bardienus Duisterhof, Deva Ramanan, and Laura Leal-Taixé.
  DynOMo: Online point tracking by dynamic online monocular gaussian reconstruction. In Proc.
  of the International Conf. on 3D Vision (3DV), 2025.

Gurkirt Singh, Suman Saha, Michael Sapienza, Philip HS Torr, and Fabio Cuzzolin. Online real-time
  multiple spatiotemporal action localisation and prediction. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf.
  on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.

Deqing Sun, Xiaodong Yang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Jan Kautz. PWC-Net: Cnns for optical flow
  using pyramid, warping, and cost volume. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2018.

Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. RAFT: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In Proc. of
  the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.

Narek Tumanyan, Assaf Singer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. DINO-Tracker: Taming DINO for
  self-supervised point tracking in a single video. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer
 Vision (ECCV), 2024.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

Mel Vecerik, Carl Doersch, Yi Yang, Todor Davchev, Yusuf Aytar, Guangyao Zhou, Raia Hadsell,
 Lourdes Agapito, and Jon Scholz. RoboTAP: Tracking arbitrary points for few-shot visual imitation.
 In Proc. IEEE International Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023.

Qianqian Wang, Yen-Yu Chang, Ruojin Cai, Zhengqi Li, Bharath Hariharan, Aleksander Holynski,
  and Noah Snavely. Tracking everything everywhere all at once. In Proc. of the IEEE International
  Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.

Xiang Wang, Shiwei Zhang, Zhiwu Qing, Yuanjie Shao, Zhengrong Zuo, Changxin Gao, and Nong
  Sang. OadTR: Online action detection with transformers. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf.
  on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.

Zhongdao Wang, Liang Zheng, Yixuan Liu, Yali Li, and Shengjin Wang. Towards real-time multi-
  object tracking. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuxi Xiao, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Nan Xue, Sida Peng, Yujun Shen, and Xiaowei Zhou.
  SpatialTracker: Tracking any 2D pixels in 3D space. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Mingze Xu, Mingfei Gao, Yi-Ting Chen, Larry S Davis, and David J Crandall. Temporal recurrent
 networks for online action detection. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision
 (ICCV), 2019.
Mingze Xu, Yuanjun Xiong, Hao Chen, Xinyu Li, Wei Xia, Zhuowen Tu, and Stefano Soatto. Long
 short-term transformer for online action detection. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Jinrong Yang, Songtao Liu, Zeming Li, Xiaoping Li, and Jian Sun. Real-time object detection for
   streaming perception. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
   2022a.
Le Yang, Junwei Han, and Dingwen Zhang. Colar: Effective and efficient online action detection by
  consulting exemplars. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2022b.
Yu Yao, Mingze Xu, Yuchen Wang, David J Crandall, and Ella M Atkins. Unsupervised traffic
  accident detection in first-person videos. In Proc. IEEE International Conf. on Intelligent Robots
  and Systems (IROS), 2019.
Haoji Zhang, Yiqin Wang, Yansong Tang, Yong Liu, Jiashi Feng, Jifeng Dai, and Xiaojie Jin.
  Flash-VStream: memory-based real-time understanding for long video streams. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.08085, 2024.
Zhu Zhang, Chang Zhou, Jianxin Ma, Zhijie Lin, Jingren Zhou, Hongxia Yang, and Zhou Zhao.
  Learning to rehearse in long sequence memorization. In Proc. of the International Conf. on
  Machine learning (ICML), 2021.
Yue Zhao and Philipp Krähenbühl. Real-time online video detection with temporal smoothing
  transformers. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.
Yang Zheng, Adam W Harley, Bokui Shen, Gordon Wetzstein, and Leonidas J Guibas. PointOdyssey:
  A large-scale synthetic dataset for long-term point tracking. In Proc. of the IEEE International
  Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Xingyi Zhou, Anurag Arnab, Shyamal Buch, Shen Yan, Austin Myers, Xuehan Xiong, Arsha Nagrani,
  and Cordelia Schmid. Streaming dense video captioning. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Xizhou Zhu, Weijie Su, Lewei Lu, Bin Li, Xiaogang Wang, and Jifeng Dai. Deformable DETR:
  Deformable transformers for end-to-end object detection. In Proc. of the International Conf. on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendices
A    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Tracking Any Point: Point tracking, presents significant challenges, particularly for long-term
tracking where maintaining consistent tracking through occlusions is difficult. PIPs (Harley et al.,
2022) was one of the first approaches to address this by predicting motion through iterative updates
within temporal windows. TAP-Vid (Doersch et al., 2022) initiated a benchmark for evaluation.
TAPIR (Doersch et al., 2023) improved upon PIPs by refining initialization and incorporating
depthwise convolutions to enhance temporal accuracy. BootsTAPIR (Doersch et al., 2024) further
advanced TAPIR by utilizing student-teacher distillation on a large corpus of real-world videos.
In contrast, CoTracker (Karaev et al., 2024b) introduced a novel approach by jointly tracking
multiple points, exploiting spatial correlations between points via factorized transformers. Differently,
TAPTR (Li et al., 2024b) adopted a design inspired by DETR (Carion et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021),
drawing parallels between object detection and point tracking. DINO-Tracker (Tumanyan et al.,
2024) took a different route, using DINO as a foundation for test-time optimization, whose tracking
capabilities have been shown (Aydemir et al., 2024) to be one of the best among foundation models.
TAPTRv2 (Li et al., 2024a), the successor to TAPTR, builds on its predecessor by incorporating
offsets predicted by the deformable attention module. While these models calculate point-to-region
similarity for correlation, LocoTrack (Cho et al., 2024) introduced a region-to-region similarity
approach to address ambiguities in matching. Recently, CoTracker3 (Karaev et al., 2024a) combined
the region-to-region similarity method from LocoTrack with the original CoTracker architecture and
utilized pseudo-labeled real-world data during training to further enhance performance.
However, all these models are designed for offline tracking, assuming access to all frames within a
sliding window (Karaev et al., 2024b) or the entire video (Doersch et al., 2023; 2024). Conversely,
MFT (Neoral et al., 2024), which extends optical flow to long-term scenarios, can be adapted for
online point tracking tasks, although it does not belong to the point tracking family. Among point
tracking approaches, models with online variants (Doersch et al., 2024; 2023) are re-trained with
a temporally causal mask to process frames sequentially on a frame-by-frame basis, despite being
originally designed for offline tracking. In contrast, we explicitly focus on online point tracking by
design, enabled by novel memory modules to capture temporal information. Additionally, many of
these models use a regression objective, originally developed for optical flow (Teed & Deng, 2020),
while we introduce a new paradigm based on patch classification and refinement.
Another line of research, orthogonal to ours, explores leveraging scene geometry for point tracking.
SpatialTracker (Xiao et al., 2024) extends CoTracker to the 3D domain by tracking points in three-
dimensional space, while OmniMotion (Wang et al., 2023) employs test-time optimization to learn a
canonical representation of the scene. Concurrent work DynOMO (Seidenschwarz et al., 2025) also
uses test-time optimization, utilizing Gaussian splats for online point tracking.
Causal Processing in Videos: Online, or temporally causal models rely solely on current and
past frames without assuming access to future frames. This is in contrast to current practice in
point tracking with clip-based models, processing frames together. Causal models are particularly
advantageous for streaming video understanding (Yang et al., 2022a; Zhou et al., 2024), embodied
perception (Yao et al., 2019), and processing long videos (Zhang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2021),
as they process frames sequentially, making them well-suited for activation caching. Due to its
potential, online processing has been studied across various tasks in computer vision, such as pose
estimation (Fan et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2019), action detection (Xu et al., 2019; De Geest et al., 2016;
Kondratyuk et al., 2021; Eun et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2021; Zhao & Krähenbühl,
2022; Xu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022a), temporal action localization (Buch et al., 2017; Singh
et al., 2017), object tracking (He et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020), video captioning (Zhou et al., 2024),
and video object segmentation (Cheng & Schwing, 2022; Liang et al., 2020).
In causal models, information from past context is commonly propagated using either sequential
models (De Geest et al., 2016), which are inherently causal, or transformers with causal attention
masks (Wang et al., 2021). However, these models often struggle to retain information over long
contexts or face expanded memory requirements when handling extended past contexts. To address
this, some approaches introduce memory modules for more effective and efficient handling of


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


complex tasks. For example, LSTR (Xu et al., 2021) separates past context as long-term and short-
term memories for action detection, while XMem (Cheng & Schwing, 2022) incorporates a sensory
memory module for fine-grained information in video object segmentation. Long-term memory-based
modeling is also applied beyond video understanding (Balazevic et al., 2024), including tasks like
long-sequence text processing and video question answering (Zhang et al., 2021). We also employ
an attention-based memory mechanism, which is specialized in point tracking with two types of
memory; one focusing on spatial local regions around points, and another on broader context.

B     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

B.1   T RAINING D ETAILS

We train our model for 150 epochs, equivalent to approximately 50K iterations, using a batch size of
32. The model is optimized using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) on 32 × A100
64GB GPUs, with mixed precision. The learning rate is set to a maximum of 5 × 10−4 , following a
cosine decay schedule with a linear warmup period covering 5% of the total training time. A weight
decay of 1 × 10−5 is applied, and gradient norms are clipped at 1.0 to ensure stable training. Input
frames are resized to 384 × 512 using bilinear interpolation before processing.
For training, we utilize entire clips of length 24 from TAP-Vid Kubric. We adopt the data augmentation
techniques from CoTracker (Karaev et al., 2024b), including random cropping to a size of 384 × 512
from the original 512 × 512 frames, followed by random Color Jitter and Gaussian Blur. Each
training sample includes up to N = 480 points. We apply random key masking with a 0.1 ratio
during attention calculations for memory read operations throughout training.
For the training loss coefficients, we set λ to 3. During training, we clip the offset loss to the stride S
to prevent large errors from incorrect patch classifications and stabilize the loss. Deep supervision
is applied to offset head (Φoff ), and the average loss across layers is used. We set the softmax
temperature τ to 0.05 in patch classification. We set the visibility threshold to 0.8 for all datasets
except RGB-Stacking, where it is set to 0.5 due to its domain-specific characteristics, consisting of
simple, synthetic videos.


Figure 9: Details of Different Modules. This figure describes the details for modules in our model:
Query Decoder (Φq-dec ), Offset Head (Φoff ), Query Update Module (Φq-up ), Spatial Memory Write
Module (Φq-wr ), and Visibility Head (Φvis ).


B.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

All of our modules consist of either a Self-Attention Block, Cross-Attention Block, or Deformable
Cross-Attention Block. Each block includes multi-head self-attention, multi-head cross-attention, or
multi-head deformable cross-attention, followed by a 2-layer feed-forward network with a hidden
dimension expansion ratio of 4. Each multi-head attention uses 8 heads, while deformable multi-
head attention operates with 4 levels, sampling 4 points per head. We extract multi-level feature


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Figure 11: Multiscale Similarity Calculation. This figure
                                         illustrates the detailed process of computing multiscale simi-
Figure 10: Re-ranking Module.            larity between a given query qt and a feature map ht . The
This figure describes the detailed       different levels of the feature map (hlt ) are generated by ap-
architecture of re-ranking module        plying bilinear downsampling at various scales.
(Φrank ).

maps by downsampling the input feature map and set the feature dimension D to 256. Following
CoTracker (Karaev et al., 2024b), we add a global support grid of size 20 × 20 during inference.
Visual Encoder (Φvis-enc ): We use the ViT-Adapter (Chen et al., 2022b) with DINOv2 ViT-
S/14 (Oquab et al., 2024; Käppeler et al., 2024) as the backbone. The DINOv2 inputs are resized
to 378 × 504, as the default input size of 384 × 512 is not divisible by the patch size of 14. The
backbone outputs, with a dimension of 384, are projected to D using a single linear layer.
Query Decoder (Φq-dec ): Query Decoder is shown in Fig. 9, first block. We set the number of layers
to 3. Positional embedding γ c from the context memory is applied only to the keys, not the values,
ensuring time-invariance in the queries while enabling the model to differentiate between time steps
during attention score calculation.
Offset Prediction (Φoff ): Second block in Fig. 9 shows the architecture of the offset prediction head.
We set the number of layers to 3. Following DETR (Carion et al., 2020), we normalize the queries
before projecting them through a linear layer, as the per-layer loss is calculated for the offset head.
Query Update (Φq-up ): The query update is detailed in third block of Fig. 9. In both attention blocks,
we mask items corresponding to frames where points are predicted as occluded.
Spatial Memory Write (Φq-wr ): The spatial memory writer module is depicted in the fourth block
of Fig. 9. We set the number of layer to 3.
Visibility Head (Φvis ): The visibility head is shown in the last block of Fig. 9. We decode the query
feature around the predicted point and concatenate it with the input query. Two separate linear layers
are then applied to predict visibility and uncertainty.
Re-ranking Module (Φre-rank ): The re-ranking module is detailed in Fig. 10. Initially, the given query
qdec
  t  is decoded around the top-k points using a Deformable Cross-Attention block with 3 layers. The
resulting features are concatenated with the input query feature to directly incorporate information
from earlier stages. These correspond to the top-k features, i.e. qtop
                                                                   t   ∈ RN ×k×D . Next, these features
are fused into the input query through a single Cross-Attention block, followed by a separate linear
layer. The output is concatenated with the input once more, and a final linear transformation reduces
the dimensionality from 2D to D (left upper arrow). Additionally, the uncertainties for these top-k
locations are predicted directly from qtop
                                       t   using a linear layer (right upper arrow).
Multiscale Similarity Calculation: The multiscale similarity calculation used in patch classification
                                                                           H   W
(Section 2.2.3) is detailed in Fig. 11. Starting with a feature map ht ∈ R S × S ×D , we generate 4-
                                                                               H       W
scale representations by applying bilinear downsampling, resulting in hlt ∈ R 2l ·S × 2l ·S ×D . For each
scale, cosine similarity is calculated between the feature maps and any query feature qt , producing
similarity maps at the respective scales. These maps are then upsampled back to the resolution of


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Quantitative Results on RoboTAP, Dynamic Replica, and BADJA This table shows
results in comparison to the previous work on RoboTAP, Dynamic Replica, and BADJA under
queried first setting. Similar to the main paper, the models are categorized into online and offline
schemes, the former setting grants access to any frame regardless of video length, thus providing a
clear advantage. While online models process one frame at a time, enable frame-by-frame inference.
For training datasets, Kub and Kub-L(ong), refer to the TAP-Vid Kubric dataset with 24-frame and
64-frame videos, respectively; and R indicates the inclusion of a large number of real-world videos,
we highlight these models in gray .
                                                   RoboTAP          Dynamic Replica         BADJA
    Model              Input      Train              x                      vis           seg
                                            AJ ↑    δavg ↑   OA ↑       δ         ↑   δ         ↑ δ 3px ↑
    Offline
    TAPIR              Video    Kub         59.6    73.4     87.0        66.1         66.9         15.2
    TAPTR             Window    Kub         60.1    75.3     86.9        69.5         64.0         18.2
    TAPTRv2           Window    Kub         60.9    74.6     87.7         -            -            -
    SpatialTracker    Window    Kub          -       -        -           -           69.2         17.1
    LocoTrack          Video    Kub         62.3    76.2     87.1        71.4          -            -
    CoTracker3        Window   Kub-L        60.8    73.7     87.1        72.9          -            -
    CoTracker3         Video   Kub-L        59.9    73.4     87.1        69.8          -            -
    BootsTAPIR         Video  Kub + R       64.9    80.1     86.3        69.0          -            -
    CoTracker3        Window Kub-L + R      66.4    78.8     90.8        73.3          -            -
    CoTracker3         Video Kub-L + R      64.7    78.0     89.4        72.2          -            -
    Online
    Online TAPIR       Frame       Kub      59.1     -        -           -            -            -
    Track-On (Ours)    Frame       Kub      63.5    76.4     89.4        73.6         71.9         20.2



the input feature map, H   W
                       S × S × D, using bilinear upsampling. Finally, we compute a weighted
summation of the upsampled maps across all scales using learned coefficients αl . The weighted
summation is implemented as a 1 × 1 convolution without bias.

C    A DDITIONAL C OMPARISONS

Similar to the main paper, we mainly focus on the setting using similar training set to ours, i.e., the
models without using real-world videos.
RoboTAP: We evaluate our model on the RoboTAP dataset (Vecerik et al., 2023), which consists of
265 real-world robotic sequences with an average length of over 250 frames, as shown in Table 4. We
use the same metrics as the TAP-Vid benchmark: AJ, δavg , and OA, with the memory size Ki set to 48.
Our model consistently surpasses existing online and offline models across all metrics. Specifically,
in AJ and δavg , our model outperforms the closest competitor, LocoTrack (which processes the entire
video), by 1.2 and 0.2 points, respectively. Additionally, it exceeds the nearest competitor (TAPTRv2)
in OA by 1.7 points. This demonstrates that our causal memory modules, which enable online
tracking, are capable of effectively capturing the dynamics of long video sequences despite lacking
bidirectional information flow across all frames. It is worth noting that this dataset, which features
textureless objects, presents a significant challenge. Fine-tuning on real-world videos provides
substantial improvements, as learning to track points on textureless objects is particularly difficult, as
highlighted by models tuned on real-world datasets.
Dynamic Replica: We compare to previous work on the Dynamic Replica dataset (Karaev et al.,
2023), a benchmark designed for 3D reconstruction with 20 sequences, each consisting of 300 frames,
as shown in Table 4. Following prior work (Karaev et al., 2024b), we evaluate models using δ vis ,
consistent with the TAP-Vid benchmark. Unlike previous work, we do not report δ occ , as our model
is not supervised for occluded points. The memory size is set to Ki = 48. Despite being an online
model, our model outperforms offline competitors, including those trained on longer sequences
(CoTracker3, 73.6 vs. 72.9) and versions fine-tuned on real-world videos (73.6 vs. 73.3). This
highlights the robustness of our model, particularly in handling longer video sequences effectively.
BADJA: We compare to previous work on the BADJA challenge (Biggs et al., 2019), a dataset
for animal joint tracking comprising 7 sequences, as shown in Table 4. Two metrics are used


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Quantitative Results on PointOdyssey. This table shows results in comparison to the
previous work on PointOdyssey under queried first setting.

                                                                 PointOdyssey
             Model                Input     Train     vis      all
                                                     δavg ↑   δavg ↑    MTE ↓     Survival ↑
             TAP-Net             Frame       Kub       -       23.8      92.0        17.0
             TAP-Net             Frame       PO        -       28.4      63.5        18.3
             PIPs                Window      Kub       -       16.5     147.5        32.9
             PIPs                Window      PO        -       27.3      64.0        42.3
             PIPs++              Window      PO       32.4     29.0       -          47.0
             CoTracker           Window      PO       32.7     30.2       -          55.2
             Track-On (Ours)     Frame       Kub      38.1     34.2     28.8         49.5



for evaluation: δ seg , which measures the proportion of√points within a threshold relative to the
segmentation mask size (specifically, points within 0.2 A, where A is the area of the mask); and
δ 3px , the ratio of points tracked within a 3-pixel range. Given the dataset’s low FPS nature, we kept the
memory size at the original value of 12. Our model achieves state-of-the-art results by a significant
margin, with a 2.7-point improvement in δ seg over SpatialTracker and a 2.0-point improvement in
δ 3px over TAPTR. These results highlight the flexibility of our inference-time memory extension,
enabling the model to adapt effectively to data with varying characteristics.
PointOdyssey: We evaluated our model, trained on TAP-Vid Kubric, on the Point Odyssey
(PO) (Zheng et al., 2023) dataset, which consists of 12 long videos with thousands of frames (up to
4325). The results are presented in Table 5. We adopted four evaluation metrics proposed in Point
            vis
Odyssey: δavg   , which measures the δavg metric from the TAP-Vid benchmark for visible points;
 all
δavg , which calculates δavg for all points, including both visible and occluded ones; MTE (Median
Trajectory Error), computed for all points; and Survival Rate, defined as the average number of
frames until tracking failure (set to 50 pixels). The memory size Ki was set to 96. From the results,
                                                          vis
we observe that PIPs trained on Kubric achieves a δavg         of 16.5, while the same model trained on
PO with a larger window size achieves 27.3 (∼ 65% improvement). Notably, CoTracker does not
report the performance of its model trained on Kubric but instead reports results for a model trained
with sequences of length 56 on PO. These findings highlight the importance of training on PO to
achieve higher performance across models. Our model, trained on Kubric, outperforms CoTracker
                                       vis       all
and PIPs++ trained on PO in both δavg      and δavg  . Interestingly, while training on PO is critical for
other models to achieve strong performance, our model demonstrates robustness by surpassing them
even when trained on a different data distribution. Moreover, despite not being explicitly supervised
                                                           all
for occluded points, our model still achieves superior δavg     . In terms of the Survival Rate, our model
falls behind CoTracker trained on PO, despite its superior δ metrics. This further emphasizes the
importance of training on PO to excel in this specific metric.


D    A DDITIONAL A BLATIONS

Memory Size: We experimented with varying memory sizes, trained with K = 12, and extended
them to different values K = {16, 32, 48, 64, 80, 96} during inference on TAP-Vid DAVIS and TAP-
Vid RGB-Stacking, as shown in Fig. 12. The plot shows the change in AJ compared to the default
training memory size of 12 after extension. Memory sizes reported in Table 1 are marked with crosses.
For DAVIS (blue), performance slightly increases up to a memory size of 48 (64.88 AJ → 65.01 AJ)
but declines beyond that, indicating that excessive memory can negatively impact the model. In
contrast, for RGB-Stacking (orange), memory size plays a more critical role due to the disparity in
video frame counts between training (24 frames) and inference (250 frames), as well as the high FPS
nature of the dataset. Performance consistently improves up to K = 80, yielding a 2.9 AJ increase.
These results highlight that, although the model is trained with a fixed and relatively small memory
size, extending memory during inference is possible to adapt the varying characteristics of different
datasets.
Top-k points: We experimented with varying the number of k points used in re-ranking (Sec. 2.2.3)
on TAP-Vid DAVIS, as shown in Fig. 13. Although the model is trained with a fixed top-k value of


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     3.0       DAVIS
               RGB-St.                                                  64
     2.5
     2.0                                                                62
     1.5
AJ


                                                                  AJ
     1.0                                                                60

     0.5
                                                                        58
     0.0
     0.5                                                                56
           12 16         32      48       64      80      96                  12 4 8   16        32    64
                              Memory Size (Ki)                                                     k
Figure 12: Memory Size. The effect of varying Figure 13: Top-k points. The effect of varying k
extended memory sizes during inference, on TAP- number of top points in ranking module, during
Vid DAVIS and TAP-Vid RGB-Stacking.             inference.


k = 16, this number can be adjusted during inference since the selected points are fused into the
target query via a transformer decoder. The k value reported in Table 1 is marked with cross. The
results indicate that increasing the top-k points up to 16 consistently improves performance. Beyond
16, performance decreases slightly but remains robust, even with larger k values. This demonstrates
that choosing a k value smaller than the optimal number leads to a noticeable performance drop,
emphasizing the importance of appropriately selecting k.
Offset Head and Stride: The offset head is essential for refining patch classification outputs,
enabling more precise localization. Specifically, the offset head allows for precision beyond the patch
size S (stride). In Table 6, we examine the impact of removing the offset head (Φoff ) for two stride
values, S = 4 and S = 8, without utilizing inference-time memory extension. For both values, the
                                                             x
addition of the offset head significantly enhances AJ and δavg  by refining predictions within the local
region. With stride 4, the offset head notably improves δ , while for stride 8, it improves both δ 2px
                                                           2px

and δ 4px . This demonstrates that while patch classification offers coarse localization, the offset head
provides further refinement, achieving pixel-level precision.
Larger stride values risk losing important details necessary for accurate tracking. For instance,
increasing the stride from 4 to 8 results in AJ drops of 12% for TAPIR and 16% for CoTracker, as
reported in their ablation studies. However, our coarse-to-fine approach mitigates the negative effects
of stride 8, leading to only a minimal decline of 4%, highlighting the robustness of our model to
larger stride values.
Note that the model with S = 8 and no offset head (first row) has a higher occlusion accuracy (OA).
A possible reason is the imbalance in the loss, where the visibility loss has a relatively higher impact
compared to the model with an additional offset loss (second row), leading to improved occlusion
accuracy.

Table 6: Offset Head. The effect of removing the offset head (Φoff ) on models with varying strides.
All metrics are higher-is-better.

                                Φoff    Stride   δ 2px   δ 4px        δ 8px     AJ      x
                                                                                       δavg   OA
                                 ✗               37.4    79.0         91.1     51.3    62.9   91.0
                                          8
                                 ✓               66.1    84.0         91.7     62.5    75.8   90.6
                                 ✗               64.3    84.4         92.4     60.1    73.0   90.5
                                          4
                                 ✓               69.3    85.5         92.5     64.9    77.7   90.6



E      A NALYSIS OF S PATIAL M EMORY
To evaluate the effect of spatial memory in the presence of feature drift and inference-time memory
extension, we conduct an experiment across different datasets using a model trained without spatial
memory (Model-C in Table 3), as shown in Table 7. The results indicate that spatial memory


                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Spatial Memory. Comparison of the model’s performance with and without spatial memory
(Ms ), evaluated using the AJ metric across different datasets, with inference-time memory extension
(IME) applied.

                                          Model                                       DAVIS                                   RGB-Stacking        Kinetics        RoboTAP
                                          Full Model                                       65.0                                       71.4         53.9                63.5
                                          - Without Spatial Memory (Ms )                   64.6                                       70.2         53.3                62.1



consistently improves AJ across four datasets: DAVIS, RGB-Stacking, Kinetics, and RoboTAP. The
impact is particularly notable for RGB-Stacking (+1.2 AJ) and RoboTAP (+1.4 AJ), where objects are
less descriptive and often textureless, as both datasets originate from robotics scenarios. This suggests
that spatial memory, which retains information around the local region of previous predictions, helps
mitigate drift and enhances generalization across different scene characteristics.
Additionally, to directly assess the impact of spatial memory (Sec. 2.3) in mitigating feature drift, we
conducted an analysis comparing the tracking performance of the initial feature sampled from the
query frame, qinit , with the query feature updated using spatial memory at frame t, denoted as qinitt  .
For this evaluation, we introduced the new metric of similarity ratio score (ssr ), which measures how
well the updated query features align with the feature at the target point compared to the initial query.
Ideally, qinit
          t    should provide a better starting point for detecting correspondences compared to qinit ,
particularly when the object’s appearance changes significantly. To assess whether qinit     t    is more
similar to the feature at the ground-truth correspondence location than qinit , we calculate the ratio of
their similarity to ground-truth, as a way of quantifying the increase in the similarity after the update:
                                                                                      qinit
                                                                                       t    · sample(ft , pt )
                                                                          ssr (t) =                                                                                                (10)
                                                                                      qinit · sample(ft , pt )

Here, pt represents the location of the ground-truth correspondence point, and ft is the feature map
of the target frame. On the DAVIS dataset, we calculated ssr for visible points, achieving a score of
1.24, indicating that spatial memory introduces a 24% increase in similarity compared to the initial
feature. In Fig. 14, we visualize the similarity scores for different tracks over time for two videos
from the DAVIS dataset. The plot highlights that the similarity increases more significantly toward
the end of the video, where appearance changes are more severe. Moreover, the score is consistently
greater than 1, showing that qinit
                               t   always provides better initialization than qinit in these videos.

                                                                                                                            3.0
                         2.0
Similarity Ratio Score


                                                                                                   Similarity Ratio Score


                         1.8                                                                                                2.5
                         1.6                                                                                                2.0
                         1.4
                                                                                                                            1.5
                         1.2
                         1.0                                                                                                1.0
                               0     10     20    30   40           50   60   70      80      90                                  0          20    40             60          80   100
                                                            Frame                                                                                         Frame


                                                       (a)                                                                                              (b)
Figure 14: Similarity Ratio Score. The similarity ratio score ssr > 1 over frames for different tracks,
demonstrates increased similarity with ground-truth location on the target frame when utilizing spatial
memory.


F                                  FAILURE A NALYSIS

We identify three common failure cases: (i) tracking points on thin surfaces or edges, (ii) fast motion
or scene cuts, and (iii) localization on uniform areas. We visualize examples of these failure cases,


                                                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the average error is higher than 8 pixels for visible frames, in Fig. 15. In the visualizations, our
predictions are represented as dots, while ground-truth correspondences are marked with diamonds.
The line connecting the ground-truth and prediction indicates the error.
Thin Surfaces: Points of interest on thin surfaces and edges may not be well-represented in feature-
level resolution due to the lack of pixel-level granularity. This limitation causes the model to track
incorrect points by missing the actual point of interest. For instance, in the upper row of Fig. 15a,
which shows an example from the DAVIS dataset, the model fails to track a rope and instead tracks
the background, as the precision is insufficient to accurately represent the thin structure. Similarly,
in the bottom row, from the Kinetics dataset, points of interest on a thin surface (e.g. a stick) are
mislocalized, with the model tracking the background instead of the object.
Fast Motion: When the scene content changes rapidly, either due to fast camera motion or scene cuts
(commonly seen in the Kinetics dataset), our model encounters difficulties in localizing previously
tracked points. For instance, in the upper row of Fig. 15b (examples from Kinetics), the model fails
to continue tracking after a large scale change, where the original view in the middle frame becomes
significantly smaller in later frames. In the second row, the model struggles to resume tracking points
after a considerable number of frames where the scene has completely changed due to a scene cut.
Uniform Areas: Localization on uniform or highly similar areas is more challenging, likely because
most objects in the training dataset exhibit descriptive textures (Doersch et al., 2024). While our
model can approximately localize points, it struggles with precision in these scenarios. This limitation
is illustrated inFig. 15c, using an example from the RoboTAP dataset.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 (a) Failure cases due to thin surfaces.


                           (b) Failure cases due to fast motion or scene cuts.


                       (c) Failure cases due to mis-localization on uniform areas.

Figure 15: Common Failure Cases. We identify three common failure cases: tracking points on
thin surfaces (a), fast motion or scene cuts (b), and localization on uniform areas (c). We visualize
predictions with average error higher than 8 pixels, where predictions are shown as dots and ground-
truth correspondences are marked with diamonds. Different tracks are depicted in distinct colors.


                                                   23
