Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DAM : A N E MBODIED C AUSAL AGENT IN O PEN -
W ORLD E NVIRONMENTS
 Shu Yu1,2,3 , Chaochao Lu1,2†
 1
  Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 Fudan University
 {yushu,luchaochao}@pjlab.org.cn



                                               A BSTRACT
              In open-world environments like Minecraft, existing agents face challenges in
              continuously learning structured knowledge, particularly causality. These chal-
              lenges stem from the opacity inherent in black-box models and an excessive
              reliance on prior knowledge during training, which impair their interpretability
              and generalization capability. To this end, we introduce A DAM, An emboDied
              causal Agent in Minecraft, which can autonomously navigate the open world,
              perceive multimodal context, learn causal world knowledge, and tackle complex
              tasks through lifelong learning. A DAM is empowered by four key components:
              1) an interaction module, enabling the agent to execute actions while recording
              the interaction processes; 2) a causal model module, tasked with constructing
              an ever-growing causal graph from scratch, which enhances interpretability and
              reduces reliance on prior knowledge; 3) a controller module, comprising a plan-
              ner, an actor, and a memory pool, using the learned causal graph to accomplish
              tasks; 4) a perception module, powered by multimodal large language models,
              enabling A DAM to perceive like a human player. Extensive experiments show
              that A DAM constructs a nearly perfect causal graph from scratch, enabling ef-
              ficient task decomposition and execution with strong interpretability. Notably, in
              the modified Minecraft game where no prior knowledge is available, A DAM excels
              with remarkable robustness and generalization capability. A DAM pioneers a novel
              paradigm that integrates causal methods and embodied agents synergistically. Our
              project page is at https://opencausalab.github.io/ADAM.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Embodied agents exploring open-world environments mark a critical frontier in artificial intelligence
(AI) research (Cassell, 2000; Xia et al., 2018; Savva et al., 2019). The ultimate goal is to build
generally capable agents (GCAs) (Team et al., 2021) that can autonomously perform a broad range
of tasks through perception, learning, and interaction (Mnih et al., 2015; Xi et al., 2023; Park et al.,
2023). Minecraft (Nebel et al., 2016) is a globally renowned 3D video game, where players need to
master complex crafting recipes (e.g., planks + sticks → wood pickaxe ) and gather
resources (e.g., mining cobblestone with wood pickaxe ), progressively unlocking new
items in the technology tree. The substantial freedom and precise simulation of physical laws in
Minecraft render it an exceptional platform for researching GCAs.
In Minecraft, two primary approaches for developing GCAs have been extensively explored: rein-
forcement learning (RL)-based (Lin et al., 2021; Baker et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022; Mao et al.,
2022; Hafner et al., 2023) and large language model (LLM)-based (Wang et al., 2023a; Zhu et al.,
2023; Qin et al., 2023a; Nottingham et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c;d). Specifically, RL agents learn
through interactions and updating their black-box model weights, which poses challenges for inter-
pretability, efficiency, and generalization. On the other hand, LLM-based agents possess and rely on
rich prior knowledge of both virtual games and real world (Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a;
Achiam et al., 2023). Their reliance on omniscient data (e.g., GPS coordinates, voxel blocks, biome,
etc., which are not explicitly observable by the player) (Wang et al., 2023a; Zhu et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023d) presents challenges for generalization and human gameplay observation alignment.
     †
         Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Technology

                                                                                 Diamond Age


                                                                                   Iron Age



                                                                                   Stone Age


                                                                                   Wood Age



                                                                                               Steps



           (a)                 (b)                                   (c)


Figure 1: (a) The technology tree for acquiring diamonds in the Minecraft game. A DAM can
precisely discover item dependencies from scratch. (b) Modified Minecraft technology tree, where
the prior knowledge from the Internet or Wiki does not align with the actual game dynamics. Red
arrows denote removed dependencies, while blue arrows denote added dependencies. (c) In the game
setting shown in (b), A DAM maintains the ability to learn the correct causal graph and successfully
obtains diamonds , whereas other methods can only acquire raw iron within the step limit,
and A DAM achieves a 4.6× speedup in obtaining raw iron compared to the SOTA.


To address these issues, we propose A DAM, An emboDied causal Agent in Minecraft, which can
autonomously navigate the open world, perceive multimodal context, learn causal world knowledge,
and tackle complex tasks through lifelong learning. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2, A DAM is
composed of four key modules: (1) Interaction module, which enables the agent to execute actions
from the action space and processes the agent’s observable information into formatted records. (2)
Causal model module, which includes two causal discovery (CD) methods. LLM-based CD utilizes
interaction records to make causal assumptions. Intervention-based CD refines these assumptions
to derive a causal subgraph. Multiple causal subgraphs are integrated into a comprehensive causal
graph (i.e., technology tree). (3) Controller module, which includes a planner, an actor, and a
memory pool. The planner can utilize the causal graph to perform task decomposition. The actor
uses the decomposed subtasks for action choosing. The memory pool ensures the long-term context
dependence. (4) Perception module, which is driven by multimodal LLMs (MLLMs), enabling
A DAM to perceive its surroundings without relying on omniscient data, thereby achieving human-
like gameplay observation.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that A DAM achieves a 2.2× speedup compared to the SOTA in
the task of obtaining diamonds . In scenarios where crafting recipes are modified (Fig. 1b),
only A DAM maintains the ability to obtain diamonds , while other methods can only acquire
raw iron within the step limit, and A DAM achieves a 4.6× speedup in obtaining raw iron
compared to the SOTA (Fig. 1c). A DAM demonstrates strong interpretability through constructing
a nearly perfect technology tree (Fig. 1a) from scratch, whereas other methods exhibit at least
30% errors or omissions. Meanwhile, in tasks requiring environmental perception, A DAM closely
aligns with human gameplay observation without relying on omniscient metadata, while maintaining
comparable performance to methods that utilize such data.
Overall, our contributions are as follows:

   (1) We introduce A DAM, an embodied causal agent that can autonomously navigate the open
       world, perceive multimodal context, learn causal world knowledge, and tackle complex tasks
       through lifelong learning.
   (2) We address the limitations of existing embodied agents. Our A DAM demonstrates strong
       robustness without relying on prior knowledge or omniscient metadata used by other LLM-
       based agents, while aligns human gameplay observation during exploration.
   (3) We pioneer the integration of causal methods into open-world embodied agents, al-
       lowing the agent to organize the learned knowledge into a rigorous causal graph, thereby
       demonstrating excellent interpretability.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Task                             Interaction                                                           Causal Model
                 New
                        Action Space                                                                                           Causal Graph
                 Task                              Recording                                 LLM-based CD

                                                                                            Causal Assumptions
                                            Sampling
                        Item Space                   +
                                                                                                                        Synthesize
                                                                                                                           Causal Relations
                                                     +
                                                                                          Intervention-based CD
                                                                                 ling
                        Perception                                          mp        g
                                                                          Sa ordin
                                                                             e c
                                                                           R
                                                                                                                Controller
                                         Pixels                        Inventory Info
                                                                                                                 Planner
                                                                                                   Subtask

                                                                          Action                       Action                    New Item in
                            MLLM                                                           Actor                     Memory       Inventory
                                                  Visual Description                                Action History
                                                                   Add New Items


Figure 2: Four key modules of A DAM. The interaction module executes actions in the environment
according to the task and records the processes. The causal model module identifies the causal
relationship between items and actions to construct an ever-growing causal graph. The controller
module implements task execution based on the learned causal graph. The perception module
aligns the agent’s gameplay observation more closely with human.


    (4) We improve the CD performance by employing embodied agent-driven interventions,
        which enhances the accuracy and efficiency of CD compared to existing methods without
        interventions.


2     P RELIMINARIES

Causal graphical models (CGMs). A CGM represents the structure of causality within a system
(Peters et al., 2017) by detailing the direct causal relationships among a set of variables X1 , . . . , Xn .
It is characterized by a distribution over these variables and is associated with a directed acyclic
graph (DAG), known as a causal graph. In this graph, each node corresponds to a variable, and each
directed edge signifies a direct causal relation from Xi to Xj .

Causal discovery from interventions. Causal Discovery (CD) (Spirtes et al., 2001; Pearl, 2009;
Peters et al., 2017; Glymour et al., 2019) is a fundamental process to infer causal relationships from
data. The relationships are typically represented in the form of a causal graph. While observational
data reveals correlations, interventions allow us to analyze causal dependencies between variables.
Specifically, interventions alter the distribution of variables (e.g., the initial system state) during
experimental sampling, which serves as a gold standard for CD (Eberhardt & Scheines, 2007). By
observing their effects, we can identify causal relationships rather than merely correlations.

3     M ETHOD

In this section, we begin with the basic notations and definitions in our work (Sec. 3.1). Then, we
give an overview of our A DAM framework (Sec. 3.2). Next, we detail the four modules of A DAM:
interaction module (Sec. 3.3), causal model module (Sec. 3.4), controller module (Sec. 3.5), and
perception module (Sec. 3.6).

3.1   N OTATIONS AND D EFINITIONS

We first introduce several key notations and definitions in our work. Sets are denoted by uppercase
letters, and their elements by lowercase letters.
Inventory: The set It of items possessed by the agent at any step t. Initialization: At the initial-
ization of Minecraft instances, the initial inventory I0 can be specified by the agent. Action Space:
The set A of actions whose names (e.g., gatherWoodLog) are replaced by letters and invisible.


                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      Interaction Module
  Initial Action Space             Sampling                           Recording              Action Space


 Initial Observed Items                                                                      Observed Items

                           Take Action        End Inventory


                          Initial Inventory                       Sampling Record × N



                          Environment Step                           Fail                           Succeed
                                                                                        CD


Figure 3: The interaction module has two core functionalities: sampling and recording. Sam-
pling involves executing actions in the environment, and recording involves processing and docu-
menting the observable information. For instance, the initial action space is {gatherWoodLog},
whose name is not exposed to A DAM and is denoted as {a} here (Note that, the original notation
{gatherWoodLog} is retained in the figure for the illustrative purpose.). The initial observed item
space is ∅. After executing a for one step, logs ( ) are obtained. A sampling can be represented as
(a, ∅, { }), where ∅ is the initial inventory and { } is the inventory after this step. The result is
recorded as R = (∅, ∅, { }), where the first ∅ is the initial inventory and the second ∅ indicates
that no items are consumed, and { } represents the items that are obtained. After sampling N
times, data Da = {R1 , . . . , RN } is provided to the causal model module for CD. If the causal rela-
tion failed to be identified, resampling on a occurs; if successful, new actions like craftPlanks
are enabled by the acquisition of , and the observed item space is updated to { }.


A DAM must independently discover the effects of these actions. Movement Space: The set M
of basic movements whose names (e.g., moveForward, moveBackward) are visible to A DAM.
Step: The agent takes an action a in the environment. A step ends either when action completes or
when execution times out. Observed Item Space: The set S of all items that A DAM has encoun-
tered. Initially, S is empty. Environmental Factors: The set E of environment conditions (e.g.,
biome, surrounding block types). Task: Denoted by the tuple (Igoal , E), a task is accomplished at
step t if Igoal ⊆ It and the factors E are present within a certain distance around the agent.

3.2     OVERVIEW

A DAM comprises four modules as depicted in Fig. 2, which can be extended to other open-world
environments, as discussed in Appendix F. Given a task (Igoal , E), the interaction module enables
the agent to execute each action a and records data Da . This data is then utilized by the causal
model module, which employs LLM-based CD to make causal assumptions and intervention-based
CD to refine these assumptions into causal subgraphs. These subgraphs are integrated into a causal
graph (i.e., technology tree). Once the causal graph G contains all required items Igoal in the task,
the controller module executes the task from an empty inventory, aided by visual descriptions from
the perception module. Newly discovered items enable the execution of new unknown actions and
the CD on these actions. This iterative process ensures the lifelong learning through continuous
engagement and adaptation.

3.3     I NTERACTION M ODULE

The interaction module (Fig. 3) enables the agent to execute actions for sampling and records ob-
servable information. Initially, the action space A contains one element gatherWoodLog, which
is the most basic action in Minecraft and a common setup for Minecraft agents (Wang et al., 2023a).
As the agent acquires certain new items, new actions are enabled in A. For example, the action of
mining becomes available only after the agent obtains a mining tool (e.g., a wooden pickaxe ).
By continuously collecting data on each action and coordinating with other modules, the nodes on
the technology tree are progressively discovered by the agent.

Sampling. This involves initiating a Minecraft instance with all observed items S as the initial
inventory I0 , and then executing action a to observe the agent’s inventory I1 after this step. The
quantity of each item in S and I1 is recorded. This sampling, represented as (a, S, I1 ), is performed


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Prompt                                                                                     Causal Assumption

 Role Playing                                                                                       Depicted as
 You are a Minecraft game analysis assistant. You are good at
 inferring causal relationships between actions and items.

 Problem Setting
 Our task is to infer the causal relationship.                                   Inference Result
 An action is a single, atomic action.                                                          Cause:[     ,    ,action       ]
 Letter Mapping
                                                                                                Effect:[    ]
 Items involved in the game include:
 'a': 'log' , 'b': 'planks' , 'c': 'crafting_table'          ,
                                                                      Action serves as an trivial cause
 Few-shot Prompting                                                   and is added to the cause
 I will give you some examples
 1. Consumed items: ; Added items: redstone                                      Matching
 Your inference: Because there is no item                                        'a': 'log' , 'b': 'planks'      , 'c': 'crafting_table'        ,
 consumption. Redstone is a higher-level mineral,
 So my answer is:                                                                                                  Cause:[     ,     ]
 Cause; Effect={k; m}      Number of shot                                        Cause:[a, c];Effect:[b]
                                                                                                                   Effect:[    ]
 Data
 1. Initial items:                       {       ,       }
    Consumed items:                          {       }
    Added items:                             {       }
                                                                                 LLM Raw Answer
                                         {       ,       }                       Because logs are comsumed and planks are get.
 N. Initial items:
                                             {       }                           this is a "Crafting" task. In addition to raw materials, the
    Consumed items:                                              LLM inference
    Added items:                                                                 "Crafting" task also requires crafting_table ('c').
                                             {       }
                                                                                 So my answer is:
 Your inference:                                                                 Cause:[a, c];Effect:[b]



Figure 4: LLM-based CD performs causal reasoning under the guidance of the prompt. Role Playing
assigns an analysis assistant role to the LLM. Problem Setting provides the reasoning task. Letter
Mapping maps the item names to letters for the accurate output. Few-shot Prompting provides
examples for chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022b) reasoning. Data Da is presented in the same form
as the few-shot examples. The output of LLM serves as the causal assumption.


N times, focusing on one specific action at a time. Due to the same configuration of these N
samplings, parallelization is available and accelerates the exploration.

Recording. This involves processing the results of samplings and documenting them. For the sam-
pling (a, S, I1 ), consumed items are denoted by X, which includes items with decreased quantities
and items that are present in S but absent in I1 . Conversely, obtained items are denoted by Y ,
which includes items with increased quantities and items that newly appear in I1 . A single record is
denoted as R = (S, X, Y ). Such N records on action a collectively form data Da = {R1 , . . . , RN }.

3.4     C AUSAL M ODEL M ODULE

The causal model module uses data Da to infer causal relationships and constructs causal subgraphs
for each action a. These subgraphs are then integrated into a comprehensive causal graph.
A causal relationship is a stable and repeatable dependence in any step, where the agent takes an
action a and the acquisition of items E (effect items) relies on the items C (cause items) the agent
possessed before the step. Since the technology tree focuses on new item acquisition, causal relations
where no items are obtained do not contribute to the technology tree.
In the causal model module, LLM-based CD makes assumptions on the causal relationships, which
effectively reduces the number of item nodes that need to be confirmed in the causal subgraph
and achieves acceleration. Then, intervention-based CD refines these assumptions and accurately
constructs causal subgraphs. We also detail our optimization techniques employed in this module.

LLM-based CD. The input to LLM-based CD (Fig. 4) is the data Da containing N records, and
the output is a causal assumption, which consists of cause items C and effect items E. The prompt is
designed with five components: (1) Role Playing, which assigns a specific role to the LLM. In this


                                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


context, the LLM serves as a causal analysis assistant, dedicated to extracting causal relationships
from data. (2) Problem Setting, which provides the reasoning task and the fundamental concepts
of the environment. We avoid introducing specific environmental knowledge for generalization. (3)
Letter Mapping, which involves mapping item names to letters, a simplification that facilitates
the formatted output. (4) Few-shot Examples, which involves providing the LLM with several
reasoning examples in a chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022b) style, including example questions,
the reasoning processes, and the expected answering format. The examples are independent of the
technology tree, thus preventing the introduction of prior knowledge. (5) Data Da , which consists
of N records from the interaction module, and is formatted consistently with the few-shot examples.

Intervention-based CD. Intervention                                        Intervention-based CD
is a method to experimentally verify
                                                  Causal Assumption
causal relationships among variables.                                          Can still obtain   Update
Intervention-based CD (Fig. 5) can refine
the causal assumptions and construct a                                             is removed
highly accurate causal graph.
                                                        do(     =0)      do(         =0)                   Save causal subgraph
Before interventions, it has to be con-                       Intervention Sampling                        Construct causal graph
firmed that C is a sufficient condition for
E. If C has already lacked the necessary           Can not obtain

items to achieve E, then the vital edges are                          Update
missing and the graph can not be corrected            is confirmed

by excluding redundant edges. Specifi-
cally, by performing sampling (a, C, I1 )
as described in Sec. 3.3, if E is consis-       Figure 5: Intervention-based CD verifies causal as-
tently absent from I1 , the assumption is       sumptions. An example of causal assumption is that,
deemed incorrect, leading the LLM-based         under the action a, log ( ) and crafting table
CD to re-infer the assumption. If these         ( ) contribute to the acquisition of planks ( ).
inferences continue to fail, the interaction    This assumption is denoted as (a, { , }, { }).
module will resample data Da .                  Intervention-based CD will verify each item in { ,
Intervention-based CD performs sam-               }. When removing from the inventory and execut-
plings (a, C \{c}, I1 ) for each item c ∈ C.    ing action a, cannot be obtained, proving that is a
For each item e ∈ E, if there is always         dependency of , and this edge ( → ) is retained in
e ̸∈ I1 within a maximum number of sam-         the causal graph (represented in green). When remov-
plings, then c is the cause of e, and the       ing and executing action a, still can be obtained,
edge c → e is retained. If at least one         which shows that is not a dependency of , and this
sample includes e ∈ I1 , then c is not indis-   edge ( → ) is removed from the causal graph (rep-
pensable for e, and the edge c → e is re-       resented in red). Intervention-based CD results in a
moved. Intervention-based CD yields ac-         corrected causal subgraph. Multiple subgraphs can be
curate causal subgraphs, which are subse-       combined into the technology tree in Minecraft. The
quently integrated into a complete causal       actions are not shown in the technology tree for the
graph.                                          sake of simplicity.

Optimization techniques. (1) Temporal Modeling (TM): Temporal information can help deter-
mine causal direction. Events occurring later cannot be the cause of events occurring earlier. This
eliminates some edges in the causal graph. (2) Subgraph Decomposition (SD): By focusing on the
causal effects of individual actions, the causal model module processes a manageable number of
items (only those in each cause-effect pair) at a time. This significantly reduces the complexity of
the CD process.

3.5   C ONTROLLER M ODULE

During the execution of task (Igoal , E), A DAM begins with an empty inventory (i.e., I0 = ∅) to
ensure fair comparison with other methods. Once all items in Igoal have been obtained in the causal
graph, the controller module (Fig. 6) is responsible for executing the task. If there are newly
discovered items, they will be added to the observed item space S and pend for a new cycle of CD,
thus achieving lifelong learning. The controller module comprises three components as described
below.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              Controller Module
                                     Planner                                                                   Actor
    Causal                                                                                   Image description
                   Formatted prompt                                                                                             Operations
    Graph                                                                                The scene featuring a lush
                                                                                                                    Action Space: [A, B ...]
                action_names = [A, B ...]                                                green forest with trees,
                                                                                                                    Movement Space:
                material_names = [a, b...]   Your Task: Smelting                         mushrooms, and a grassy
                                                                                                                    [Forward, Backward ...]
                material_names_dict =        iron near grass .            Subtasks       area...
                { a: log ,                                            (1) craft planks                               LLM
                   b: planks ,...}
                 Discovered causal graph:              Decompose task (2) craft sticks
                                                 LLM
                 [[A], a]                                                    ...
                 [[B, a], b]                                           (n) smelt iron                            Choose Action B
                 [[C, b], c]
                 ...                                                                                           Memory
Inventory                                                                                Action trajectories        [A, A, B, ...]
                   [   ,     ]
   Info
                                                                                         Inventory at every step [{}, {log}, {log}, ...]
                            Newly discovered item

                 Interaction Module


Figure 6: The controller module comprises three components. The Planner utilizes the reasoning
capabilities of LLMs to decompose the task. It receives the current inventory and the learned causal
graph as input. The Actor leverages LLMs to choose an action a in the the action space A or a
movement m in the movement space M , and executes it in the environment. The Memory records
the step information, including action trajectories and item changes every step.


Planner. The Planner utilizes LLMs to decompose the task with current inventory It at step t and
the learned causal graph. Relying solely on the causal graph is suboptimal as actions may fail or
have side effects. LLMs can fully utilize the inventory information and provide detailed thought
process of the decomposition process, which is passed to the Actor for action selection.

Actor. The Actor leverages LLMs to choose an action a ∈ A or a movement m ∈ M to execute.
It receives the task decomposition from the Planner, the description of game image at this step, and
the records from the Memory. In the task (Igoal , E), the Actor prioritizes obtaining the items Igoal ,
because the agent’s surroundings Et at each step t change during this process, which may affect the
acquisition of E.

Memory. The Memory records observable information during task execution, including action
trajectories and inventory changes at each step. It plays a crucial role in tracking long-term depen-
dencies and facilitates robust task execution.

3.6        P ERCEPTION M ODULE

The perception module utilizes MLLMs for environmental observation, enabling A DAM to perceive
the world without relying on metadata such as the names of surrounding blocks, GPS coordinates,
or biome names, which are typically invisible to human players. This module captures first-person
screenshots between steps, which are processed by MLLMs to generate text descriptions. This text
description is subsequently passed to the Actor in the controller module for action selection.


4        E XPERIMENTS

4.1        E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

In our study, we employ Mineflayer (PrismarineJS, 2023a), a JavaScript-based framework provid-
ing control APIs for the commercial Minecraft (version 1.19) 1 . The encapsulation of Mineflayer
uses the implementation in VOYAGER (Wang et al., 2023a). For visual processing, we utilize
prismarine-viewer (PrismarineJS, 2023b), an API for rendering game scenes from the agent’s per-
spective. A DAM and our baselines all use GPT-4-turbo (gpt-4-0125-preview) (Achiam et al., 2023)
for LLM inference, with the temperature set to 0.3 based on our experiments in Appendix A. For
visual description, we utilize LLaVA-v1.5-13B (Liu et al., 2024) in our perception module.
     1
         https://www.minecraft.net


                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Model                SHD          Model                SHD
                     A DAM                2±2          CDHRL                10 ± 4
                     A DAM w/o TM,SD      19 ± 6       CDHRL w/ SD          6±2
                     Reflexion            24 ± 9       React w/ TM,SD       5±2
                     AutoGPT              24 ± 6       Reflexion w/ TM,SD   4±2
                     Empty Graph          32           AutoGPT w/ TM,SD     4±2

Table 1: Structural Hamming Distance (SHD) between the learned causal graph and the target graph.
For non-embodied agents without built-in interventions, even with our TM and SD (Section 3.4), the
causal graph learned by these agents remains suboptimal. The CD used by CDHRL is based on SDI
(Ke et al., 2019), which incorporates temporal modeling (TM) into its implementation, and still
exhibits over 30% errors or omission, while A DAM can identify a nearly perfect causal graph.


4.2   BASELINES

In the absence of directly comparable works, we select representative methods as baselines and fo-
cus on their comparable aspects, including: (1) ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), which explicitly expresses
the thought processes through chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022b). (2) Reflexion (Shinn
et al., 2024), derived from ReAct, which can reflect on its exploration history. (3) AutoGPT (Sig-
nificant Gravitas), which can autonomously decompose tasks and execute subtasks in a ReAct-style.
Baselines 1–3 can only perform text-based tasks and lack embodied components to interact with the
environment. Hereafter, they are referred to as non-embodied agents, and we have adapted them
with our interaction module for embodied exploration. (4) VOYAGER (Wang et al., 2023a) is an
LLM-based embodied lifelong learning agent in Minecraft, featuring an automatic curriculum aim-
ing to “discover as many diverse things as possible”. We also add our benchmarking tasks (e.g., ob-
taining diamonds ) to the curriculum for oriented explorations, denoted as VOYAGER-Guided.
(5) CDHRL (Peng et al., 2022) introduces an RL agent that constructs hierarchical structures based
on causal relationships. Given that RL agents have disparate action spaces and magnitudes of
difference in episode length compared to LLM-based methods (105 ∼ 108 in DreamerV3 (Hafner
et al., 2023) and DEPS (Wang et al., 2023d) versus 101 ∼ 102 in VOYAGER and our A DAM),
we focus our comparison on the CD component of CDHRL. Detailed discussion of other Minecraft
agents that are not directly comparable can be found in Appendix C.

4.3   M AIN R ESULTS

Interpretability. We evaluate the interpretability of agents by assessing their ability to construct a
causal graph. Structure Hamming Distance (SHD) (Zheng et al., 2024) can quantify the discrepancy
between the learned causal graph and the target graph as presented in Tab. 1. Despite applying
our TM and SD optimization (Section 3.4), non-embodied agents without built-in interventions fail
to achieve the optimal accuracy. For CDHRL, we directly provide A DAM’s sampling data for its
CD. CDHRL performs CD with all nodes in the causal graph, which hampers its performance as
CDHRL shows improved performance when integrated with our SD optimization. Nevertheless,
these competitive methods exhibit at least 30% errors or omissions, whilst A DAM is capable of
learning a nearly perfect causal graph. VOYAGER does not organize knowledge in a causal graph.

Efficiency. Efficiency is evaluated in the original Minecraft as shown in Tab. 2. A DAM achieves a
2.2× speedup compared to the SOTA in the task of obtaining diamonds . The design of parallel
sampling (Section 3.3) significantly boosts A DAM’s exploration efficiency. Due to the absence of
intervention-based CD, non-embodied agents are unable to refine their causal assumptions, there-
fore limiting their exploration speed and confining them to the lower levels of the technology tree.
Additionally, A DAM achieves higher success rate across most tasks compared to other methods.

Robustness. Robustness is evaluated in a modified Minecraft where crafting recipes are altered.
The result is shown in Fig. 1c. In this scenario, there exists a misalignment between the LLM’s
prior knowledge and the actual game dynamics. A DAM successfully obtains diamonds in the
modified Minecraft. The baselines lack a CD approach to learn and organize new causal knowledge
beyond prior, and struggle with complex dependencies. The most advanced item that baseline agents


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Framework                Wooden Tool    Stone Tool                                                               Iron Tool                                                                                      Diamond
         React w/ TM w/ SD        51 ± 19(2/3)   96(1/3)                                                                  N/A (0/3)                                                                                      N/A (0/3)
         Reflexion w/ TM w/ SD    60 ± 27(3/3)   122 ± 56(2/3)                                                            N/A (0/3)                                                                                      N/A (0/3)
         AutoGPT w/ TM w/ SD      49 ± 20(2/3)   103 ± 45(2/3)                                                            N/A (0/3)                                                                                      N/A (0/3)
         VOYAGER                  8 ± 2(3/3)     10 ± 3(3/3)                                                              27 ± 11(3/3)                                                                                   113 ± 41(2/3)
         VOYAGER Guided           7 ± 2(3/3)     11 ± 2(3/3)                                                              24 ± 9(3/3)                                                                                    75 ± 20(2/3)
         A DAM                    23 ± 5(3/3)    33 ± 8(3/3)                                                              53 ± 16(3/3)                                                                                   68 ± 21(3/3)
         A DAM Parallel           12 ± 2(3/3)    18 ± 3(3/3)                                                              29 ± 5(3/3)                                                                                    34 ± 7(3/3)

Table 2: Exploration steps in different tasks. Fewer steps indicates higher efficiency. Each method
has three trials for a maximum length of 200 steps. The success rate is depicted in the parentheses.
A DAM achieves a 2.2× speed compared to the SOTA in the task of obtaining diamonds, with a
higher success rate.

                             VOYAGER         VOYAGER w/o Meta                                                                  A DAM                                                                                               A DAM w/o MLLM
 Find a river                16 ± 8(2/3)     N/A (0/3)                                                                         21 ± 16(2/3)                                                                                        N/A (0/3)
 Gather log near river       36(1/3)         N/A (0/3)                                                                         40 ± 23(2/3)                                                                                        N/A (0/3)
 Smelting iron near grass    N/A (0/3)       N/A (0/3)                                                                         95(1/3)                                                                                             N/A (0/3)

Table 3: Performance of A DAM and VOYAGER in tasks requiring environmental factors E. Each
method has three trials for a maximum length of 100 steps. The success rate is depicted in the paren-
theses. VOYAGER’s performance significantly declines when metadata is not accessible, whereas
A DAM do not rely on metadata. MLLM contributes A DAM’s performance in this type of tasks.


manage to acquire is raw iron . In terms of exploration speed, A DAM achieves a 4.6× speedup
in obtaining raw iron . For more details, please refer to Tab. 7 in the Appendix.

Lifelong learning. A DAM utilizes CD meth-                                                                                                                              log


ods to learn the effects of each action, obtain-                                                                                                                       planks


ing causal subgraphs that contain new items.                                                                    stick                                                                                                                                                          crafting_table


These new items make it possible to perform                          wooden_pickaxe                                               wooden_axe   wooden_hoe          wooden_shovel          wooden_sword         fence              fence_gate


more unknown actions, thereby continually ex-                          cobblestone        coal                                                              sand                   dirt


panding the knowledge of the game world in               stone_axe            stone_hoe          stone_shovel    stone_sword                            stone_pickaxe


a bootstrapping manner and achieves lifelong                                                                                                            furnace                                               raw_iron


learning. A DAM successfully learns a complex
causal graph of all 41 actions we implement, as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 iron_ingot


demonstrated in Fig. 7.                                                                                                                                            iron_axe               iron_hoe       iron_shovel           iron_sword         iron_pickaxe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     raw_gold                                  diamond


Human gameplay alignment. Avoiding the                                                                                                                                                                                        gold_ingot        diamond_sword    diamond_axe       diamond_hoe   diamond_pickaxe   diamond_shovel


use of human-invisible metadata demonstrates                                                                                                                                                             golden_axe           golden_hoe        golden_pickaxe                                                                      golden_shovel   golden_sword


A DAM’s alignment with human gameplay. We
compare VOYAGER, a fully text-based agent Figure 7: The causal graph learned in lifelong
that relies on metadata2 . We test three tasks that learning. A DAM successfully unlocks all 41 ac-
requires environmental factors E. The results tions we implement and discovers accurate causal
are shown in Tab. 3. VOYAGER’s performance relationships.
significantly declines when metadata is not ac-
cessible. A DAM performs well on these tasks relying solely on observable information. Ablation
experiments demonstrate that MLLMs contribute to A DAM’s performance on this type of task.

4.4      A BLATION S TUDIES

Ablation of LLM-based CD Prior knowledge and inference capabilities are key factors in ab-
lating LLM-based CD. Prior knowledge can be ablated in modified games and enhanced through
fine-tuning LLMs on Minecraft knowledge datasets as detailed in Appendix B. Inference capabili-
ties can be ablated by replacing SOTA LLMs with smaller LLMs. Our result in Tab. 4 shows that
A DAM primarily utilizes the reasoning abilities of LLMs rather than relying on prior knowledge.

   2
       The information used by VOYAGER and A DAM is compared in Tab. 5 in the Appendix.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Model                      R&E (success/all)        Model                    R&E (success/all)
      gpt-4-turbo-preview        0.0 (35/35)              gpt-4                    0.1 (35/35)
      gpt-4-turbo-preview†       0.1 (35/35)              gpt-4†                   0.1 (35/35)
      gpt-3.5-turbo              0.2 (34/35)              Llama-2-70B              0.6 (23/35)
      gpt-3.5-turbo†             0.3 (32/35)              Llama-2-70B†             0.9 (16/35)
      Llama-2-70B-finetuned      0.4 (27/35)              Llama-2-13B-finetuned    1.8 (5/35)
      Llama-2-70B-finetuned†     0.9 (15/35)              Llama-2-13B-finetuned†   N/A (0/35)

Table 4: Ablation of LLM-based CD. † means “in a modified environment”. We record the aver-
age number of redundant/error items (represented as R&E) in the causal assumption proposed by
LLM-based CD, and the success rate after the intervention-based CD. LLMs with only strong prior
knowledge but weak inference abilities cannot perform well.


Ablation of intervention-based CD. With-
out intervention-based CD, agents are forced
to rely on exhaustive trials to learn the game
knowledge, significantly impairing their effi-
ciency and effectiveness. Our experimental re-
sults are shown in Fig. 8. Through inter-
ventions, A DAM achieves up to 4.4 × speed
and a higher accuracy compared to the ablated
group.
                                                     Figure 8: Average number of steps and success
                                                     rate to learn the causal subgraphs of “Collecting”
5   R ELATED W ORK                                   actions (e.g., gatherIronOre), which are rep-
                                                     resentative due to higher noise in their sampling
Causality in Agents. The integration of              data. We perform up to 20 steps for each action,
causality (Pearl, 2009; Peters et al., 2017;         and if the CD fails, it is counted as 20. Inter-
Schölkopf, 2022) into agents is primarily aimed     vention contributes up to 4.4× acceleration and
at enhancing the learning efficiency (Méndez-       higher success rate in the exploration.
Molina et al., 2020; Seitzer et al., 2021; Gasse
et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2022). Peng et al. (2022) propose CDHRL to build high-
quality hierarchical structures in complicated environments. Méndez-Molina et al. (2020) employ
the causal models to restrict the search space. Zeng et al. (2023) distinguish agents with causality
in two categories: ones relying on prior causal information and ones that learn causality by causal
discovery algorithms (Spirtes et al., 2000; Sun et al., 2007; Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2009; Zhang et al.,
2011; Peters et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2019). Our work aligns with the latter category and extends to
a wider range of scenarios where prior knowledge is unknown or not available.

LLM/MLLM-Based Agents. Leveraging the generalization capabilities of LLMs (Brown et al.,
2020; Touvron et al., 2023a;b) to empower agent systems with tools (Qin et al., 2023b; Schick et al.,
2024; Shen et al., 2024) is an essential task (Xi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b). Schick et al. (2024)
design a framework to allow LLM to use external APIs to complete tasks. Qin et al. (2023b) build
related benchmarks to evaluate performance in such tasks. In tasks involving interaction with the
environment, Shinn et al. (2024) enhance the agent’s ability through language feedback signals. Wei
et al. (2022b) employ Chain-of-Thought prompting method to optimize the reasoning capabilities
of the LLM agent. However, the hallucination and interpretability challenges (Zhang et al., 2023)
of LLMs also accompany these systems. In this work, we prove that the perspective of causal
architecture can reduce the reliance on priors and enhance the robustness of inferences.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce A DAM, an embodied causal agent in open-world environments. A DAM
innovatively incorporates CD with embodied exploration, significantly improving the accuracy of
CD while enhancing the efficiency and interpretability of embodied exploration. Without relying
on prior knowledge, A DAM demonstrates strong robustness, and its multimodal perception closely
aligns with human approaches. Our work sets a foundation for developing autonomous agents that
can understand and manipulate environments in a causal manner.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank all the anonymous reviewers and area chair for their valuable feedback throughout the
review process. We also appreciate Zhuangyan Zhang for his contribution to some of the artistic
elements in Fig. 2. This work is supported by the Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide detailed descriptions of our experimental setup in Section 4.1, and we use the
same OpenAI API (gpt-4-0125-preview) for all LLM-based methods to ensure comparability
and reproducibility. We have open-sourced the code of A DAM at https://github.com/
OpenCausaLab/ADAM.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24639–24654,
  2022.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Justine Cassell. Embodied conversational interface agents. Communications of the ACM, 43(4):
  70–78, 2000.

Frederick Eberhardt and Richard Scheines. Interventions and causal inference. Philosophy of sci-
  ence, 74(5):981–995, 2007.

Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
  De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied
  agents with internet-scale knowledge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  18343–18362, 2022.

Maxime Gasse, Damien GRASSET, Guillaume Gaudron, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Causal rein-
 forcement learning using observational and interventional data. 2021.

Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, and Peter Spirtes. Review of causal discovery methods based on graph-
  ical models. Frontiers in genetics, 10:524, 2019.

William H Guss, Cayden Codel, Katja Hofmann, Brandon Houghton, Noboru Kuno, Stephanie
 Milani, Sharada Mohanty, Diego Perez Liebana, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Nicholay Topin, et al.
 The minerl 2019 competition on sample efficient reinforcement learning using human priors.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10079, 2019.

William H Guss, Mario Ynocente Castro, Sam Devlin, Brandon Houghton, Noboru Sean Kuno,
 Crissman Loomis, Stephanie Milani, Sharada Mohanty, Keisuke Nakata, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
 et al. The minerl 2020 competition on sample efficient reinforcement learning using human priors.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11071, 2021.

Danijar Hafner. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent capabilities. In The Tenth International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1W0z96MFEoH.

Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anssi Kanervisto, Stephanie Milani, Karolis Ramanauskas, Nicholay Topin, Zichuan Lin, Junyou
  Li, Jianing Shi, Deheng Ye, Qiang Fu, Wei Yang, et al. Minerl diamond 2021 competition:
  Overview, results, and lessons learned. NeurIPS 2021 Competitions and Demonstrations Track,
  pp. 13–28, 2022.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Olexa Bilaniuk, Anirudh Goyal, Stefan Bauer, Hugo Larochelle, Chris Pal,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Learning neural causal models from unknown interventions. CoRR,
  abs/1910.01075, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01075.
Zaijing Li, Yuquan Xie, Rui Shao, Gongwei Chen, Dongmei Jiang, and Liqiang Nie. Optimus-
  1: Hybrid multimodal memory empowered agents excel in long-horizon tasks. CoRR,
  abs/2408.03615, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2408.03615. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2408.03615.
Zichuan Lin, Junyou Li, Jianing Shi, Deheng Ye, Qiang Fu, and Wei Yang. Juewu-mc:
  Playing minecraft with sample-efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.04907, 2021.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.
Hangyu Mao, Chao Wang, Xiaotian Hao, Yihuan Mao, Yiming Lu, Chengjie Wu, Jianye Hao, Dong
  Li, and Pingzhong Tang. Seihai: A sample-efficient hierarchical ai for the minerl competition. In
  Distributed Artificial Intelligence: Third International Conference, DAI 2021, Shanghai, China,
  December 17–18, 2021, Proceedings 3, pp. 38–51. Springer, 2022.
Arquı́mides Méndez-Molina, Ivan Feliciano-Avelino, Eduardo F Morales, and Luis Enrique Sucar.
  Causal based q-learning. Res. Comput. Sci., 149(3):95–104, 2020.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Steve Nebel, Sascha Schneider, and Günter Daniel Rey. Mining learning and crafting scientific
  experiments: a literature review on the use of minecraft in education and research. Journal of
  Educational Technology & Society, 19(2):355–366, 2016.
Kolby Nottingham, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Sameer
  Singh, and Roy Fox. Do embodied agents dream of pixelated sheep: Embodied decision mak-
  ing using language guided world modelling. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume
  202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 26311–26325. PMLR, 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/nottingham23a.html.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings
  of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
Shaohui Peng, Xing Hu, Rui Zhang, Ke Tang, Jiaming Guo, Qi Yi, Ruizhi Chen, Xis-
  han Zhang, Zidong Du, Ling Li, Qi Guo, and Yunji Chen.         Causality-driven hierar-
  chical structure discovery for reinforcement learning. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
  A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9,
  2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  7e9fbd01b3084956dd8a070c7bf30bad-Abstract-Conference.html.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonas Peters, Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal discovery with
  continuous additive noise models. 2014.

Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.

PrismarineJS.  Prismarinejs/mineflayer, 2023a.     URL https://github.com/
  PrismarineJS/mineflayer. https://github.com/PrismarineJS/mineflayer.

PrismarineJS. Prismarinejs/prismarine-viewer, 2023b.      URL https://github.com/
  PrismarineJS/prismarine-viewer.               https://github.com/PrismarineJS/prismarine-
  viewer.

Yiran Qin, Enshen Zhou, Qichang Liu, Zhenfei Yin, Lu Sheng, Ruimao Zhang, Yu Qiao, and Jing
  Shao. Mp5: A multi-modal open-ended embodied system in minecraft via active perception.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07472, 2023a.

Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
  Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world
  apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789, 2023b.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain,
 Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, et al. Habitat: A platform for embodied
 ai research. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp.
 9339–9347, 2019.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can
  teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Bernhard Schölkopf. Causality for machine learning. In Probabilistic and Causal Inference: The
  Works of Judea Pearl, pp. 765–804. 2022.

Maximilian Seitzer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Georg Martius. Causal influence detection for improv-
 ing efficiency in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 22905–22918, 2021.

Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugging-
  gpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.

Significant Gravitas. AutoGPT. URL https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/
  AutoGPT.

Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. MIT
  press, 2000.

Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. MIT press,
  2001.

Xiaohai Sun, Dominik Janzing, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Kenji Fukumizu. A kernel-based causal
  learning algorithm. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, pp.
  855–862, 2007.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuewen Sun, Kun Zhang, and Changyin Sun. Model-based transfer reinforcement learning based on
  graphical model representations. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
  2021.
Xiaojuan Tang, Jiaqi Li, Yitao Liang, Song-Chun Zhu, Muhan Zhang, and Zilong Zheng. Mars: Sit-
  uated inductive reasoning in an open-world environment. CoRR, abs/2410.08126, 2024. doi: 10.
  48550/ARXIV.2410.08126. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.08126.
Open Ended Learning Team, Adam Stooke, Anuj Mahajan, Catarina Barros, Charlie Deck, Jakob
  Bauer, Jakub Sygnowski, Maja Trebacz, Max Jaderberg, Michael Mathieu, et al. Open-ended
  learning leads to generally capable agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.12808, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2302.13971. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya
  Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar
  Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan
  Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen
  Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan
  Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Rodriguez,
  Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
  tuned chat models. CoRR, abs/2307.09288, 2023b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2307.09288. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023b.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Yonggang Jin, Jinbing Hou, Bowei Zhang, Haowei Lin,
  Zhaofeng He, Zilong Zheng, Yaodong Yang, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. JARVIS-1:
  open-world multi-task agents with memory-augmented multimodal language models. CoRR,
  abs/2311.05997, 2023c. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2311.05997. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2311.05997.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan
  and select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task
  agents. CoRR, abs/2302.01560, 2023d. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2302.01560. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.01560.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Zhancun Mu, Haowei Lin, Ceyao Zhang, Xuejie Liu, Qing Li, Anji Liu,
  Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Omnijarvis: Unified vision-language-action tokenization enables
  open-world instruction following agents. CoRR, abs/2407.00114, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
  2407.00114. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.00114.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language mod-
  els. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2022, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=yzkSU5zdwD.

                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December
  9, 2022, 2022b. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html.
Yue Wu, So Yeon Min, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yonatan Bisk, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Amos Azaria,
  Tom M Mitchell, and Yuanzhi Li. Spring: Studying papers and reasoning to play games. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.
Fei Xia, Amir R Zamir, Zhiyang He, Alexander Sax, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese. Gibson
  env: Real-world perception for embodied agents. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9068–9079, 2018.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
Haoqi Yuan, Chi Zhang, Hongcheng Wang, Feiyang Xie, Penglin Cai, Hao Dong, and Zongqing
  Lu. Plan4mc: Skill reinforcement learning and planning for open-world minecraft tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.16563, 2023.
Yan Zeng, Ruichu Cai, Fuchun Sun, Libo Huang, and Zhifeng Hao. A survey on causal reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05209, 2023.
Kun Zhang and Aapo Hyvärinen. On the identifiability of the post-nonlinear causal model. In
  Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 647–
  655, 2009.
Kun Zhang, Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Kernel-based conditional
  independence test and application in causal discovery. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh
  Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 804–813, 2011.
Yue Zhang, Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Lemao Liu, Tingchen Fu, Xinting Huang, Enbo Zhao,
  Yu Zhang, Yulong Chen, et al. Siren’s song in the ai ocean: a survey on hallucination in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01219, 2023.
Yujia Zheng, Biwei Huang, Wei Chen, Joseph Ramsey, Mingming Gong, Ruichu Cai, Shohei
  Shimizu, Peter Spirtes, and Kun Zhang. Causal-learn: Causal discovery in python. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 25(60):1–8, 2024.
Shengyu Zhu, Ignavier Ng, and Zhitang Chen. Causal discovery with reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world
  enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    LLM S ’ PRIOR KNOWLEDGE ON M INECRAFT
We utilize the Minecraft crafting recipes to construct an MC-QA dataset (introduced in Appendix
B), aiming to evaluate the prior knowledge of various LLMs on Minecraft. We test and determine
that 0.3 is the optimal temperature as shown in Fig. 9a. Then we test various LLMs on this dataset.
The GPT series (Ouyang et al., 2022; Achiam et al., 2023) show significantly stronger Minecraft
prior knowledge than other LLMs as shown in Fig. 9b.
Utilizing this dataset to fine-tune LLMs can improve their prior knowledge on Minecraft as shown
in Fig. 9c. On the other hand, by modifying the crafting recipes in Minecraft, we can make the
SOTA LLMs (e.g., GPT series) have no prior of this modified environment. This setup enables us
to distinctively analyze the roles of prior knowledge and inference capability as shown in Fig. 9d,
which serves as the basis of our ablation study.

                                                                                                              Strong Inference

                                                                                                  In modified Game:     In original Game:


                                                                                                        GPT-4-turbo         GPT-4-turbo
                                                                                                        GPT-4               GPT-4

                                                                                                Weak                                      Strong
                                                                                                Prior                                     Prior

                                                                                                        LLaMA2-13B      LLaMA2-13B-finetuned
                                                                                                        LLaMA2-7B       LLaMA2-7B-finetuned


                                                                                                              Weak Inference



             (a)                               (b)                             (c)                                    (d)



Figure 9: (a) LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023b) demonstrates optimal accuracy in answering crafting
recipes at a temperature of 0.3, measured as the ratio of correct answers to total questions. (b) Per-
formance of open-source LLMs and GPT series models, showcasing their inherent prior knowledge
of Minecraft. (c) Illustration of the improvement in performance for open-source LLMs fine-tuned
with the MC-QA dataset. (d) Categorizing the LLMs into four types based on their prior knowledge
of Minecraft recipes and inference capabilities.


B    MC-QA DATASET

                                                     MC-QA Dataset
                   Input prompt:
                   Q: In the game Minecraft, to craft a "diamond_sword", what materials are needed?
                   A: {diamond, stick}

                   Q: In the game Minecraft, to craft a "furnace", what materials are needed?
                   A: {cobblestone}

                   Q: In the game Minecraft, to craft a "birch_chest_boat", what materials are needed?
                   A: {birch_boat, chest}

                   Q: In the game Minecraft, to craft a "acacia_chest_boat", what materials are needed?
                   Answer:
                   A: {acacia_boat, chest}



                        Figure 10: An example of the questions in MC-QA dataset.

Minecraft is an open-world game with a high degree of freedom. Players can freely gather materials
(e.g., log ), mine ore (e.g., iron ore ), craft tools (e.g., wooden pickaxe ), and more.
Crafting recipes (e.g., planks + sticks → wood pickaxe ) are the main knowledge in
the Minecraft game, and serve as the basis for players to climb the technology tree and obtain more
advanced items in the game.


                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given this, LLMs’ mastery of crafting recipes can reflect the strength of their prior knowledge in
Minecraft. We utilize the crafting recipes in Minecraft (version 1.19) to create the MC-QA dataset.
An example of the QA pairs in the dataset is shown in Fig. 10. The questions in this dataset ask for
the crafting ingredients required to obtain higher-level items in the technology tree, and the answers
are the ingredient items. LLMs need to provide their answers in the specified format. The order of
the items in the answer is not required. For each question, we provide 3 examples to help LLMs
understand the QA task and the format of the answers. For situations where there are multiple ways
to craft the same item, we take them all into account to avoid the model being biased toward a fixed
understanding of the game. The dataset contains 754 QA pairs on the knowledge of obtaining items
in Minecraft.


C    AGENT IN M INECRAFT


RL explorations in Minecraft agents focus on the efficient use of data (Baker et al., 2022; Fan et al.,
2022), hierarchical RL design (Lin et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2022), innovative architecture modeling
(Hafner et al., 2023), etc.. Hafner et al. (2023) use world models to achieve a general and scalable
RL without human data or curricula. Much work (Guss et al., 2019; 2021; Kanervisto et al., 2022;
Fan et al., 2022) has made different simplifications for the Minecraft environment to facilitate the RL
agent systems. The MineDojo framework (Fan et al., 2022) provides an internet-scale knowledge
database and game environments for CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021) and RL training. These
efforts provide efficient optimization for agent sampling and interaction, but there is still a gap when
compared to commercial Minecraft games with complete game features like in VOYAGER (Wang
et al., 2023a) and our work.
The reasoning capabilities and rich prior knowledge of LLMs have contributed to much work on
Minecraft agents (Yuan et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Qin et al., 2023a; Notting-
ham et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023d;c). VOYAGER (Wang et al., 2023a) and GITM (Zhu et al.,
2023) use LLMs’ prior knowledge of Minecraft and environment feedback to complete exploration
tasks in a text-based manner. Qin et al. (2023a) leverage MLLMs to introduce visual information as
the contextual basis for action execution. These methods more or less rely on prior knowledge of
Minecraft. Our A DAM shows effectiveness even when the game rules are modified.
There are also agents that operate in non-commercial Minecraft environments and utilize frame-level
control, including Plan4MC (Yuan et al., 2023), DEPS (Wang et al., 2023d), JARVIS-1 (Wang
et al., 2023c), OmniJARVIS (Wang et al., 2024), and Optimus-1 (Li et al., 2024). They need
approximately 104 steps for a task, in contrast to the action-level control in our system, which
involves around 102 steps for a task. Furthermore, these RL methods require training stages, whereas
our system does not involve weight updates. Notably, JARVIS-1 incorporates crafting recipes as an
integral part of the system, utilizing prior knowledge rather than learning from scratch. Given the
lack of comparable open-source MLLM-based Minecraft agent, comprehensive ablation studies on
A DAM itself — including the ablation of TM and SD (Section 3.4, Tab. 1), LLM-based CD (Tab. 4),
and intervention-based CD (Fig. 8) — establish a robust baseline for MLLM agents in Minecraft.
Due to the complexity of the Minecraft environment, Crafter (Hafner, 2022) simplifies the game
space while maintaining the game rules of Minecraft. Crafter is a 2D game environment with craft-
ing routes similar to Minecraft. Agents such as SPRING (Wu et al., 2024) and Mars (Tang et al.,
2024) have been developed on this environment.
In the original implementation of VOYAGER, the environment feedback provides detailed infor-
mation such as crafting recipe errors (e.g., ”I cannot make an iron chestplate because I need: 7 more
iron ingots.”). We retain this informative feedback in all our experiments with VOYAGER, even in
environments with modified crafting recipes where the feedback may not align with the changes.
Tab. 5 shows the environmental information used by A DAM and VOYAGER. This setup is used
in our experiments at Sec. 4.3. VOYAGER does not have a visual input and requires omniscient
metadata (Meta) which is not explicitly exposed to human players, while A DAM utilizes visual
input and other observable information to make decisions.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  VOYAGER                 VOYAGER w/o Meta          A DAM        A DAM w/o MLLM
    Observation   Environment Feedback,   Environment Feedback,     Pixels,      Inventory
    Space         Inventory,              Inventory                 Inventory
                  Meta
    Action        Code                    Code                      Discrete     Discrete
    Space

Table 5: Comparison of environmental information used by A DAM and VOYAGER. VOYAGER
does not have a visual input and needs omniscient metadata (Meta) which is not explicitly exposed
to human players, while A DAM relies on the visual input and the information observable by human
players to make decisions.


             Action Type     Action-Item Dependency        Data Quality        Skill Level
             Collecting      Simple                        Noise               Low
             Crafting        Complex                       Clean               High
             Smelting        Complex                       Noise               High

Table 6: Three action types in our experiment setting. “Smelting” actions have complex causal
subgraphs, often leading to omissions in LLM-based CD. “Collecting” actions have noisy sampling
data, and the results of the LLM-based CD are often redundant. The “Crafting” actions have complex
causal subgraphs and clean sampling data.



D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

D.1    P ROMPT

The prompt for LLM-based CD is shown in Fig. 11, which is composed of 5 components: (1) Role
Playing, which assigns a specific role to the LLM; (2) Problem Setting, which provides specific
details of the inference task; (3) Letter Mapping, which involves mapping item names to letters, a
simplification that facilitates the formatted output; (4) Few-shot Prompting, which involves provid-
ing the LLM with several inference examples in chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022b) style; (5) Data
Da , which is the data collected by the interaction module for inference.


D.2    ACTION S PACE AND M OVEMENT S PACE

We have implemented 41 discrete actions and 6 movements to ensure the agent can freely explore
the Minecraft world through a diverse range of their combinations. The actions can be divided
into three categories: “Smelting”, “Collecting”, and “Crafting”. “Smelting” actions have complex
causal subgraphs, often leading to omissions in LLM-based CD. “Collecting” actions have noisy
sampling data, and the results of the LLM-based CD are often redundant. The “Crafting” actions
have complex causal subgraphs and clean sampling data.
The movement space corresponds to the low-level movement control visible to human players, in-
cluding moving forward / backward, lowering / raising the agent’s coordinates and turning left /
right.



E     ROBUSTNESS

Tab. 7 shows our experiment results in the modified Minecraft environment where the crafting
recipes are altered. A DAM can maintain its performance as it is equipped with CD methods, whereas
agents that rely on prior knowledge struggle to explore efficiently. The result demonstrates the
robustness and generalization capabilities of our A DAM architecture.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       You are a Minecraft game analysis assistant. Our task is to infer the effect of an action and explore the causal
       relationship by analyzing the items consumed and generated before and after an action. An action is a single, atomic
       action consisting of
       1. "Crafting" type actions, that is, combining raw materials into an item.
       2. "Collecting" type actions, that is, collecting certain items. There may be some by-products in this process.
       3. "Smelting" type actions, that is, consuming fuel and raw metal materials, and obtaining smelted items. A furnace is
       needed.

       It's possible that the action didn't have the expected effect, or that some additional items were collected, and we'll give
       multiple sampling records to ensure robustness. Such records all correspond to the execution of the same action. Your
       answer will only refer to the alphabetical codes of these items.
       The answer should be in the format {Cause; Effect}

       (Comment: The following is an example of the Observed Item Space. "m" and "n" are for few-shot learning and are not
       included in the technology tree to avoid prior)
       Items involved in the game include
       'a': 'log'
       'b': 'planks'
       'c': 'crafting_table'
       'd': 'stick'
       'e': 'wooden_pickaxe'
       'f': 'cobblestone'
       'g': 'stone_pickaxe'
       'h': 'raw_iron'
       'i': 'furnace'
       'j': 'iron_ingot'
       'k': 'iron_pickaxe'
       'l': 'diamond'
       'm': 'redstone'
       'n': 'redstone_torch'

       log corresponds to a variety of log named xx_log
       planks correspond to a variety of planks named xx_planks


       1. Initial items: iron_pickaxe, crafting_table ; Consumed items: ; Added items: redstone, cobblestone,
       cobbled_deepslate
       2. Initial items: iron_pickaxe, crafting_table ;Consumed items: ; Added items: cobblestone, redstone, andesite
       3. Initial items: iron_pickaxe, crafting_table ;Consumed items: ; Added items: granite
       4. Initial items: iron_pickaxe, crafting_table ;Consumed items: ; Added items: cobblestone, cobbled_deepslate
       5. Initial items: iron_pickaxe, crafting_table ;Consumed items: ; Added items: redstone, cobblestone

       Your inference:
       Because there is no item consumption, this is a "Collecting" task. Redstone is a higher-level mineral and needs to be
       collected with an iron_pickaxe ('k'). The rest of the items are considered additional items obtained during collection and
       will not be considered. So my answer is:
       Cause; Effect={k; m}


       1. Initial items: stick, redstone, crafting_table ; Consumed items: stick, redstone; Added items: redstone_torch
       2. Initial items: stick, redstone, crafting_table ; Consumed items: ; Added items:
       3. Initial items: stick, redstone, crafting_table ; Consumed items: redstone, stick; Added items: redstone_torch
       4. Initial items: stick, redstone, crafting_table ; Consumed items: stick, redstone; Added items: redstone_torch
       5. Initial items: stick, redstone, crafting_table ; Consumed items: redstone, stick; Added items: redstone_torch

       Your inference:
       Because redstone and sticks are being used to craft redstone torches, this is a "Crafting" task. In addition to raw
       materials, the "Crafting" task also requires crafting_table ('c'). So my answer is:
       Cause; Effect={c, d, m; n}

       (Our Data )
       Your inference:



Figure 11: The prompt for LLM-based CD. The contents in red will be replaced in the inference
process.


F   G ENERALIZATION

The A DAM architecture is a general framework for embodied agents operating in various open-
world environments including Minecraft. When adapting A DAM to other application scenarios,
some modifications may be necessary:

    (1) The world knowledge in Minecraft is the dependence between items and actions. Conse-
        quently, in this paper, items and actions are designed as causal graph nodes. When mi-
        grating to other environments, key elements related to the agent’s task objectives can be
        similarly designed as causal graph nodes.


                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Framework                   Wooden Tool       Stone Tool        Iron Tool          Diamond
 React w/ TM w/ SD           91 ± 34(2/3)      139(1/3)          N/A (0/3)          N/A (0/3)
 Reflexion w/ TM w/ SD       76 ± 28(2/3)      120 ± 40(2/3)     N/A (0/3)          N/A (0/3)
 AutoGPT w/ TM w/ SD         82 ± 25(2/3)      124(1/3)          N/A (0/3)          N/A (0/3)
 VOYAGER                     95 ± 33(2/3)      152 ± 43(2/3)     N/A (0/3)          N/A (0/3)
 VOYAGER Guided              108 ± 35(2/3)     176(1/3)          N/A (0/3)          N/A (0/3)
 A DAM                       28 ± 4(3/3)       52 ± 14(3/3)      94 ± 27(3/3)       109 ± 34(2/3)
 A DAM Parallel              15 ± 2(3/3)       31 ± 7(3/3)       54 ± 14(3/3)       61 ± 18(2/3)

Table 7: Performance in the modified Minecraft game. Each method has three trials for a maximum
length of 200 steps. The success rate is depicted in the parentheses. A DAM can maintain its per-
formance as it is equipped with CD methods, whereas agents that rely on prior knowledge struggle
to explore efficiently. The result demonstrates the robustness and generalization capabilities of our
A DAM architecture.


    (2) In A DAM, the perception module utilizes a vision-based MLLM and does not rely on om-
        niscient metadata. This allows the module to adapt well to other visual tasks. If conditions
        permit (e.g., a robot equipped with LiDAR), the perception module can provide more pre-
        cise information, potentially further improving performance.
    (3) To model actions as a finite set of causal graph nodes, it is necessary to discretize the
        continuous action space. The granularity of this discretization should be determined based
        on the specific environment.


                                                 20
