Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AGENT O CCAM : A S IMPLE Y ET S TRONG BASELINE
FOR LLM-BASED W EB AGENTS

 Ke Yang†∗, Yao Liu♢ , Sapana Chaudhary♢ , Rasool Fakoor♢ , Pratik Chaudhari♢ , George
 Karypis♢ , Huzefa Rangwala♢
 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign† , Amazon♢
 key4@illinois.edu, {yaoliuai,chausapa,fakoor,rhuzefa}@amazon.com



                                                A BSTRACT
             Autonomy via agents based on large language models (LLMs) that can carry out
             personalized yet standardized tasks presents a significant opportunity to drive hu-
             man efficiency. There is an emerging need and interest in automating web tasks
             (e.g., booking a hotel for a given date within a budget). Being a practical use case
             itself, the web agent also serves as an important proof-of-concept example for
             various agent grounding scenarios, with its success promising advancements in
             many future applications. Meanwhile, much prior research focuses on handcraft-
             ing their web agent strategies (e.g., agent’s prompting templates, reflective work-
             flow, role-play and multi-agent systems, search or sampling methods, etc.) and the
             corresponding in-context examples. However, these custom strategies often strug-
             gle with generalizability across all potential real-world applications. On the other
             hand, there has been limited study on the misalignment between a web agent’s
             observation and action representation, and the data on which the agent’s underly-
             ing LLM has been pre-trained. This discrepancy is especially notable when LLMs
             are primarily trained for language completion rather than tasks involving embod-
             ied navigation actions and symbolic web elements. In our study, we enhance an
             LLM-based web agent by simply refining its observation and action space, align-
             ing these more closely with the LLM’s capabilities. This approach enables our
             base agent to significantly outperform previous methods on a wide variety of web
             tasks. Specifically, on WebArena, a benchmark featuring general-purpose web in-
             teraction tasks, our agent AGENT O CCAM surpasses the previous state-of-the-art
             and concurrent work by 9.8 (+29.4%) and 5.9 (+15.8%) absolute points respec-
             tively, and boosts the success rate by 26.6 points (+161%) over similar plain web
             agents with its observation and action space alignment. Furthermore, on WebVoy-
             ager benchmark comprising tasks defined on real-world websites, AGENT O CCAM
             exceeds the former best agent by 2.4 points (+4.6%) on tasks with deterministic
             answers. We achieve this without using in-context examples, new agent roles,
             online feedback or search strategies. AGENT O CCAM’s simple design highlights
             LLMs’ impressive zero-shot performance on web tasks, and underlines the critical
             role of carefully tuning observation and action spaces for LLM-based agents.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
AI agents leveraging large language models (LLMs) show great potential in automating repetitive
and programmatic tasks and thereby alleviating human workloads (Gao et al., 2024; Xi et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2024). LLMs showcase remarkable capabilities in perception, reasoning and planning
primarily due to their pre-training and post-learning. However, their effectiveness is significantly
constrained when task-specific observation and action representations diverge from the parametric
knowledge encoded during their training/learning time. For instance, in web-based tasks, these
agents perform notably below human levels (Zhou et al., 2023b; Koh et al., 2024a).
To improve web task performance by LLM-based agents, recent work focuses on designing better
agent policies with either handcrafted prompting templates (Sodhi et al., 2024) or hard-coded auto-
    ∗
        Work performed while interning at Amazon.
    1
        Our code and data are available at https://github.com/amazon-science/AgentOccam.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 Aligned                                         Original
          My goal is, to list                    Actions        click       type       note      Actions         click     ... ... ... ... ...
        reviewers, if any, who
                                               stop     go_back          branch        prune     new_tab        ... ...     go_back        ... ...
        mention ear cups being     action
                small.
                                                + Action Space: More Compact
  Given the web observation
  and available actions, click                   AgentOccam: Action and
      the "review" link!                       Observation Space Alignment
                                                 + Observation Space: Less
                                                                                                                Web Server
   Previous Approaches:                         Redundant Yet As Informative                             Original Observation
                                  LLM Policy                                                   RootWebArea [1] 'Wireless Headphones' [focused: True]
   Compound LLM Policy                                                                             link [1312] 'My Account'
                                                                                                         StaticText [761] 'My Account'
                                                       Aligned Observation                         link [1310] 'My Wish List 9 items'
                                 observation     RootWebArea 'Wireless Headphones'                       StaticText [762] 'My Wish List '
                                                                                                         StaticText [763] '9 items'...
             Agent                                   link [1312] 'My Account'
                                                     link [1310] 'My Wish List 9 items'...
                                                                                                              Environment

Figure 1: Overview of AGENT O CCAM. Unlike prior research that works intensively on designing
compound LLM policies, we enhance the web agent simply by aligning the web interaction action
and observation space with the functioning LLM’s acquired knowledge and skills during its training.
prompting strategies (Fu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). While those pre-defined strategies can be
effective for certain tasks, they struggle to generalize to diverse websites and varying skill require-
ments. Another emerging trend is to adopt sampling or search algorithms for a dynamic exploration
of web navigation actions, which reduces dependence on pre-defined strategies but increases the
cost of LLM inferences (Koh et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2024).
In this work, we aim to enhance an LLM-based web agent’s proficiency by optimizing the text-
based task understanding and reasoning of existing LLMs, rather than refining the agent strategies.
Automating web tasks is challenging, as the agent needs to i) accurately extract information from
web pages with varying formats and encoded scripts, and ii) issue appropriate embodied actions,
selecting from those defined merely on web (e.g., scrolling, clicking, or hovering over buttons).
These web observation and action spaces are less common in both, the pre- and post-training data of
LLMs, preventing the LLMs from fully realizing their potential in accomplishing general-purpose
web tasks. Therefore, we study how to properly tune the observation and actions for LLM-based
web agents, to align them with the functioning LLMs capacities learned during training.
As shown in Figure 1, our method comprises of three components: i) We reduce non-essential ac-
tions to minimize the agent’s embodiment and trivial interaction needs; ii) We refine the observation
by eliminating redundant and irrelevant web elements, and restructuring web content blocks for
more succinct yet as informative representations; iii) We introduce two planning actions (branch
and prune), which enables the agent to self-organize navigation workflow with a planning tree, and
use the same structure to filter the previous traces for history replay. It’s noteworthy that those plan-
ning commands are in the same position as navigation prompts for the agent. We implement these
components by generic rules that applies to all types of markup-language-formatted web pages,
without leveraging task-related information on the test benchmark.
By combining the three techniques mentioned above, our proposed agent AGENT O CCAM per-
forms substantially better on web tasks across websites in the WebArena environments (Zhou et al.,
2023b). AGENT O CCAM outperforms the previous state-of-the-art approach by 9.8 absolute points
(+29.4%) and surpasses concurrent work by 5.9 absolute points (+15.8%). Notably, unlike most
prior work, we do not use any in-context examples, additional online search or sampling, nor spe-
cialized prompting templates or agent roles to play well. In contrast, AGENT O CCAM delivers such
strong performance with an unexpectedly simple approach: letting the LLM issue actions within the
processed and augmented observation and action spaces. Compared with a similar plain web agent
without these proposed observation and action space changes, AGENT O CCAM increases the suc-
cess rate by 26.6 absolute points (+161%). Moreover, we prove AGENT O CCAM’s web environment
generalizability in the real-world web environment. In the WebVoyager definite-answer subset (He
et al., 2024), which consists of real-world web tasks with deterministic answers, AGENT O CCAM
exceeds the previous best agent on this benchmark by 2.4 points (+4.6%).
In summary, the primary contribution of this work are as follows. First, we develop a new state-of-
the-art agent, AGENT O CCAM, for web tasks. On the WebArena benchmark consisting of 812 tasks
across five diverse websites (e.g., shopping, searching on a forum), AGENT O CCAM outperforms
previous and concurrent work significantly. Second, we shed light on the strong zero-shot perfor-


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Table 1: Comparison of essential components for different LLM-based web agents.
    Essential Components                  Task-specific    In-context    Additional    Offline     Online
                                          Strategies       Examples      Module        Data2       Search
    AutoGuide (Fu et al., 2024)           NO               YES           YES           YES         NO
    SteP (Sodhi et al., 2024)             YES              YES           YES           NO          NO
    AutoRefine (Pan et al., 2024)         NO               YES           YES           YES         YES
    LM-Tree Search (Koh et al., 2024b)    NO               YES           YES           YES         YES
    AWM (Wang et al., 2024)               NO               YES           YES           YES 3       NO
    WebPilot (Zhang et al., 2024)         NO               YES           YES           NO          YES
    Agent-E (Abuelsaad et al., 2024)      NO               YES           YES           NO          NO
    AGENT O CCAM                          NO               NO            NO            NO          NO


mance of LLMs on web tasks with our simple agentic workflow, in sharp contrast to many more
complex compound agent policies. Last, our work on aligning the observation and action spaces is
orthogonal to agentic strategies and can be combined with future advances in that aspect.

2       R ELATED W ORK
LLM-based Web Agent Advances in large language and multi-modal foundation models have
significantly boosted the development of autonomous agents to solve web tasks. Techniques translat-
ing LLMs to powerful decision-making agents (Yao et al., 2022b; Shinn et al., 2024) have advanced
web agents, inspiring many techniques that design inference time agent strategies. Many prior ap-
proaches improve the agent system by designing auxiliary modules with specialized LLMs or roles,
aiming to break down complex tasks (Sun et al., 2024; Prasad et al., 2024; Abuelsaad et al., 2024).
Other work leverages LLMs to extract common patterns from examples or past experience (Zheng
et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). However, this line of work often relies on pre-defined
control hierarchy, prompt templates or examples to act accurately in the test environments. For ex-
ample, SteP (Sodhi et al., 2024) utilizes a stack-based approach for dynamic multi-level control in
the web tasks but relies on task-specific atomic policies with environment-related information hard-
coded in prompt template. Another line of work focuses on improving web agents’ performance by
leveraging more online examples from the environments. Many of them (Zhou et al., 2023a; Zhang
et al., 2024; Putta et al., 2024) adapt Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) methods, expanding inter-
mediate states (tree nodes) in one task repeatedly by multiple trials over that task. Among them,
WebPilot (Zhang et al., 2024) also adds a global optimization layer for high-level planning. Koh
et al. (2024b) use a trained value function to guide search and to back-trace on the task execution
tree. Auto Eval and Refine (Pan et al., 2024) trains a separate evaluator, and improves the task execu-
tion using reflective thinking (Shinn et al., 2024) on past trials in the same task. However, sampling
or resetting multiple times in the same task, not only increases the inference cost significantly, but
also limits its applicability when failed task is not revocable. As a comparison, we highlight the
simplicity of our method and its difference with related agent approaches in Table 1.

Fine-tuned or Trained Models for Web Tasks Fine-tuning language or multimodal models
for web tasks is another effective approach to enhance decision-making capabilities on the web
tasks (Yin et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2024; Lai et al., 2024; Putta et al., 2024). While fine-tuning
promises more adaptivity and broader optimization space, the size of task-specific fine-tuned models
are typically not comparable with the most powerful closed-source models. There is also some early
research that trains models to follow natural language command on the web before LLMs emerged,
using semantic parsing (Artzi & Zettlemoyer, 2013), reinforcement learning (Branavan et al., 2009)
and imitation learning (Liu et al., 2018; Humphreys et al., 2022). However, those fine-tuned agents,
limited by the base model’s capacities or training data volume, often fail to match those constructed
with LLMs regarding performance or/and generalizability, and is beyond the scope of this work.

Simulated Web Agent Environments Web agent development has been supported by increas-
ingly complex web simulators for training and evaluation. These range from basic platforms like
MiniWoB (Shi et al., 2017) and its extension MiniWoB++ (Liu et al., 2018), to more sophisticated
    2
    The offline data refers to a labeled dataset to instill human knowledge into models.
    3
    AWM supports two scenarios: in offline scenarios it directly leverage an offline dataset, and in online
scenarios it relies on a domain-specific evaluator from Pan et al. (2024) which requires offline data to train.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


environments such as WebShop (Yao et al., 2022a), WebArena (Zhou et al., 2023b), and Visual-
WebArena (Koh et al., 2024a). These simulators progressively incorporate real-world complexities,
from simple form-filling to tasks across multiple full-featured websites. In this work, we focus only
on the text modality, and use WebArena to evaluate our method’s task success and generalizability
as it contains different types of websites and task-intents in a single suite. To further assess AGEN -
T O CCAM ’s generalizabilty, we extend experiments to the real-world web environments, evluated
with the tasks and golden answers proposed in WebVoyager (He et al., 2024).

3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We formalize the web interaction process by a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP, Littman (2009); Spaan (2012)): ⟨O, S, A, P, R, p0 , γ⟩. In POMDPs, an observation
o ∈ O consists of information that the agent receives from the web environment, e.g. HTMLs,
as well as any instructions and prompts. In this work, we only consider the text modality. A state
s ∈ S denotes the whole underlying (unobserved) state of the agent and the environment such that
the state transition is Markovian. An action a ∈ A is either a command recognized by the web en-
vironment, or any other unrecognized token sequence that will lead to a stay in the current state. P
denotes a deterministic state transition function that records the change in the webpage state given
the current state and agent action. R is the reward function that decides the success or failure of
the agent’s sequence of actions. p0 denotes the initial state distribution which is uniform over tasks
tested. The discounting factor γ is typically set to 1 when the reward is only assigned at the end of
an agent-web interaction episode.
To solve POMDP, a common goal is to find a decision policy π(at |ht ) maximizing the expected
cumulative reward, where ht denotes the observation history {o0 , o1 , ..., ot }. In LLM-based web
agent design, that is translated to designing a policy π(at |ht ) with the help of one or more base LLM
policies πLLM and a set of algorithmic modules. In this work, we work on a special class of policies
that can be expressed as: π(g(at )|ht ) = πLLM (at |f (ht )), where f and g are rule-based functions that
process the observation (including action instructions) and actions for the LLM policy. We name it
the observation and action space alignment problem. Notice that under such a problem setting, all of
our changes apply only to the observations and the actions. We emphasize not all agent strategies in
previous approaches can be represented in this way. For example, search-based algorithms require
a control program on the top to select actions and trigger back-tracing; methods with evaluators,
reflective thinking or memory modules also necessitate a managing center to alternate between the
main LLM and these helper segments or other role-playing LLMs. In contrast, we aim to answer
the following question in our work: Can we build a strong web agent with the base LLM policy
πLLM by optimizing only the observation and action mapping f and g?

4     M ETHOD
Rather than introducing any new modules or hierarchical structures on top of the base LLM, our
method focuses on a simple web agent workflow that inputs the web observations to a general-
purpose LLM-API and uses the LLM outputs as actions directly. In this section, we describe the
process of aligning web tasks, which necessitates embodiment knowledge, with the predominantly
static and text-centric nature of LLM training. Section 4.1 discusses our strategies (summarized
in Figure 2) for refining the action space to be more compact and reducing the need for the agent’s
embodiment capabilities. Section 4.2 outlines our methods (summarized in Figure 4) for condensing
web content descriptions to be both brief and informative, and identifying key web elements and
relevant steps for retention to organize the agent’s memory in a pertinent manner.

4.1   ACTION S PACE A LIGNMENT
A web agent’s action space defines the valid commands it can use to interact with the web envi-
ronment. The WebArena simulator supports translating three categories of actions into mouse and
keyboard operations: basic actions (e.g., click, type), tab operations (e.g., tab focus for man-
aging active tabs), and page operations (e.g., go back for navigation). These actions are detailed
in Appendix A, along with a comparison of our changes to the action space.
Based on our observation of common failure modes in web agents, there exist two key challenges
to be addressed by editing the action space: i) removing irrelevant actions that LLMs struggle to
understand and frequently misuse, and ii) improving the memorization and planning ability when


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                            3. Plan via Generation
      Action Space Alignment
                                                Low-Embodiment Actions
                                                                                                                          Objective          Objective
     Original Actions                            click     scroll     type      go_back              Objective
                                                                                                                                 Plan 1            Plan 1
     Basic Actions        noop      click        note       stop     go_home*                                 Plan 1
                                                                                                                                 Plan 2            Plan 2
      hover     type     press    scroll                                                             Planning Tree
                                                                                                                             branch                prune
                                                         2. Disable Scrolling
     Tab Operations           tab_focus     1. Avoid arbitrary scrolling.
                                            2. Package atomic actions to higher-level operations.
      new_tab      tab_close                                                                        Core Navigation Actions
                                                Essential Actions                                   click     type     go_back    go_home*         For Navigation
     Page Operations           go_back           click     scroll     type      go_back
                                                                                                    note      stop       For Workflow Management
      go_forward       goto                      note       stop     go_home*
                                                                                                    Planning Actions
                                                                                * Only valid in     branch     prune      For Improved Decision-Making
              1. Remove Non-essential Actions                                   multisite tasks.


Figure 2: In aligning the action space with LLM pre-training, we only retain high-utility actions
and lessen the demand for advanced embodiment skills (steps 1 and 2). Additionally, we incorporate
planning steps, allowing the agent to autonomously manage task breakdown and execution (step 3).
the task execution requires navigating multiple potential paths to succeed. We propose that the
first can be corrected simply by removing and combining actions. The second issue was often
addressed in the previous work using handcrafted rules or strategies, making these approaches hard
to generalize. In this work, we tackle the second problem by introducing actions that allow the
LLM to autonomously generate plans and manage the task workflow. These proposed solutions are
explained in detail below and illustrated in Figure 2. The list of all actions in original and reduced
action space is shown in Table 3, together with the frequency they are taken in different agents.
Simplifying the Action Space. First, we eliminate actions that can be replicated using similar ac-
tions or replace multiple actions with one action with the same expressiveness (illustrated in Figure 2
step 1). Specifically, we remove the noop action, signifying “no operation”, as it is shown to be a
distraction to the agent in most cases. Similarly, tab operations, which manage the focusing, open-
ing, or closing of tabs are removed because they are only needed in limited cases of multi-site tasks
requiring two tabs. Furthermore, we limit page navigation actions like go forward and goto, as
their utility is greatly constrained by the agent’s poor memory of the relationship between a page’s
URL and its content. By eliminating these less effective actions, our goal is to minimize distrac-
tions and boost the agent’s concentration on more meaningful operations. In addition, we introduce
the note action, allowing the agent to record key observations for subsequent conclusions, and the
stop action, enabling the agent to autonomously conclude the trajectory with answers. We also add
a go home command for multi-site tasks, enabling the agent to navigate directly to the homepage
where all available sites are listed.
Second, we eliminate actions that heavily require embodiment knowledge and simplify low-level
actions into more abstract operations as shown in Figure 2 step 2. In particular, we reduce commands
that LLM-based agents struggle with unless provided with detailed context-specific guidance, like
hover or press (the latter is for pressing key combinations, often shortcuts). To properly use these
actions requires LLMs to have embodied thinking of the current scenario, especially regarding the
mouse position or keyboard operations, which it has not acquired during their training. Additionally,
we remove the scroll action, opting instead to load the full page content as the web state. This
change is in response to our observation that agents tend to engage in aimless and repetitive scrolling
when an essential link is not visible at the top of the page, wasting steps without making progress.
Furthermore, we streamline the agent’s interaction with drop-down menus; instead of selecting the
menu and then an option, a single click command with the ID of the desired option now suffices.
Planning via Generation. Web tasks often require a solution that requires navigating multiple
paths, e.g. extracting information from one page and submitting it to another page, like the task of
creating a refund request on the Contact Us page for a broken product (task template 154), which
requires parsing the order ID and refund amount from the order pages. We introduce two actions,
branch and prune, to generate plans in a tree structure and save them for future observations. As
Figure 2 step 3 shows, the LLM-generated plans start with a root node being the objective of the task.
The branch action will generate new subplans under the current node, decomposing high-level
objectives into smaller, more manageable subgoals. Conversely, the prune action allows the agent


                                                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        General              Task Description                  E.g., You are a seasoned web navigator. You need to issue an action for this step…
                      Instruction           Output Specifications              E.g., Reason: Provide your rationale for proposing the subsequent action commands. Action: Select your action.
Agent
Prompt                                       Action Specifications             E.g., click [id]: To click on an element with its numerical id on the web page.

                     Online Task
                                             Step Objective ...        Previous Interaction Current Observation                     ...     Page Length                  History Length
                     Information


Figure 3: The components of our web navigation agent’s prompt. It includes a general instruc-
tion outlining the task, the desired output and available actions, as well as online task information
providing the current goal, the agent’s past interactions, and the latest observations. Notably, the
sections on previous interactions and current observation use the most tokens, and can be attributed
to two main factors: the length of the pages and the extent of history span.
 Observation Space Alignment
                                                                            Original Web Environment Description                                   Original Web Content Block
              1. Simplify Web Page Elements                                RootWebArea [1] 'Wireless Headphones' [focused: True]                main
                                                                               link [1312] 'My Account'                                                table 'Orders'
                                                                                                                                                       caption
                                                                                     StaticText [761] 'My Account'                                          StaticText 'Orders'
      Refined Web Environment                                                  link [1310] 'My Wish List 9 items'                                      row
                                                                                     StaticText [762] 'My Wish List '                                       columnheader 'Order #' [required: False]
             Description                                                             StaticText [763] '9 items'                                                  StaticText 'Order #'
                                                    1. Remove                                                                                               columnheader 'Date' [required: False]
  RootWebArea 'Wireless Headphones'                                            link [1314] 'Sign Out'
                                                    redundant text.                                                                                              StaticText 'Date'
      link [1312] 'My Account'                                                       StaticText [764] 'Sign Out'                                            columnheader 'Order Total' [required: False]
      link [1310] 'My Wish List 9 items'                                       StaticText [765] 'Welcome, Emma Lopez!'                                           StaticText 'Order Total'
      link [1314] 'Sign Out'                                                                                                                                columnheader 'Status' [required: False]
                                                                                                                                                                 StaticText 'Status'
      text 'Welcome, Emma Lopez!'                                                                                                                           columnheader 'Action' [required: False]
                                                                                                                                                                 StaticText 'Action'
                                                                                                                                                       row
                                                                                                                                                            gridcell '000000191' [required: False]
                                     Refined Web Content Block                                                                                                   StaticText '000000191'
   table 'Orders'                                                                                                  2. Convert HTML                          gridcell '6/21/24' [required: False]
        row '| Order | Date | Order Total | Status | Action |'                                                     or accessibility                              StaticText '6/21/24'
                                                                                                                                                            gridcell '$8,368.88' [required: False]
        row '| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |'                                                                      tree to Markdown.                             StaticText '$8,368.88'
                                                                                                                                                            gridcell 'Pending' [required: False]
        row "| 000000191 | 6/21/24 | 8,368.88 | Pending | View Order link [46850] 'View Order'"                                                                  StaticText 'Pending'
                                                                                                                                                            gridcell 'View Order' [required: False]
                                                                                                                                                                 link [46850] 'View Order'
                                                                                                                                                                        StaticText 'View Order'
             2. Selectively Replay Web
                                                                                   3. Selectively Replay Past Pages
               Elements in One Page

  RootWebArea                                                                                                 Planning Tree                                     Step           Invisible step
                                          Tree-Structured Web Elements
                                                 Pivotal node     (e.g., text 'View Order')                Plan 0                  Step 0                       Step            Visible step

                                                 Ancestor node (e.g., link 'My Order')
                                                                                                                  Subplan 1                     Step 1                 Step 2                 Step 3
                                                 Sibling node (e.g., text '$742.42')
                                                 Descendent node (e.g., link 'View Order')                        Subplan 2                     Step 4                         Current step
                                                 Other invisible node
                                                                                                                          Subsubplan 3                         Step 5                Step 6



Figure 4: To align the web task’s observation space with the format that the base model perceives
most effectively, we condense a single-page length by removing unnecessary texts that repetitively
describe the web page’s functionality and layout (step 1), and by identifying page elements rele-
vant to the task for the agent to remember (step 2). Additionally, we optimize the agent workflow
memory through a planning tree, viewing each new plan as a separate goal and excluding past steps’
information dedicated to previous plans to enhance memory conciseness (step 3).


to give up the current sub-plan, often after repetitive failed attempts, and seek alternatives. Together
with the branch and the prune actions, the LLM can edit the planning tree autonomously. Note
that these two planning actions are of no difference from the native navigation actions in
the web environment (e.g. click, type) and the LLM is free to choose when to take these actions to
update the plan. The generated plan provides a context for future action generation and enhances
the consistency of actions in one trajectory. This approach leverages the intrinsic planning ability
of LLM itself. We argue that this will not compromise the agent’s generalization capability as this
design relies minimally on task-specific prior knowledge.
4.2      O BSERVATION S PACE A LIGNMENT
The observation space of web agents consists of task objectives, instructions, previous interaction,
and the current web text descriptions or screenshots (see Figure 3 and Appendix G for our agent).
Among them, previous interactions and current web content consume the most number of tokens,
which scales with the length of a single page and the length of history. This often results in a long
context window, which not only increases the LLM inference cost but also poses challenges for
LLM to extract related information accurately. Therefore, our main goal in refining the observation
is to address these two aspects. The alignment of observations is outlined in Figure 4.


                                                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Simplifying Web Page Observations. The content on web pages is represented in HTML or ac-
cessibility tree format in most text-only web agents. These formats are designed towards front-end
loading and rendering, containing numerous formatting tokens making them lengthy and repeti-
tive, as illustrated in Figure 4 Step 1. Our goal is to optimize the representation to make it more
readable to LLMs on one single page. Specifically, we merge function-descriptive web elements
(e.g., StaticText [761] ‘My Account’) with interactive elements that share the same la-
bel (e.g., link [1312] ‘My Account’). We then convert table and list blocks to Markdown,
eliminating repetitive structural tokens (e.g., columnheader, gridcell). Consequently, we
achieve a more concise representation while keeping the same information.
Replaying Observation History Selectively. Taking observation history as input is important for
decision-making agents to act consistently for tasks requiring long horizons, given that the obser-
vation state only contains partial information about the environment’s state. For web tasks, it is
also important to include both observation and action history as some key information may not be
displayed on the current page. However, the observation history will also significantly scale up the
context length and increase reasoning difficulty as well as inference cost. We address this issue by
only selecting the most important and related information on the previous web pages, according to
two rules based on the “pivotal” nodes (defined later) and the planning tree. We provide detailed
examples of how these two techniques are implemented in Appendix B.
First, we observe that only a small amount of content on a web page is pertinent to a specific
task among several steps and is worth replaying in future steps. For example, in tasks requiring
the agent to find all reviews within three months, it is unnecessary to keep other reviews or some
unrelated links like Contact Us on the page. Thus we employ a simple rule to identify this
small amount of content by leveraging the tree structure of web data (e.g. accessibility tree). To
do this, we first instruct the agent to pinpoint the crucial web elements denoted as “pivotal” nodes,
at the same time when the agent generates an action. The agent is then programmed to include
only the pivotal nodes’ ancestor nodes (indicating their global hierarchy and position), sibling nodes
(providing immediate context), and descendant nodes (offering detailed characteristics) in the future
observations as illustrated in Figure 4 Step 2. This effectively narrows down the volume of data and
level of noise passed to the future context of LLM inference.
Second, we observe that not all previous steps’ observation needs to be noted during the inference
of future steps. Thus we can leverage the planning tree generated by the agent itself to keep the
agent’s focus sharp. Specifically, when the agent initiates a branch action to develop a new plan,
we treat this new plan as a separate goal. Steps taken for earlier plans and their observations will be
dismissed in the current plan’s observation window, as depicted in Figure 4 step 3. This allows the
agent to focus only on information dedicated to the current plan for a sub-task.

5    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Here, we detail experiments on WebArena (Zhou et al., 2023b), a web simulator benchmark. Further
experiments with WebVoyager (He et al., 2024), a web benchmark based on real-world websites, are
included in Appendix C. We show AGENT O CCAM’s base model generalizability in Appendix D.
Environment. We utilize WebArena, an interactive web simulator, as our benchmark. WebArena
consists of fully functional websites from four common domains: e-commerce platforms (OneStop-
Shop), social forums for idea and opinion exchange (Reddit), collaborative software development
(GitLab), and content management for creation and management of online data (online store man-
agement). The platform additionally includes utility tools: a map, a calculator, a scratchpad, and
Wikipedia to enable human-like task-solving. The benchmark consists of 812 tasks generated from
241 templates. A template here is a parametric form of a task intent, allowing for multiple instan-
tiations with different keywords. Each task is accompanied by an evaluator that programmatically
checks the correctness of the final information with respect to the desired ground truth information4 .
We use GPT-4-turbo-2024-04-09 (Achiam et al., 2023) to build our AGENT O CCAM.

Baselines. We compare AGENT O CCAM with the following prior and concurrent work: 1) We-
bArena agent: the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompted agent included in the WebArena benchmark
   4
     We identified and corrected errors in the original evaluators, with details discussed in Appendix E. Our
approach outperforms the baseline methods with both the original and the corrected evaluators.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Comparison of the success rate (SR) of AGENT O CCAM with baseline agents on WebArena.

               Agent                    Model       SR (%)   Shopping   Shopping Admin   GitLab     Map     Reddit   Multisite
                                                    (#812)    (#187)        (#182)       (#180)    (#109)   (#106)    (#48)
               WebArena-replication   GPT-4-Turbo    16.5      16.6          15.9         10.0      22.9     21.7      16.7
               SteP-replication       GPT-4-Turbo    33.3      33.2          32.4         26.7      35.8     52.8      12.5
               AWM                      GPT-4        35.5        -             -            -         -        -        -
               WebPilot                 GPT-4o       37.2        -             -            -         -        -        -
               AGENT O CCAM           GPT-4-Turbo    43.1      40.6          45.6         37.8      46.8     61.3      14.6



                                  Vanilla            Above + X Scrolling          Above + History
                                    Actions          Above + Obs Opt.             AgentOccam (Above + Planning)
Success Rate


               50

                0
                            All        Shopping Shopping admin Gitlab              Map            Reddit       Multisite
Figure 5: Ablation study of AGENT O CCAM’s action and observation space alignment, with details
in Table 17. We incrementally add refinement components and assess marginal performance gains.


(Zhou et al., 2023b). 2) SteP (Sodhi et al., 2024): a stack-based approach on top of 14 human-written
atomic strategies tailored to solving WebArena. 3) WebPilot (Zhang et al., 2024): a multi-agent,
multi-level MCTS based agent that reports state-of-the-art overall performance on WebArena. 4)
Agent Workflow Memory (AWM) (Wang et al., 2024): a method automatically summarizing work-
flow from past experience. SteP has made its code and interaction trajectories public. Hence, we
are able to fully replicate the agents from WebArena and SteP with GPT-4-turbo in the identical
web environments as our methods, for a fair comparison.5 WebPilot and AWM, being concurrent
works with this paper, have not yet provided source code or resulting trajectories, limiting our anal-
ysis of these works to just reporting the aggregated performance numbers included in their technical
reports. Our analysis focuses on SteP as it was the most performant method prior to this work.
Question 1: How well does AGENT O CCAM perform? As seen from the results in Table 2, our
agent AGENT O CCAM, which optimizes the action and observation space, now sets a new SOTA
on the WebArena benchmark. It increases the overall success rate from 37.2% to 43.1%, a 15.8%
relative improvement over best results among previous and concurrent work. We observe that
AGENT O CCAM not only accomplishes tasks in the template that is previously unsolvable, like up-
dating personal information on OneStopShop (task template 165), but it also raises the success rate
for templates with mixed results previously, such as setting a homepage URL on a GitLab profile
(task template 331). This is further illustrated in Figure 6 in the appendix.
Question 2: How much does each observation and action space change contribute to AGEN -
T O CCAM ? We evaluate the contribution of each component in AGENT O CCAM described in Sec-
tion 4 to its overall success by incrementally integrating them into the vanilla agent (WebArena-
Replication) and assessing the marginal performance gain shown in Figure 5. The details of each
incremental experiment are as follows:
i) Removal of non-essential actions (↓ Actions): Narrowing the action space can reduce the
level of distraction for LLM policies and significantly improves performance across all tested web-
sites as shown in Figure 5. By removing rarely used actions like tab focus,go forward,
hover and press, the agent spends fewer steps wandering around and explores more efficiently
using actions such as click and type. Table 3 shows it reduces hundreds of hover and goto
actions while significantly increasing the number of click and type.
ii) Disabling scrolling (Above + X Scrolling): We observe that LLM policies tend to use
scroll up and down often when they do not know what to do (since these actions are revertible).
Consequently, it significantly delays the task execution and causes looping in certain tasks. As a
   5
     In our experiments, we note that all agents occasionally fail due to errors from the WebArena simulator,
such as posting rate limits in Reddit or login expiration. In such cases, we restart the experiments.


                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Action statistics for the ablation study of AGENT O CCAM’s components. Each number in
the table represents the frequency of an action across all the tasks within the experiment setting.
Actions noop, go forward, tab focus and tab close are not included since they are not
used even once in vanilla agent and removed in our method.
        Exp.        click      hover   type    press     scroll new tab go back    goto    note     stop go home branch    prune
       Vanilla      2328        126    1024      7        132     20      71       511      -        -6      -      -        -
     ↓ Actions      7119         -     2531      -        370      -      52        -      194      512     36      -        -
Above + X Scrolling 7033         -     2390      -         -       -      100       -      219      536     42      -        -
 Above + Obs Opt.   6890         -     2040      -         -       -       56       -      201      571     23      -        -
  Above + History   4625         -     1286      -         -       -       94       -      112      801     54      -        -
    AGENT O CCAM    4720         -     1159      -         -       -      339       -      197      769     42     34       47


Table 4: Average observation tokens per step across WebArena sites. We use the GPT 2 tokenizer
from H UGGINGFACE (Radford et al., 2019).
                Exp.                All       Shopping      Shopping Admin        GitLab    Map       Reddit   Multisite
               Vanilla             2210.2      2272.1           2460.2            2199.1   1883.2     2132.4   1751.0
             ↓ Actions             1652.0      1644.7           2133.1            1981.3    912.0     1081.2   1296.8
       Above + X Scrolling         3376.2      3148.0           5403.7            3364.9   1378.1     2603.6   1975.5
         Above + Obs Opt.          2891.1      1722.5           4791.7            2560.8   1476.4     3332.3   1619.4
         Above + History           3051.3      1802.6           5140.2            3153.3    862.1     3156.1   2030.3
            AGENT O CCAM           2930.9      1634.2           4920.7            3126.8   1056.0     3697.8   1282.5



result, disabling the scrolling action and passing the entire page to the agent proves advantageous,
especially for GitLab and Reddit tasks. However, this strategy increases the number of observation
tokens, which will be addressed by subsequent refinements.
iii) Simplifying web page elements (Above + Obs Opt.): We remove redundant text and web
format as show in Figure 4 Step 1. This results in fewer tokens in the context window, as outlined
in Table 4. It helps the agent focus on web elements crucial to task success across all websites and
boosts the performance on all task types, except on GitLab, where this sometimes leads the agent to
overlook simpler solutions (task id 394).
iv) Selective replay of web elements in one page (Above + History): In this experiment, we
follow step 2 shown in Figure 4 to add a subset of elements from previous web pages as history.
We observe that it allows the agent to avoid repetitive actions in tasks, significantly decreasing the
steps needed for task completion as demonstrated in Table 5. However, this addition slightly hurts
performance in tasks with dense single-page content or those requiring navigation across multiple
pages, as shopping and Reddit tasks success rate drops by 3.2 and 6.0 points, respectively.
v) Planning via generation and selective replay of past pages (AGENT O CCAM; Above +
Planning): We introduce actions branch and prune to allow the agent to autonomously gen-
erate plans and exclude historical steps not in the current sub-plan from the prompt context. This
results in performance gains in tasks across nearly all websites, alongside a reduction in the required
observation tokens. The actions branch and prune are both primarily used in correcting a failed
strategy and trying an alternative path. For example, in the task of identifying the nearest national
park to Boston (task id 265), the agent employs a branch action to adopt an alternative search
strategy after a failed search attempt. In a GitLab task (task id 563), after multiple failed attempts
using the Create project button, the agent opts for a prune action to explore other methods.
Question 3: Could the power of AGENT O CCAM be combined with other agentic strategies?
A natural question to ask next is if we can combine these changes with other common agent strate-
gies or prior work, since the changes in observation and action space are orthogonal and comple-
mentary to them. We showcase two example studies to answer this question: one with the SteP
method (Sodhi et al., 2024) and another action selection method with LLM-as-a-judge.
The judge method is motivated by our observation of the high variation in the agent’s behavior. In
some key steps, the agent has a certain probability of generating the correct action but often fails
to do so, making it hard for the agent to recover from later pages. For instance, when tasked with
identifying the most suitable subreddit for posting (task template 6100), the AGENT O CCAM agent
    6
      We remove stop in the statistics for the vanilla WebArena agent as this action is excluded in their officially
defined action space. However, their agent is allowed by code to generate stop to end the trajectory.


                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Table 5: Average number of steps per task across all WebArena sites.
                     Exp.            All      Shopping   Shopping Admin   GitLab     Map     Reddit    Multisite
                    Vanilla           6.2        6.2           6.6          5.9      5.7       7.4       4.4
                  ↓ Actions          13.3       10.6          14.3         14.8      11.9     15.2      13.7
            Above + X Scrolling      12.7        9.0          14.0         14.8      12.7     13.0      14.0
              Above + Obs Opt.       12.0        8.5          13.2         15.4      10.2     12.1      13.2
              Above + History         8.6        5.6           9.6         10.3       8.3      7.6      12.9
                 AGENT O CCAM         9.0        6.7           9.2         10.8       8.5      8.6      13.4


    Table 6: Success rate (SR) of AGENT O CCAM combined with agent strategies on WebArena.

    Agent                    Model          SR (%)   Shopping   Shopping Admin     GitLab    Map      Reddit   Multisite
                                            (#812)    (#187)        (#182)         (#180)   (#109)    (#106)    (#48)
    AGENT O CCAM           GPT-4-Turbo       43.1      40.6          45.6           37.8     46.8      61.3      14.6
    AGENT O CCAM + SteP    GPT-4-Turbo       41.1      46.5          36.3           36.7     47.7      50.9      18.8
    AGENT O CCAM + Judge   GPT-4-Turbo       45.7      43.3          46.2           38.9     52.3      67.0      16.7



tends to hastily choose less relevant subreddits and gets stuck there. To address this, we direct the
AGENT O CCAM to generate all possible suitable actions instead of one action at each step. These
action candidates are then evaluated by another LLM (GPT-4-turbo as well) prompted to play
the role of a judge and select the best action. The prompts for the judge are included in Appendix G.
Table 6 shows that a AGENT O CCAM + SteP agent, enhanced with task strategies, outperforms the
standalone SteP method but doesn’t match AGENT O CCAM’s base performance. Additionally, com-
bining AGENT O CCAM with a judge role through an action prediction and selection pipeline rectifies
some of the base agent’s behavioral misconduct.
By analyzing the trajectories of each method, we observe that task-specific strategies like those
introduced in SteP can help when the strategy fits the task requirements. For example, in the task
of "Draft an email to the shop owner via their contact us function
for a coupon as {reason}" (task template 163), the AGENT O CCAM + SteP and SteP
agents excel by prompting the agent explicitly not to click the submit button after drafting, where
AGENT O CCAM fails to follow. However, for tasks outside the designed strategies, these hints can
mislead the agent, leading to a 2-point drop in the overall success rate of AGENT O CCAM + SteP
compared to AGENT O CCAM only. An example is task 639, where the agent, guided by SteP’s
instruction    "Under forums, you will see only a subset of subreddits.
To get the full list of subreddits, you need to navigate to the
Alphabetical option.", repetitively navigates away from the appropriate subreddit, and
generates reasons for its action selection that "Clicking on the ’Alphabetical’ link
will help us access a more comprehensive Reddit list.", demonstrating
how hard-coded strategies can distract the agent and hurt generalizability.
The AGENT O CCAM + Judge agent, combining the AGENT O CCAM’s generated action list with the
second opinion from an LLM judge increases its overall success rate by 2.6%, by completing tasks
where it may well fail due to intermediate decision flaws. For example, in choosing the right sub-
reddit for a post (task template 6100), the base AGENT O CCAM might hastily pick from an initial
list, whereas the AGENT O CCAM + Judge agent conducts a thorough search using post keywords or
explores the entire forum list before drafting the post. This approach minimizes errors due to rushed
decisions, increasing the likelihood of successfully completing task series.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a simple but effective LLM-based web agent AGENT O CCAM that refines
its action and observation spaces to be more comprehensible for LLMs primarily trained on static
text. Unlike other methods, AGENT O CCAM stands out for its remarkably simple policy workflow,
requiring no extra modules, additional LLM calls, or in-context examples. This simplicity does not
compromise its performance; AGENT O CCAM surpasses previous and contemporary approaches on
WebArena by 9.8 (SteP) and 5.9 (WebPilot) absolute points, respectively. Our results emphasize the
importance of maintaining a simple agent architecture for better generalizability, echoing Occam’s
razor principle. In summary, AGENT O CCAM aims to lay a solid foundation and offer valuable
insights for future web agent research and development.


                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Tamer Abuelsaad, Deepak Akkil, Prasenjit Dey, Ashish Jagmohan, Aditya Vempaty, and Ravi
  Kokku. Agent-e: From autonomous web navigation to foundational design principles in agen-
  tic systems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13032.
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Yoav Artzi and Luke Zettlemoyer. Weakly supervised learning of semantic parsers for mapping
  instructions to actions. Transactions of the association for computational linguistics, 1:49–62,
  2013.
Satchuthananthavale RK Branavan, Harr Chen, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Regina Barzilay. Reinforce-
  ment learning for mapping instructions to actions. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the
  47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing of the AFNLP, pp. 82–90, 2009.
Yao Fu, Dong-Ki Kim, Jaekyeom Kim, Sungryull Sohn, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Kyunghoon Bae,
  and Honglak Lee. Autoguide: Automated generation and selection of state-aware guidelines for
  large language model agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08978.
Chen Gao, Xiaochong Lan, Nian Li, Yuan Yuan, Jingtao Ding, Zhilun Zhou, Fengli Xu, and Yong
  Li. Large language models empowered agent-based modeling and simulation: A survey and
  perspectives. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, 11(1):1–24, 2024.
Google.   Gemini-1.5, 2024. URL https://blog.google/technology/ai/
  google-gemini-ai/#sundar-note.
Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan,
  and Dong Yu. Webvoyager: Building an end-to-end web agent with large multimodal models,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13919.
Wenyi Hong, Weihan Wang, Qingsong Lv, Jiazheng Xu, Wenmeng Yu, Junhui Ji, Yan Wang, Zihan
 Wang, Yuxiao Dong, Ming Ding, et al. Cogagent: A visual language model for gui agents.
 In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
 14281–14290, 2024.
Peter C Humphreys, David Raposo, Tobias Pohlen, Gregory Thornton, Rachita Chhaparia, Alistair
  Muldal, Josh Abramson, Petko Georgiev, Adam Santoro, and Timothy Lillicrap. A data-driven
  approach for learning to control computers. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 9466–9482. PMLR, 2022.
Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram Duvvur, Ming Lim, Po-Yu Huang, Graham
   Neubig, Shuyan Zhou, Russ Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. VisualWebArena: Evaluating
   multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
   Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
   Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 881–905, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024a. As-
   sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.50. URL https:
   //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.50.
Jing Yu Koh, Stephen McAleer, Daniel Fried, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Tree search for language
   model agents, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01476.
Hanyu Lai, Xiao Liu, Iat Long Iong, Shuntian Yao, Yuxuan Chen, Pengbo Shen, Hao Yu, Hanchen
  Zhang, Xiaohan Zhang, Yuxiao Dong, et al. Autowebglm: A large language model-based
  web navigating agent. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 5295–5306, 2024.
Michael L Littman. A tutorial on partially observable markov decision processes. Journal of
 Mathematical Psychology, 53(3):119–125, 2009.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Evan Zheran Liu, Kelvin Guu, Panupong Pasupat, Tianlin Shi, and Percy Liang. Reinforcement
  learning on web interfaces using workflow-guided exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08802,
  2018.

Jiayi Pan, Yichi Zhang, Nicholas Tomlin, Yifei Zhou, Sergey Levine, and Alane Suhr. Autonomous
   evaluation and refinement of digital agents. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.

Archiki Prasad, Alexander Koller, Mareike Hartmann, Peter Clark, Ashish Sabharwal, Mohit
  Bansal, and Tushar Khot. ADaPT: As-needed decomposition and planning with language mod-
  els. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pp. 4226–4252, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.264. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-naacl.264.

Pranav Putta, Edmund Mills, Naman Garg, Sumeet Motwani, Chelsea Finn, Divyansh Garg, and
  Rafael Rafailov. Agent q: Advanced reasoning and learning for autonomous ai agents. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2408.07199, 2024.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI, 2019. URL https://huggingface.
  co/openai-community/gpt2.

Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of bits: An
  open-domain platform for web-based agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 3135–3144. PMLR, 2017.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.

Paloma Sodhi, SRK Branavan, Yoav Artzi, and Ryan McDonald. Step: Stacked llm policies for web
  actions. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.

Matthijs TJ Spaan. Partially observable markov decision processes. In Reinforcement learning:
 State-of-the-art, pp. 387–414. Springer, 2012.

Haotian Sun, Yuchen Zhuang, Lingkai Kong, Bo Dai, and Chao Zhang. Adaplanner: Adaptive plan-
  ning from feedback with language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024.

Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Agent workflow memory,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07429.

Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.

Ke Yang, Jiateng Liu, John Wu, Chaoqi Yang, Yi R Fung, Sha Li, Zixuan Huang, Xu Cao, Xingyao
  Wang, Yiquan Wang, et al. If llm is the wizard, then code is the wand: A survey on how code
  empowers large language models to serve as intelligent agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00812,
  2024.

Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:20744–20757, 2022a.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Da Yin, Faeze Brahman, Abhilasha Ravichander, Khyathi Chandu, Kai-Wei Chang, Yejin Choi, and
  Bill Yuchen Lin. Agent lumos: Unified and modular training for open-source language agents. In
  Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 12380–12403,
  Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2024.acl-long.670. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.670.
Yao Zhang, Zijian Ma, Yunpu Ma, Zhen Han, Yu Wu, and Volker Tresp. Webpilot: A versatile and
  autonomous multi-agent system for web task execution with strategic exploration, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.15978.
Longtao Zheng, Rundong Wang, Xinrun Wang, and Bo An. Synapse: Trajectory-as-exemplar
  prompting with memory for computer control. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Lan-
  guage agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and planning in language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.04406, 2023a.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for build-
  ing autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        C OMPARISON OF THE VANILLA AND THE A LIGNED ACTION S PACE

                                     Table 7: The action space in WebArena.

                Category                 Action Type                 Description
                                         noop                        Do nothing
                                         click(elem)                 Click at an element
                                         hover(elem)                 Hover on an element
                Basic Actions
                                         type(elem, text)            Type to an element
                                         press(key comb)             Press a key combination
                                         scroll(dir)                 Scroll up and down
                                         tab focus(index)            Focus on the i-th tab
                Tab Operations           new tab                     Open a new tab
                                         tab close                   Close current tab
                                         go back                     Visit the last URL
                Page Operations          go forward                  Undo go back
                                         goto(URL)                   Go to URL


                              Table 8: The aligned action space of AGENT O CCAM.

        Category                         Action Type                      Description
                                         noop                             Do nothing
                                         click [id]                       Click at an element
                                         hover                            Hover on an element
        Basic Actions
                                         type [id] [content]              Type to an element
                                         press                            Press a key combination
                                         scroll                           Scroll up and down
                                         tab focus                        Focus on the i-th tab
        Tab Operations                   new tab                          Open a new tab
                                         tab close                        Close current tab
                                         go back                          Visit the last URL
                                         go forward                       Undo go back
        Page Operations
                                         goto                             Go to URL
                                         go home7                         Go to home page
                                         note [content]                   Take notes
        Workflow Management
                                         stop [answer]                    Stop with an answer
                                         branch [id] [intent]             Generate a new plan
        Planning Actions
                                         prune [id] [reason]              Restore to a previous plan

We list the action space of WebArena and our aligned action space in Table 7 and 8, respectively.
In detail, we remove non-essential and embodiment-understanding-required actions like noop and
scroll, and add more actions for internal workflow management or autonomous planning control.


B        P IVOTAL N ODES AND THE P LANNING T REE C LARIFICATIONS

To prevent confusion, we separate the following explanations for the independent techniques of
“selectively replaying web elements on a page” and “selectively replaying entire pages.”
    7
        Valid only in multisite tasks.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1      S ELECTIVELY R EPLAYING W EB E LEMENTS ON A PAGE WITH P IVOTAL N ODES (F IGURE
         4 S TEP 2)

B.1.1        I NTUITION AND BACKGROUND
We could view selectively replaying web elements on a page as a focused memory mechanism,
where only the information that’s relevant to the task would be recorded and replayed as the agent
history traces. As all the web pages could be framed into a (DOM) tree structure, any web elements
are nodes in this representation. We define pivotal nodes as the web elements, be it interactable or
not, that are potentially useful for completing the task. Those pivotal nodes might present infor-
mation (e.g., customer reviews in a review summary task) or the agent could interact with them to
navigate to crucial states (e.g., the search box and the search button in a search task). We obtain
these nodes at each step by prompting the agent to generate the page’s highlights based on which
they issue the action, or any web elements they will attend to if they fail at future steps and restore
to the current state. After identifying the pivotal nodes with the agent’s efforts, our code supports
automatically parsing the web page’s DOM tree and retaining nodes that are associated with the
pivotal nodes (i.e., pivotal nodes’ ancestor, sibling, and descendant nodes, as shown in Figure 4),
to get a more succinct but less noisy version of the observation. This version would be used for
constructing the agent’s focused working history.

B.2      P ROMPT, P IVOTAL N ODE S ECTION
Generate the response in the following format :
...
OBSERVATION HIGHLIGHT :
L i s t t h e n u m e r i c a l i d s o f e l e m e n t s on t h e c u r r e n t webpage b a s e d on which you would i s s u e y o u r
        a c t i o n . A l s o i n c l u d e e l e m e n t s on t h e c u r r e n t webpage you would a t t e n d t o i f you f a i l i n
        t h e f u t u r e and h a v e t o r e s t o r e t o t h i s s t e p . Don ’ t i n c l u d e e l e m e n t s from t h e p r e v i o u s
        p a g e s . S e l e c t e l e m e n t s a t a h i g h e r h i e r a r c h i c a l l e v e l i f most t h e i r c h i l d r e n n o d e s a r e
        c o n s i d e r e d c r u c i a l . S o r t by r e l e v a n c e and p o t e n t i a l v a l u e s from h i g h t o low , and s e p a r a t e
          t h e i d s w i t h commas . E . g . , ‘ 1 3 2 1 , 5 2 , 7 5 6 , 8 3 8 ‘ .



B.3      E XAMPLE TASK O BJECTIVE

What is the email address of the Dean of the School of Engineering at Stanford University?

B.4      AGENT O CCAM ’ S W ORKFLOW R EGARDING THE P IVOTAL N ODES

0. The task started at the Google.com, with the observation to be:
RootWebArea ’ Google ’
        l i n k [ 2 9 ] ’ About ’
        l i n k [30] ’ Store ’
        l i n k [ 2 7 7 ] ’ Gmail ’
        l i n k [ 2 7 5 ] ’ S e a r c h f o r Images ’
        b u t t o n [ 2 8 2 ] ’ Google apps ’
        l i n k [ 1 5 2 ] ’ Sign in ’
        IframePresentational [153]
        search [6]
                      combobox [ 1 2 ] ’ S e a r c h ’ [ r e q u i r e d : F a l s e ]
                      b u t t o n [ 2 9 4 ] ’ S e a r c h by v o i c e ’
                      b u t t o n [ 2 9 5 ] ’ S e a r c h by image ’
                      b u t t o n [ 2 7 2 ] ’ Google S e a r c h ’
                      b u t t o n [ 2 7 3 ] ” I ’m F e e l i n g Lucky ”
        contentinfo
                      link [83] ’ Advertising ’
                      l i n k [84] ’ Business ’
                      l i n k [ 8 5 ] ’How S e a r c h works ’
                      l i n k [ 8 9 ] ’ Our t h i r d d e c a d e o f c l i m a t e a c t i o n : j o i n us ’
                      l i n k [93] ’ Privacy ’
                      l i n k [ 9 4 ] ’ Terms ’
                      button [100] ’ Settings ’
                                    generic [102] ’ Settings ’


1. The agent typed the keyword into the search box and identified element 12 (combobox [12]
’Search’ [required: False]) and 272 (button [272] ’Google Search’) as the pivotal nodes. The web
transit to a Google search page with the searched entries listed. Now, the agent would be prompted


                                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with task history and web observation for issuing the next action, where the task history was con-
structed based on the pivotal nodes selected by the agent previously, and any pivotal-node-associated
nodes. We take the automatically-generated interaction history clip from the prompt at this step:
<s t e p 0 i n t e r a c t i o n >
OBSERVATION :
RootWebArea ’ Google ’
               search
                              combobox ’ S e a r c h ’ [ r e q u i r e d : F a l s e ]
                               b u t t o n ’ S e a r c h by v o i c e ’
                               b u t t o n ’ S e a r c h by image ’
                               b u t t o n ’ Google S e a r c h ’
                               b u t t o n ” I ’m F e e l i n g Lucky ”
REASON FOR ACTION :
To p r o g r e s s t o w a r d s f i n d i n g t h e e m a i l a d d r e s s o f t h e Dean o f t h e S c h o o l o f E n g i n e e r i n g a t
         S t a n f o r d U n i v e r s i t y , t h e f i r s t l o g i c a l s t e p i s t o s e a r c h f o r r e l e v a n t i n f o r m a t i o n . Using
         t h e s e a r c h i n p u t box t o e n t e r a q u e r y s u c h a s ” Dean o f t h e S c h o o l o f E n g i n e e r i n g S t a n f o r d
           U n i v e r s i t y e m a i l ” and t h e n s u b m i t t i n g i t u s i n g t h e ’ Google S e a r c h ’ b u t t o n i s a d i r e c t
         approach to gather t h i s information .
ACTION :
t y p e [ 1 2 ] [ Dean o f t h e S c h o o l o f E n g i n e e r i n g S t a n f o r d U n i v e r s i t y e m a i l ] [ 1 ]
</ s t e p 0 i n t e r a c t i o n >


2. We can observe that the “pivotal node” technique helps keep a focused memory attention by only
retaining the context of crucial information and omitting irrelevant noise. Based on the interaction
history summary and current observation, the agent executed the following steps, with the history
section constantly updated with the information from the ongoing steps till trajectory ended.

B.5       S ELECTIVELY R EPLAYING E NTIRE PAGES WITH THE P LANNING T REE (F IGURE 4 S TEP
          3)

We will use a planning tree generated by our agent during the development stage as an example for
explaining how the planning tree takes shape and helps in selectively replaying past pages.

B.5.1         I NTUITION AND BACKGROUND
If we make an analogy of the single-thread web task completion to code execution, the agent’s
issuing sub plans mimic nested function calling, the active plan is like the uppermost function in the
execution stack, and pruning the planning tree plays as popping failed functions off the stack. There
constantly exists a planning tree and the planning tree operation instructions in the agent’s prompt.
We enable the agent to organize the planning tree with ‘branch‘ and ‘prune‘ commands, where the
‘branch‘ action creates new subplans, and the ‘prune‘ action restores the task progress to a previous
state. It’s noteworthy that those planning commands are in the same position as navigation prompts
for the agent.

B.5.2         P ROMPT, P LANNING T REE S ECTION
I f you t h i n k you s h o u l d r e f i n e t h e p l a n , u s e t h e f o l l o w i n g a c t i o n s :
b r a n c h [ p a r e n t p l a n i d ] [ n e w s u b p l a n i n t e n t ] : To c r e a t e a new s u b p l a n b a s e d on PREVIOUS PLANS .
            E n s u r e t h e new s u b p l a n i s c o n n e c t e d t o t h e a p p r o p r i a t e p a r e n t p l a n by u s i n g i t s ID . E . g
          . , ‘ branch [ 1 2 ] [ N avig ate t o t h e ” I s s u e ” page t o check a l l t h e i s s u e s . ] ‘
p r u n e [ r e s u m e p l a n i d ] [ r e a s o n ] : To r e t u r n t o a p r e v i o u s p l a n s t a t e when t h e c u r r e n t p l a n i s
          deemed i m p r a c t i c a l . E n t e r t h e ID o f t h e p l a n s t a t e you want t o r e s u m e . E . g . , ‘ p r u n e [ 5 ] [
          The c u r r e n t p a g e l a c k s i t e m s ” b l a c k s p e a k e r , ” p r o m p t i n g a r e t u r n t o t h e i n i t i a l p a g e t o
          r e s t a r t the item search . ] ‘
Otherwise , use the f o l l o w i n g a c t i o n s :
{navigation specifications}



B.6       E XAMPLE TASK O BJECTIVE

(WebArena 174) Open my latest updated issue that has keyword “feature” in its title to check if it is
closed.

B.7       AGENT O CCAM ’ S W ORKFLOW R EGARDING THE P LANNING T REE
0. At the beginning, we used the task objective as the root plan:


                                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[ 0 ] ( A c t i v e P l a n ) F i n d t h e s o l u t i o n t o ” Open my l a t e s t u p d a t e d i s s u e t h a t h a s keyword ” f e a t u r e
       ” in i t s t i t l e to check i f i t i s c l o s e d ”


1. The agent added a subplan to planning node 0 by issuing branch [0] [Navigate to
the Issues page to search for the latest issue with the keyword
"feature" in the title.]. Now the planning tree changed into:
[ 0 ] F i n d t h e s o l u t i o n t o ” Open my l a t e s t u p d a t e d i s s u e t h a t h a s keyword ” f e a t u r e ” i n i t s t i t l e
          to check i f i t i s c l o s e d ”
             [ 1 ] ( A c t i v e Plan ) Nav igat e t o t h e I s s u e s page t o s e a r c h f o r t h e l a t e s t i s s u e with t h e
                    keyword ” f e a t u r e ” i n t h e t i t l e .


2. The agent navigated to the project’s issue page.
3. The agent decomposed the plan by generating branch actions branch [1] [Search for
the latest issue with the keyword "feature" in the title and check
if it is closed.]                 and branch [1] [Open the latest issue with the
keyword "feature" in the title.]. It performed navigation steps for each active plan
before the next planning command was executed. In this example, after branch [1] [Search
for the latest issue with the keyword "feature" in the title and
check if it is closed.] was proposed, the active plan turned into “Search for the latest
issue with the keyword ‘feature’ in the title and check if it is closed.” The agent then typed the
keyword “feature” into the search box and sorted the issues by operating the sort icon before
generating the next plan “Open the latest issue with the keyword ‘feature’ in the title.” In other
words, all the navigation commands (e.g., search and sort) it issued were intended for the current
active plan (e.g., search for the latest issue with the keyword “feature” in the title and check if it is
closed). Just like a function call only needs to consider the function’s scope, this allows the agent
to only attend to the navigation actions dedicated to the active plan and the corresponding web
observation as the playing history, which helps selectively replay past pages for the agent. Note
that in this case, it assigned the two new sub plans to the same parent plan [1], which automatically
shaped the planning tree’s structure. Finally, the planning tree reformed into (the content enclosed
in “[]” means comments, which is intended for illustration and didn’t appear in the agent’s prompt):
[ 0 ] F i n d t h e s o l u t i o n t o ” Open my l a t e s t u p d a t e d i s s u e t h a t h a s keyword ” f e a t u r e ” i n i t s t i t l e
          to check i f i t i s c l o s e d ”
             [ 1 ] N a v i g a t e t o t h e I s s u e s p a g e t o s e a r c h f o r t h e l a t e s t i s s u e w i t h t h e keyword ”
                    f e a t u r e ” i n t h e t i t l e . [ Plan ’ s a c t i o n scope : n a v i g a t e . ]
                           [ 2 ] S e a r c h f o r t h e l a t e s t i s s u e w i t h t h e keyword ” f e a t u r e ” i n t h e t i t l e and
                                   c h e c k i f i t i s c l o s e d . [ P l a n ’ s a c t i o n s c o p e : s e a r c h and s o r t . ]
                           [ 3 ] ( A c t i v e P l a n ) Open t h e l a t e s t i s s u e w i t h t h e keyword ” f e a t u r e ” i n t h e
                                   title .


4. The agent executed the following steps to complete the task.

C      AGENT O CCAM ’ S G ENERALIZABILITY TO R EAL - WORLD W EBSITES

Table 9: Performance comparison between Agent-E success rate (SR) and AgentOccam SR on tasks
defined on real-world web environments from WebVoyager (He et al., 2024).

                                   Website (Task Number)                Agent-E SR           AgentOccam SR
                                   Allrecipes (4)                        75.00%                  50.00%
                                   Amazon (1)                             0.00%                  0.00%
                                   Apple (7)                             57.14%                  28.57%
                                   ArXiv (16)                            50.00%                  43.75%
                                   BBC News (2)                           0.00%                  0.00%
                                   Booking (2)                            50.00%                100.00%
                                   Cambridge Dictionary (9)               55.56%                88.89%
                                   Coursera (2)                           50.00%                 50.00%
                                   ESPN (10)                              40.00%                50.00%
                                   Google Map (9)                         33.33%                44.44%
                                   Google Search (16)                     62.50%                81.25%
                                   Huggingface (17)                       17.65%                29.41%
                                   Wolfram Alpha (34)                    73.53%                  61.76%
                                   Overall (129)                          51.90%                54.30%


WebVoyager benchmark (He et al., 2024) compiles web tasks based on 15 popular real-world web-
sites. It comprises tasks with two types of user questions: ones with “golden” answers that are


                                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: The success rate (SR) of AGENT O CCAM’s ablation study with models GPT-4-T URBO
and G EMINI -1.5-F LASH on the WebArena’s development set.

 Agent                         Model         SR (%)   Shopping   Shopping Admin   GitLab   Map     Reddit   Multisite
                                             (#190)     (#48)         (#41)       (#41)    (#29)   (#21)     (#10)
 Vanilla                   GPT-4-Turbo        14.2       16.7          12.2        14.6     17.2     9.5      10.0
 ↓ Actions                 GPT-4-Turbo        25.8       22.9          24.4        34.2     31.0    19.1      10.0
 Above + X Scrolling       GPT-4-Turbo        30.0       29.2          29.3        36.6     24.1    38.1      10.0
 Above + Obs Opt.          GPT-4-Turbo        34.7       37.5          34.2        22.0     41.4    57.1      10.0
 Above + History           GPT-4-Turbo        36.8       39.6          34.2        36.6     44.8    38.1      10.0
 AGENT O CCAM              GPT-4-Turbo        44.2       45.8          46.3        48.8     41.4    47.6      10.0
 Vanilla                  Gemini-1.5-Flash    11.6       20.8           4.9         9.8     17.2     4.8       0.0
 ↓ Actions                Gemini-1.5-Flash    23.2       29.2          22.0        29.3     13.8    19.1      10.0
 Above + X Scrolling      Gemini-1.5-Flash    24.2       33.3          24.4        22.0     27.6    14.3       0.0
 Above + Obs Opt.         Gemini-1.5-Flash    30.0       37.5          34.2        31.7     20.7    23.8      10.0
 Above + History          Gemini-1.5-Flash    32.1       35.4          31.7        31.7     37.9    28.6      10.0
 AGENT O CCAM             Gemini-1.5-Flash    33.7       37.5          34.2        36.6     37.9    28.6       0.0



definite and time-invariant, and ones with “possible” answers that are either open-ended with multi-
ple potential answers or related to real-time information. We use WebVoyager questions with golden
answers to avoid subjective human evaluations. We acknowledge that other WebVoyager tasks might
test more web agent skills, but since they are not defined on static web pages, and thus their solu-
tions would change over time, each new web agent’s success rate would require human assessment
of trajectories. Due to the subjectivity of human annotation (as evidenced by the high variance in our
main experiment’s human annotations provided alongside the code8 ), these results aren’t compara-
ble. We can’t expect the same group of human annotators to label all previous agents’ trajectories
for every new agent, so we regretfully omit other tasks. Additionally, we exclude GitHub tasks,
as the site’s anti-scraping measures frequently cause page loading timeouts. Additionally, due to
these measures, GitHub limits interactable elements, which prevents web page proper functionality,
and the IP address hosting the agent is at risk of being banned. In contrast, WebArena’s simulated
GitLab environment mimics GitHub, enabling us to demonstrate AGENT O CCAM’s performance on
similar tasks using existing results. In a nutshell, we have 129 tasks from WebVoyager with defi-
nite golden answers across 13 real-world web environments, including Allrecipes, Amazon, Apple,
ArXiv, BBC News, Booking, Cambridge Dictionary, Coursera, ESPN, Google Map, Google Search,
Huggingface, and Wolfram Alpha.
Our baseline on WebVoyager is the concurrent work Agent-E (Abuelsaad et al., 2024), which intro-
duces several architectural improvements like the planner-browser-reflector agent architecture and
the browser’s document object model selection. It achieves the previous SOTA on the full WebVoy-
ager with the assessments done by humans. As they didn’t report agent trajectory logs, we replicate
their work on the WebVoyager subset introduced in the above paragraph, evaluated with the same
definite-answer-based hard-coded evaluators as ours. We run each task once for both agents.
Based on the results in Table 9, AGENT O CCAM performs better than Agent-E on WebVoyager’s
definite-answer-subset. Specifically, both agents have their specificities. We find that Agent-E
makes an edge on websites like Wolfram Alpha with more delicate plans issued by its “planner,”
and AGENT O CCAM outperforms it on websites like Google Search and Hugging Face with more
accurate task interpretation and information retrieval. The impressive results across 10+ websites
and many types of tasks can show AGENT O CCAM’s generalizability in the web environment.

D    AGENT O CCAM ’ S G ENERALIZABILITY TO BASE M ODEL FAMILIES
We conduct the full set of ablation studies on a WebArena development subset with G EMINI -1.5-
F LASH (Google, 2024), a model trained with different data from the GPT model family.
Due to the cost constraints, we construct a representative subset from the original 812 tasks in
WebArena. Specifically, we sample one task from each task cluster instantiated with the same intent
    8
      We would like to thank Yuhao Cheng, Tong Li, Yuren Hao, Ye Wu, and Xiaoxuan Wang for helping assess
the agent trajectories.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Action statistics for the ablation study of AGENT O CCAM’s components with models GPT-
4-T URBO and G EMINI -1.5-F LASH on the WebArena’s development set.
        Exp.            Model        click hover type press scroll new tab go back goto    note    stop go homebranch prune
       Vanilla       GPT-4-Turbo     473 26 212         1     22      4        9   115       -       -      -     -     -
     ↓ Actions       GPT-4-Turbo 1612 -          515    -    107      -      16     -       40     120      5     -     -
Above + X Scrolling GPT-4-Turbo 1641 -           491    -      -      -       19    -       60     128      5     -     -
 Above + Obs Opt.    GPT-4-Turbo 1539 -          437    -      -      -       21    -       82     137      1     -     -
  Above + History    GPT-4-Turbo 1068 -          287    -      -      -       24    -       23     181     24     -     -
    AGENT O CCAM     GPT-4-Turbo 1110 -          261    -      -      -      123    1       40     183      3     9     6
       Vanilla      Gemini-1.5-Flash 103     0    65    0      7      5        0    9        -       -      -     -     -
     ↓ Actions      Gemini-1.5-Flash 1390 -      509    -    176      -      28     -       31     130     11     -     -
Above + X Scrolling Gemini-1.5-Flash 1258 -      542    -      -      -      23     -       53     134     22     -     -
 Above + Obs Opt. Gemini-1.5-Flash 1322 -        377    -      -      -      28     -       29     144     42     -     -
  Above + History Gemini-1.5-Flash 776       -   253    -      -      -      50     -       44     185     15     -     -
    AGENT O CCAM    Gemini-1.5-Flash 942     -   289    -      -      -      67     -       44     185     34    27    75


Table 12: Average observation tokens per step of AGENT O CCAM’s components with models GPT-
4-T URBO and G EMINI -1.5-F LASH on the WebArena’s development set. We use the GPT 2 tokenizer
from H UGGINGFACE (Radford et al., 2019).
         Exp.                    Model           All     Shopping    Shopping Admin       GitLab     Map      Reddit   Multisite
        Vanilla               GPT-4-Turbo       2202.5    2268.7         2421.6           2267.3    1882.3    2119.0   1715.8
      ↓ Actions               GPT-4-Turbo       1682.1    1496.7         2186.6           2168.3     953.3    1102.3   1261.8
 Above + X Scrolling          GPT-4-Turbo       3571.2    3120.3         5175.5           4234.9    1423.3    3079.8   1977.9
  Above + Obs Opt.            GPT-4-Turbo       2669.8    1664.9         4274.6           2744.3    1930.8    2664.4   1370.6
   Above + History            GPT-4-Turbo       3107.0    1745.4         4988.5           3579.2     788.0    2758.4   1856.9
     AGENT O CCAM             GPT-4-Turbo       2785.1    1500.8         5032.8           3032.3     645.6    3476.0   1233.9
        Vanilla              Gemini-1.5-Flash   2303.4    2307.0         2537.5           2707.0    1849.7    1794.7   2037.6
      ↓ Actions              Gemini-1.5-Flash   1713.9    1577.4         2112.3           2257.1     818.5    1542.8   1177.2
 Above + X Scrolling         Gemini-1.5-Flash   3219.6    3110.7         5234.0           3378.0    1040.7    3204.9   2021.1
  Above + Obs Opt.           Gemini-1.5-Flash   2814.9    1769.8         4632.9           3410.7     858.7    3203.5   1577.0
   Above + History           Gemini-1.5-Flash   3283.2    1720.7         5078.3           3657.6     734.2    5712.5   1112.4
     AGENT O CCAM            Gemini-1.5-Flash   2872.2    1639.6         4156.3           2519.3     688.7    6241.4   1267.7


template (e.g., “What is the top-{{n}} best-selling product in {{year}}”, where “n” and “{{year}}”
would be replaced by instantiation tokens) in WebArena, forming a development set with 190 tasks9 .
We use Gemini-1.5-flash for all experiments. We run each task once and restart the experiment if
the WebArena simulator fails (i.e., login expires, Reddit post limit exceeds, map malfunctioning,
etc.). The results and statistics are listed in Table 10, 11, 12, 13, with the performance from the
GPT-4-turbo counterpart on the same development task set for comparison.
We can observe a similar trend with the Gemini model that each alignment component introduced by
our paper contributes to the web agent’s overall performance. To be specific, removing non-essential
actions (↓ Actions) encourages the agent to explore more actively with commands click and
type; disabling scrolling (Above + X Scrolling) proves advantageous in tasks where key
information is not presented on the first browser sight; simplifying web page elements (Above +
Obs Opt.) reduces the observation token number; selectively replaying web element in one page
(Above + History) reduces the steps required to accomplish the task; and planning and se-
lectively replay past pages (AGENT O CCAM) enables the agent to self-organize task workflow and
quickly restore to a previous stage after several failed attempts. In conclusion, each alignment com-
ponent proposed by AGENT O CCAM proves beneficial to the agent system and can be generalized to
different base models.

    9
      We remove stop in the statistics for the vanilla WebArena agent as this action is excluded in their officially
defined action space. However, their agent is allowed by code to generate stop to end the trajectory.
    9
      The task ids are: 3, 9, 13, 20, 22, 30, 35, 40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 52, 61, 65, 68, 71, 76, 78, 80, 86, 89, 94, 96,
97, 99, 104, 109, 116, 117, 118, 120, 125, 127, 131, 132, 138, 141, 148, 153, 156, 157, 158, 164, 171, 173,
180, 187, 188, 194, 204, 205, 212, 217, 219, 224, 225, 230, 234, 237, 239, 244, 250, 257, 258, 259, 262, 265,
271, 274, 281, 283, 285, 287, 289, 294, 298, 305, 311, 313, 316, 323, 324, 333, 337, 340, 345, 350, 354, 356,
357, 360, 367, 368, 370, 375, 376, 377, 382, 383, 384, 386, 388, 390, 395, 401, 406, 410, 413, 416, 419, 423,
425, 435, 440, 443, 446, 452, 457, 463, 468, 472, 476, 482, 490, 495, 499, 503, 508, 509, 512, 518, 521, 525,
530, 535, 539, 546, 550, 555, 561, 566, 567, 571, 578, 580, 587, 594, 599, 604, 606, 613, 615, 624, 627, 634,
637, 644, 646, 653, 660, 663, 666, 669, 674, 677, 682, 687, 691, 698, 702, 706, 713, 715, 720, 730, 731, 738,
749, 754, 758, 762, 766, 770, 771, 772, 779, 785, 797, 803.


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Average number of steps per task of AGENT O CCAM’s components with models GPT-4-
T URBO and G EMINI -1.5-F LASH on the WebArena’s development set.
         Exp.                  Model          All   Shopping   Shopping Admin   GitLab   Map   Reddit   Multisite
        Vanilla             GPT-4-Turbo       1.3     1.5            1.3         1.1     1.4    1.3       0.9
      ↓ Actions             GPT-4-Turbo       3.0     2.9            3.1         3.2     3.3    2.4       2.4
 Above + X Scrolling        GPT-4-Turbo       2.9     2.2            3.3         3.2     3.5    2.2       2.8
  Above + Obs Opt.          GPT-4-Turbo       2.7     2.4            2.7         3.4     2.7    2.4       2.7
   Above + History          GPT-4-Turbo       2.0     1.3            2.4         2.4     1.8    1.4       3.2
     AGENT O CCAM           GPT-4-Turbo       2.1     1.7            2.2         2.4     2.2    2.0       3.0
        Vanilla            Gemini-1.5-Flash   0.5     0.5            0.4         0.5     0.5    0.3       0.6
      ↓ Actions            Gemini-1.5-Flash   2.8     3.2            2.8         2.5     2.6    2.9       2.4
 Above + X Scrolling       Gemini-1.5-Flash   2.5     2.4            2.2         2.4     2.7    2.7       3.3
  Above + Obs Opt.         Gemini-1.5-Flash   2.4     2.5            2.3         2.8     2.4    1.9       2.2
   Above + History         Gemini-1.5-Flash   1.6     1.6            1.7         1.7     1.4    1.5       1.7
     AGENT O CCAM          Gemini-1.5-Flash   2.0     1.6            2.4         2.0     2.2    1.8       2.8


E     E VALUATOR R ECTIFICATIONS

E.1    R ECTIFICATION C ATEGORIZATION

We only modify the evaluator when it’s deemed erroneous due to the wrong task labels or misuse of
evaluating functions. When the task definition and corresponding evaluation metric match to some
extent but might be misleading to most agents and even to human, we still keep the original ones
to ensure the slightest reasonable changes. We emphasize that we re-implement WebArena’s
base agent SteP’s agent with the same web environment and modified evaluators as AGEN -
T O CCAM for a fair comparison. For example, we keep the evaluators of shopping tasks defined
with template 163, requiring the agent to "Draft an email to the shop owner via
their contact us function for a coupon as {reason}", which doesn’t explic-
itly specify whether to submit the drafted email. However, the evaluator is defined to assess the not
yet submitted email. All capable LLM-based agents we have tested, which have been aligned to be
helpful, will for sure submit the email if not directly prompted to behave in the way the evaluator
desires, leading the email field to be blank and thus failing those tasks. Another example of this
kind is the Reddit task asking the agent to find the most appropriate subreddit to post (task template
6100), where the assessment of appropriation is very subjective. In all those tasks, we follow the
original evaluators, though their evaluation outcomes are arguably questionable.
We categorize our evaluator modifications into two classes, namely label errors and improper evalu-
ation function selection, raise representative examples for each class, and list all the changes made.10
Label errors: We find there exist evaluator definition errors and some typos in the correct answers.
In the later cases, the tasks always require exact matching, where any well-aligned LLM-agent
would correct those typos in their generation. We thus rectify those errors:
i) Evaluator definitions contain errors. For example, in the Reddit task 584, the eval-
uator would open up the wrong page for the evaluation.        Another case in point is
the shopping task 261, where the url match evaluator is constrained to identify-
ing one correct url (<server host>:7770/electronics/headphones.html),
misjudging the same page (of the identical content) with a different url
(<server host>:7770/electronics.html?cat=60).                Tasks fall in this category
include: 261-264, 351-355, 584, 644, 679, 707-709, 786.
ii) The answer contains typos or grammatical errors. For example the is car necessary in
NYC in task 601, or the budge in task 603. More tasks of this kind include: task id 240, 298-302,
489, 583, 601, 603, 606, 608, 629, 645-649.
Improper evaluation function selection: Evaluator problems are more obvious in this case with
the following types:

   10
      As the evaluator is programmed by the WebArena simulator to be revoked only once at the end of each
trajectory, our statement of “our approach outperforms the baseline methods with the original evaluators” refers
to setting all the rewards of the trajectories with modified evaluators to be 0, which can be verified with the
reported trajectory logs.


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


i) Use the exact match function that compares whether the answer given by a human label-er and
the answer returned by the agent is identically the same. Errors occur when the agent returns a full-
form or a more complete answer, where the evaluators’ labels cannot match. For example, in Reddit
task 644 that requires the agent to post a meeting notice with the meeting date, where the keyword
match for such date is exactly the Dec 15th, where the evaluator would judge other answers like
December 15th as incorrect, where we change the keyword matching to one that could match
both Dec 15th and December 15th. (In other cases with a single answer, we simply replace
exact match with fuzzy match, which for instance in task 254 it could match 4125785000
with the agent’s answer The phone number is 4125785000; or replace exact match
with must include, which for instance in task 363 it could match 778m with the agent’s an-
swer 778 m.) It also demands that the answer should strictly include expressions like virtual
meetup, where the agent might add other words in the virtual and meetup. In that sense,
we also split the keyword virtual meetup into two separate keywords, i.e., virtual and
meetup. Tasks of this kind include: task id 97, 118, 146, 178-182, 254, 293-297, 308-312, 330,
363-367, 415-418, 528-532, 640-649, 653-657.
ii) Use the poorly defined fuzzy match function, that would view the answer returned as un-
qualified for the missing-from-expression answer exploration process, or assess answers with more
detailed answers as partially correct (reward=0). We thus shift our prompt for the fuzzy match
function from: ‘Help a teacher to grade the answer of a student given a question. Keep in mind that
the student may use different phrasing or wording to answer the question. The goal is to evaluate
whether the answer is semantically equivalent to the reference answer.” to ‘Help a teacher to grade
the answer of a student given a question. Keep in mind that the student has executed the actions to
get the answer. They are allowed to use different phrasing or wording to answer the question. The
goal is to evaluate whether the key points in the reference answer are included in the student’s an-
swer. We allow answers with additional information that doesn’t contradict the reference answer
and review them as fully (not partially) correct.”
iii) Misuse the fuzzy match function by splitting the keyword list for matching into a list, where
each of the keyword and the entire answer, would be evaluated as partially correct (reward=0). In
other words, no answer would be assessed as the correct answer (even the gloden-standard answer
itself) due to such evaluator function misuse. This could be inferred from the function and the
evaluator’s definition. Tasks of this type include: task id 16-20, In such tasks, we simply merge
the list of keywords into a string, concatenated with "; ". For instance, for task 16, the previous
fuzzy match field is ["driving: 2min", "walking: 16min"], and we modify it
to ["driving: 2min; walking: 16min"].

E.2         D ETAILS
# Task 16
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 2min ’ , ’ w a l k i n g : 16 min ’ ]
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 2 min ; w a l k i n g : 16 min ’ ]

# Task 17
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 13 min ’ , ’ w a l k i n g : 1h 35 min ’ ]
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 13 min ; w a l k i n g : 1h 35 min ’ ]

# Task 18
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 15 min ’ , ’ w a l k i n g : 1h 47 min ’ ]
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 15 min ; w a l k i n g : 1h 47 min ’ ]

# Task 19
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 12 min ’ , ’ w a l k i n g : 1h 44 min . ’ ]
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 12 min ; w a l k i n g : 1h 44 min . ’ ]

# Task 20
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 13 min ’ , ’ w a l k i n g : 1h 45 min ’ ]
[ ’ d r i v i n g : 13 min ; w a l k i n g : 1h 45 min ’ ]

# Task 97
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ 9 1 4km ’ ]
[ ’ 9 1 4km |OR| 914 km ’ ]

# Task 118
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ :   ’ ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ jaw b r u x i s m ’ , ’ mouth g u a r d ’ ] } } ]


                                                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ :     ’ ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ jaw ’ , ’ b r u x i s m ’ , ’ mouth g u a r d ’ ] } } ]

# Task 146
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ 1 6 x24 ’ ]
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ 1 6 x24 ’ ]

# Task 178
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
Yes
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ Yes , i t i s c l o s e d ’ ]

# Task 179
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
Yes
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ Yes , i t i s c l o s e d ’ ]

# Task 180
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
No
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ No , i t i s open ’ ]

# Task 181
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
No
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ No , i t i s open ’ ]

# Task 182
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
Yes
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’ Yes , i t i s c l o s e d ’ ]

# Task 240
### i n s t a n t i a t i o n d i c t . p r o d u c t c a t e g o r y
c o m p e t i t i v e swimwear
c o m p e t a t i v e swimwear
### i n t e n t
I am d o i n g a m a r k e t s u r v e y f o r one s t o p m a r k e t , show me t h e most e x p e n s i v e p r o d u c t from c o m p e t i t i v e swimwear
          category
I am d o i n g a m a r k e t s u r v e y f o r one s t o p m a r k e t , show me t h e most e x p e n s i v e p r o d u c t from c o m p e t a t i v e swimwear
          category

# Task 254
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
4125785000
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . f u z z y m a t c h
[ ’4125785000 ’]

# Task 261
### e v a l . o r
[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / e l e c t r o n i c s . h t m l ? c a t =60 ’}]

# Task 262
### e v a l . o r
[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / c l o t h i n g − s h o e s − j e w e l r y . h t m l ? c a t =145 ’}]

# Task 263
### e v a l . o r
[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / c l o t h i n g − s h o e s − j e w e l r y . h t m l ? c a t =143 ’}]

# Task 264
### e v a l . o r
[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / o f f i c e − p r o d u c t s . h t m l ? c a t =187 ’}]

# Task 293
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
g i t c l o n e s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / c o n v e x e g g / s u p e r a w e s o m e r o b o t . g i t
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ g i t c l o n e s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / c o n v e x e g g / s u p e r a w e s o m e r o b o t . g i t ’ ]

# Task 294
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
g i t c l o n e s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / c o n v e x e g g / c h a t g p t . g i t
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ g i t c l o n e s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / c o n v e x e g g / c h a t g p t . g i t ’ ]

# Task 295
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
g i t c l o n e s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / r o o t / m e t a s e q . g i t
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ g i t c l o n e s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / r o o t / m e t a s e q . g i t ’ ]

# Task 296
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / e r i k l i n d e r n o r e n / PyTorch −GAN. g i t
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e


                                                                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[ ’ g i t c l o n e s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / e r i k l i n d e r n o r e n / PyTorch −GAN. g i t ’ ]

# Task 297
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / y j l o u /2019 − nCov . g i t
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ g i t c l o n e s s h : / / g i t @ m e t i s . l t i . c s . cmu . edu : 2 2 2 2 / y j l o u /2019 − nCov . g i t ’ ]

# Task 298
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r p a g e
### i n t e n t
Show t h e most r e c e n t           completed order
Show t h e most r e c e n t           completed o r d e r page

# Task 299
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r p a g e
### i n t e n t
Show t h e most r e c e n t           cancelled order
Show t h e most r e c e n t           c a n c e l l e d o r d e r page

# Task 300
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r p a g e
### i n t e n t
Show t h e most r e c e n t           pending order
Show t h e most r e c e n t           pending o r d e r page

# Task 301
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r p a g e
### i n t e n t
Show t h e most r e c e n t           processing order
Show t h e most r e c e n t           p r o c e s s i n g o r d e r page

# Task 302
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r
Show t h e most r e c e n t          {{ s t a t u s }} o r d e r p a g e
### i n t e n t
Show t h e most r e c e n t           out of d e l i v e r y order
Show t h e most r e c e n t           out of d e l i v e r y o r d e r page

# Task 308
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
Shawn A l l e n
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ Shawn A l l e n ’ ]

# Task 309
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
Grayson Wright
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ G r a y s o n Wright ’ ]

# Task 310
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
tokudu
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ tokudu ’ ]

# Task 311
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
E r i k L i n d e r −Nor \ ’ en
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ E r i k L i n d e r −Nor \ ’ en ’ ]

# Task 312
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
C h r i s t o p h e r Groskopf
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ C h r i s t o p h e r Groskopf ’ ]

# Task 330
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’81.31 ’]
[ ’83.31 ’]
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r r a w a n n o t a t i o n
81.31
83.31

# Task 351
### e v a l . o r
[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / v i d e o −games . h t m l ? c a t =67& p r o d u c t l i s t o r d e r = p r i c e ’ } ]

# Task 352
### e v a l . o r


                                                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / h e a l t h − h o u s e h o l d . h t m l ? c a t =192& p r o d u c t l i s t o r d e r = p r i c e ’ } ]

# Task 353
### i n s t a n t i a t i o n d i c t . p r o d u c t c a t e g o r y
c o m p e t i t i v e swimwear
c o m p e t a t i v e swimwear
### i n t e n t
L i s t p r o d u c t s from c o m p e t i t i v e swimwear c a t e g o r y by a s c e n d i n g p r i c e
L i s t p r o d u c t s from c o m p e t a t i v e swimwear c a t e g o r y by a s c e n d i n g p r i c e
### e v a l . o r
[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / c l o t h i n g − s h o e s − j e w e l r y . h t m l ? c a t =149& p r o d u c t l i s t o r d e r = p r i c e ’ } ]

# Task 354
### e v a l . o r
[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / home− k i t c h e n . h t m l ? c a t =154& p r o d u c t l i s t o r d e r = p r i c e& p r o d u c t l i s t d i r =
          desc ’}]

# Task 355
### e v a l . o r
[{ ’ r e f e r e n c e u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 7 0 / home− k i t c h e n . h t m l ? c a t =155& p r o d u c t l i s t d i r = d e s c ’ } ]

# Task 363
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
748m
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ 7 7 8m |OR| 778 m’ ]
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r r a w a n n o t a t i o n
748m
778m

# Task 364
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
1 . 7 km
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ 1 . 7 km |OR| 1 . 7 km ’ ]

# Task 365
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
2 . 2 km
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ 2 . 2 km |OR| 2 . 2 km ’ ]

# Task 366
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
1 . 2 km
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’ 1 . 2 km |OR| 1 . 2 km ’ ]

# Task 367
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . e x a c t m a t c h
1 . 4 km
1 . 4 km |OR| 1 . 4 km

# Task 415
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 8 0 2 3 / b y t e b l a z e / a11y − w e b r i n g . c l u b / − / m e r g e r e q u e s t s / 4 0 ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document .
          q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” n o t e s − l i s t ” \ ’ ) . l a s t E l e m e n t C h i l d . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ . t i m e l i n e − d i s c u s s i o n −body \ ’) .
          o u t e r T e x t ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ @davepgreene ’}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 8 0 2 3 / b y t e b l a z e / a11y − w e b r i n g . c l u b / − / m e r g e r e q u e s t s / 4 0 ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document .
          q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” n o t e s − l i s t ” \ ’ ) . l a s t E l e m e n t C h i l d . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ . t i m e l i n e − d i s c u s s i o n −body \ ’) .
          o u t e r T e x t ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ @davepgreene ’ ] } } ]

# Task 416
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 8 0 2 3 / a 1 1 y p r o j e c t / a 1 1 y p r o j e c t . com / − / m e r g e r e q u e s t s / 1 2 7 0 ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document .
          q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” n o t e s − l i s t ” \ ’ ) . l a s t E l e m e n t C h i l d . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ . t i m e l i n e − d i s c u s s i o n −body \ ’) .
          o u t e r T e x t ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ Thank you ’}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 8 0 2 3 / a 1 1 y p r o j e c t / a 1 1 y p r o j e c t . com / − / m e r g e r e q u e s t s / 1 2 7 0 ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document .
          q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” n o t e s − l i s t ” \ ’ ) . l a s t E l e m e n t C h i l d . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ . t i m e l i n e − d i s c u s s i o n −body \ ’) .
          o u t e r T e x t ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Thank you ’ ] } } ]

# Task 417
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 8 0 2 3 / a 1 1 y p r o j e c t / a 1 1 y p r o j e c t . com / − / m e r g e r e q u e s t s / 1 4 8 5 ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document .
          q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” n o t e s − l i s t ” \ ’ ) . l a s t E l e m e n t C h i l d . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ . t i m e l i n e − d i s c u s s i o n −body \ ’) .
          o u t e r T e x t ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ @Roshanjossey ’}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 8 0 2 3 / a 1 1 y p r o j e c t / a 1 1 y p r o j e c t . com / − / m e r g e r e q u e s t s / 1 4 8 5 ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document .
          q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” n o t e s − l i s t ” \ ’ ) . l a s t E l e m e n t C h i l d . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ . t i m e l i n e − d i s c u s s i o n −body \ ’) .
          o u t e r T e x t ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ @Roshanjossey ’ ] } } ]

# Task 418
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 8 0 2 3 / b y t e b l a z e ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . c o v e r − s t a t u s ’ ) . l a s t C h i l d .
          t e x t C o n t e n t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ Busy ’}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 8 0 2 3 / b y t e b l a z e ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . c o v e r − t i t l e ’ ) . t e x t C o n t e n t ” , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Busy ’ ] } } ]

# Task 489
### i n s t a n t i a t i o n d i c t . h e a d i n g
No p r i v a c y p o l i c y i s n e e d e d i s t h i s d y s t o p i a n w o r l d
No p r i v a c y p o l i c y i s n e e d e d i n t h i s d y s t o p i a n w o r l d
### i n t e n t


                                                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Change t h e p a g e t i t l e o f ” P r i v a c y P o l i c y ” p a g e on my s i t e t o ”No p r i v a c y p o l i c y i s n e e d e d i s t h i s d y s t o p i a n
          world ” .
Change t h e p a g e t i t l e o f ” P r i v a c y P o l i c y ” p a g e on my s i t e t o ”No p r i v a c y p o l i c y i s n e e d e d i n t h i s d y s t o p i a n
          world ” .
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 8 0 / admin / cms / p a g e / e d i t / p a g e i d / 4 / ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r (\ ’ i n p u t [
          name =” t i t l e ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’No p r i v a c y p o l i c y i s n e e d e d i s t h i s
          d y s t o p i a n world ’}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 7 7 8 0 / admin / cms / p a g e / e d i t / p a g e i d / 4 / ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r (\ ’ i n p u t [
          name =” t i t l e ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’No p r i v a c y p o l i c y i s n e e d e d i n t h i s
          d y s t o p i a n world ’}}]

# Task 528
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 0 ’ ,
           ’12.99 ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 0 ’ , ’ 1 2 . 9 9 ’ ] } } ]

# Task 529
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 4 8 ’ ,
           ’169.95 ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 4 8 ’ , ’ 1 6 9 . 9 5 ’ ] } } ]

# Task 530
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 6 1 ’ ,
           ’68.88 ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 6 1 ’ , ’ 6 8 . 8 8 ’ ] } } ]

# Task 531
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 0 ’ , ’ $12
          .99 ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 0 ’ , ’ $12 . 9 9 ’ ] } } ]

# Task 532
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 0 ’ ,
           ’1.63 ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 0 ’ , ’ 1 . 6 3 ’ ] } } ]

# Task 583
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f / P l a n t s F o r C a t P a r e n t s / e d i t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” #
          f o r u m d e s c r i p t i o n ” ) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Cat p a r e n t s & p l a n l o v e r s ’]}} , {’ u r l
          ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f / P l a n t s F o r C a t P a r e n t s / e d i t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” #
          f o r u m s i d e b a r ” ) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Cat f r i e n d l y ’ , ’ Local vendors ’ , ’
          Promotion ’ , ’ Toxic p l a n t s ! ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f / P l a n t s F o r C a t P a r e n t s / e d i t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” #
          f o r u m d e s c r i p t i o n ” ) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Cat p a r e n t s & p l a n t l o v e r s ’]}} , {’
          u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f / P l a n t s F o r C a t P a r e n t s / e d i t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” #
          f o r u m s i d e b a r ” ) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Cat f r i e n d l y ’ , ’ Local vendors ’ , ’
          Promotion ’ , ’ Toxic p l a n t s ! ’]}}]

# Task 584
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f / Karaoke ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” # f o r u m d e s c r i p t i o n ” ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ P l a c e f o r Karaoke l o v e r s ’]}} , {’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f /
          Karaoke ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” # f o r u m s i d e b a r ” ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’
          must include ’ : [ ’ devices ’ , ’ setup ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f / K a r a o k e / e d i t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” # f o r u m d e s c r i p t i o n ” ) .
          value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ P l a c e f o r Karaoke l o v e r s ’]}} , {’ u r l ’ : ’ h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t
          : 9 9 9 9 / f / K a r a o k e / e d i t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” # f o r u m s i d e b a r ” ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ :
            {’ must include ’ : [ ’ devices ’ , ’ setup ’]}}]

# Task 601
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ i s c a r n e c e s s a r y i n NYC’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ i s c a r n e c e s s a r y i n NYC |OR| i s a c a r n e c e s s a r y i n
          NYC’ ] } } ]

# Task 603
### i n s t a n t i a t i o n d i c t . q u e s t i o n
s a f e and budge a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e i n nyc
s a f e and b u d g e t a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e i n nyc
### i n t e n t
P o s t my q u e s t i o n , ” s a f e and budge a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e i n nyc ” , i n a s u b r e d d i t where I ’m l i k e l y t o g e t an a n s w e r
P o s t my q u e s t i o n , ” s a f e and b u d g e t a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e i n nyc ” , i n a s u b r e d d i t where I ’m l i k e l y t o g e t an a n s w e r
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l


                                                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ s a f e and budge a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e i n nyc ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ s a f e and b u d g e t a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e i n nyc ’ ] } } ]

# Task 606
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ must include ’ : [ ’ i s car necessary ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ i s c a r n e c e s s a r y |OR| i s a c a r n e c e s s a r y ’ ] } } ]

# Task 608
### i n s t a n t i a t i o n d i c t . q u e s t i o n
s a f e and budge a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e
s a f e and b u d g e t a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e
### i n t e n t
F i n d a s u b r e d d i t f o c u s e d on t o p i c s r e l a t e d t o c i t y l i v e s i n DMV a r e a , and p o s t my q u e s t i o n , ” s a f e and                         budge
          apartment to live ” there
F i n d a s u b r e d d i t f o c u s e d on t o p i c s r e l a t e d t o c i t y l i v e s i n DMV a r e a , and p o s t my q u e s t i o n , ” s a f e and                         budget
          apartment to live ” there
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n   inner ’) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ s a f e and budge a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n   inner ’) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ s a f e and b u d g e t a p a r t m e n t t o l i v e ’ ] } } ]

# Task 629
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ y o u r o p i n i o n ’ , ’ Fun t h i n g t o do i n P i t t s b u r g h ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ y o u r o p i n i o n ’ , ’ Fun t h i n g t o do i n P i t t s b u r g h |OR|
          Fun t h i n g s t o do i n P i t t s b u r g h ’ ] } } ]

# Task 640
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ book r e a d i n g ’ , ’ March 15 t h ’ , ’ v i r t u a l meetup ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ book r e a d i n g ’ , ’ Mar 15 t h |OR| March 15 t h ’ , ’ v i r t u a l
          ’ , ’ meetup ’ ] } } ]

# Task 641
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ H a r r y P o t t e r ’ , ’ J u l y 8 t h ’ , ’ v i r t u a l meetup ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ H a r r y P o t t e r ’ , ’ J u l 8 t h |OR| J u l y 8 t h ’ , ’ v i r t u a l ’ , ’
          meetup ’ ] } } ]

# Task 642
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Big l i t t l e l i e s ’ , ’ Sep 10 t h ’ , ’ v i r t u a l meetup ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Big l i t t l e l i e s ’ , ’ Sep 10 t h |OR| S e p t e m b e r 10 t h ’ , ’
          v i r t u a l ’ , ’ meetup ’ ] } } ]

# Task 643
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r a c i n g c a r s ’ , ’ Oct 21 s t ’ , ’ v i r t u a l meetup ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r a c i n g c a r s ’ , ’ Oct 21 s t |OR| O c t o b e r 21 s t ’ , ’ v i r t u a l
          ’ , ’ meetup ’ ] } } ]

# Task 644
### i n s t a n t i a t i o n d i c t . s u b r e d d i t
games
gaming
### i n t e n t
P o s t a n o t i c e on a v i r t u a l meetup f o r T e a r s o f Kingdom e n t h u s i a s t s on Dec 15 t h i n t h e games s u b r e d d i t
P o s t a n o t i c e on a v i r t u a l meetup f o r T e a r s o f Kingdom e n t h u s i a s t s on Dec 15 t h i n t h e gaming s u b r e d d i t
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e u r l
h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f / games
h t t p : / / l o c a l h o s t : 9 9 9 9 / f / gaming
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l            ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
           o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ T e a r s o f Kingdom ’ , ’ Dec 15 t h ’ , ’ v i r t u a l meetup ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l            ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
           o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ T e a r s o f Kingdom ’ , ’ Dec 15 t h |OR| December 15 t h ’ , ’
           v i r t u a l ’ , ’ meetup ’ ] } } ]

# Task 645
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d         machine l e a r n i n g h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d         machine l e a r n i n g h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### i n t e n t
P o s t i n b o o k s s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d m a c h i n e         learning help the correpong f i e l d .
P o s t i n b o o k s s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d m a c h i n e         learning help the corresponding f i e l d .
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l


                                                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ machine l e a r n i n g ’ , ’ help ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ m a c h i n e l e a r n i n g ’ , ’ h e l p |OR| a s s i s t |OR| b e n e f i t |
          OR| i m p r o v e |OR| e n h a n c e |OR| t r a n s f o r m |OR| r e v o l u t i o n i z e ’ ] } } ]

# Task 646
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d m i d j o u r n e y h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d m i d j o u r n e y h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### i n t e n t
P o s t i n DIY s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d m i d j o u r n e y h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n DIY s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d m i d j o u r n e y h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ must include ’ : [ ’ midjourney ’ , ’ help ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ m i d j o u r n e y ’ , ’ h e l p |OR| a s s i s t |OR| b e n e f i t |OR|
          i m p r o v e |OR| e n h a n c e |OR| t r a n s f o r m |OR| r e v o l u t i o n i z e ’ ] } } ]

# Task 647
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} forum a b o u t what c o u l d open − s o u r c e LLMs h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} forum a b o u t what c o u l d open − s o u r c e LLMs h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### i n t e n t
P o s t i n t e c h n o l o g y forum a b o u t what c o u l d open − s o u r c e LLMs h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n t e c h n o l o g y forum a b o u t what c o u l d open − s o u r c e LLMs h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ open − s o u r c e LLMs ’ , ’ h e l p ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ open − s o u r c e LLMs ’ , ’ h e l p |OR| a s s i s t |OR| b e n e f i t |
          OR| i m p r o v e |OR| e n h a n c e |OR| t r a n s f o r m |OR| r e v o l u t i o n i z e ’ ] } } ]

# Task 648
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} forum a b o u t what c o u l d l a r g e l a n g u a g e m o d e l s h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} forum a b o u t what c o u l d l a r g e l a n g u a g e m o d e l s h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### i n t e n t
P o s t i n d a t a i s b e a u t i f u l forum a b o u t what c o u l d l a r g e l a n g u a g e m o d e l s h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n d a t a i s b e a u t i f u l forum a b o u t what c o u l d l a r g e l a n g u a g e m o d e l s h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ l a r g e l a n g u a g e models ’ , ’ h e l p ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ l a r g e l a n g u a g e models ’ , ’ h e l p |OR| a s s i s t |OR|
          b e n e f i t |OR| i m p r o v e |OR| e n h a n c e |OR| t r a n s f o r m |OR| r e v o l u t i o n i z e ’ ] } } ]

# Task 649
### i n t e n t t e m p l a t e
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d d i f f u s i o n model h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n {{ s u b r e d d i t }} s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d d i f f u s i o n model h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### i n t e n t
P o s t i n h i s t o r y s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d d i f f u s i o n model h e l p t h e c o r r e p o n g f i e l d .
P o s t i n h i s t o r y s u b r e d d i t a b o u t what c o u l d d i f f u s i o n model h e l p t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g f i e l d .
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ d i f f u s i o n model ’ , ’ h e l p ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ” f u n c : r e d d i t g e t p o s t u r l ( ’ l a s t u r l           ’ ) ” , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ” document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ’ . s u b m i s s i o n i n n e r ’ ) .
          o u t e r T e x t ” , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ d i f f u s i o n model ’ , ’ h e l p |OR| a s s i s t |OR| b e n e f i t |OR
          | i m p r o v e |OR| e n h a n c e |OR| t r a n s f o r m |OR| r e v o l u t i o n i z e ’ ] } } ]

# Task 653
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 0 ’ , ’
          B087QJN9W1 ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e a f t e r ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8 0 ’ , ’
          B087QJN9W1 ’ ] } } ]

# Task 654
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 1 6 1 ’ , ’ B09P7BFL4H
          ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 1 6 1 ’ , ’ B09P7BFL4H ’ ] } } ]

# Task 655
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 1 8 0 ’ , ’B087QJN9W1
          ’]}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 1 8 0 ’ , ’B087QJN9W1 ’ ] } } ]

# Task 656
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ i t b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 1 8 0 ’ , ’ B0041MSF2S
          ’]}}]


                                                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 1 8 0 ’ , ’ B0041MSF2S ’ ] } } ]

# Task 657
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e a f t e r t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 1 4 8 ’ , ’B003FVW3VA’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ t i t l e =” What ’ s on y o u r mind ? ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ r e f u n d ’ , ’ b r o k e ’ , ’ t h r e e d a y s o f use ’ , ’ 1 4 8 ’ , ’B003FVW3VA’ ] } } ]

# Task 679
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” d i v . a d m i n     data −grid − f i l t e r s − c u r r e n t ”) . outerText ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Completed ’ ] } } ]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( ” d i v . a d m i n     data −grid − f i l t e r s − c u r r e n t ”) . outerText ’ , ’
          r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : { ’ m u s t i n c l u d e ’ : [ ’ Complete ’ ] } } ]

# Task 707
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t f r o m ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ :
          { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ 1 / 1 / 2 0 2 2 ’ } } , { ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t t o
          ”\ ’) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ exact match ’ : ’12/31/2022 ’}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t f r o m ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ :
          { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ 1 / 1 / 2 2 ’ } } , { ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t t o
          ”\ ’) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ exact match ’ : ’12/31/22 ’}}]

# Task 708
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t f r o m ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ :
          { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ 1 / 1 / 2 0 2 3 ’ } } , { ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t t o
          ”\ ’) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ exact match ’ : ’12/31/2023 ’}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t f r o m ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ :
          { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ 1 / 1 / 2 3 ’ } } , { ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t t o
          ”\ ’) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ exact match ’ : ’12/31/23 ’}}]

# Task 709
### e v a l . p r o g r a m h t m l
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t f r o m ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ :
          { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ 5 / 1 / 2 0 2 1 ’ } } , { ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t t o
          ”\ ’) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ exact match ’ : ’3/31/2022 ’}}]
[{ ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t f r o m ” \ ’ ) . v a l u e ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ :
          { ’ e x a c t m a t c h ’ : ’ 5 / 1 / 2 1 ’ } } , { ’ u r l ’ : ’ l a s t ’ , ’ l o c a t o r ’ : ’ document . q u e r y S e l e c t o r ( \ ’ [ i d =” s a l e s r e p o r t t o
          ”\ ’) . value ’ , ’ r e q u i r e d c o n t e n t s ’ : {’ exact match ’ : ’3/31/22 ’}}]

# Task 786
### e v a l . r e f e r e n c e a n s w e r s . m u s t i n c l u d e
[ ’412 ’]
[ ’414 ’]



                                                                        Table 14: Action statistics.
                      Exp.                           click       hover       type        scroll go back goto                 note        stop go home branch                  prune
                 AGENT O CCAM                        4715          -         1159           -     339    -                   197          769    42     34                     47
              AGENT O CCAM + SteP                    5235         198        1407          11      25   132                  124         1733     -      -                      -
              AGENT O CCAM + Judge                   4893          -         1297           -     261    -                   127          726    94    220                     41



                            Table 15: Average number of steps per task across all WebArena sites.
                            Exp.                           All          Shopping           Shopping Admin                GitLab         Map          Reddit         Multisite
                       AGENT O CCAM                        9.0            6.7                    9.2                      10.8           8.5          8.6            13.3
                    AGENT O CCAM + SteP                    11.6           10.3                  12.0                      10.6          12.0          14.6           11.0
                    AGENT O CCAM + Judge                   9.4             6.7                  10.5                      10.6           9.6          8.4            13.5



                             Table 16: Average observation tokens per step across WebArena sites.
                        Exp.                             All            Shopping          Shopping Admin                GitLab           Map           Reddit          Multisite
                   AGENT O CCAM                         2932.1           1634.2               4920.7                    3126.8          1056.0         3697.8          1282.9
                AGENT O CCAM + SteP                     2601.1           1675.2               3833.3                    2983.8          1196.4         3071.4          1581.9
                AGENT O CCAM + Judge                    2646.4           1773.8               4181.2                    2848.4          729.7          3285.4          1433.2


F        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
We include the trial statistics for experiments that combine AGENT O CCAM with other compound
agent policies like SteP’s strategies and our newly proposed Judge role. Specifically, 14 shows
these well performing agent are equally open to web environment exploration, actively issuing
environment-changing actions like click and type. Not surprisingly, the AGENT O CCAM + SteP


                                                                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 17: The success rate (SR) of AGENT O CCAM’s ablation study on WebArena.

  Agent                                     Model           SR (%)        Shopping   Shopping Admin   GitLab    Map     Reddit   Multisite
                                                            (#812)         (#187)        (#182)       (#180)   (#109)   (#106)    (#48)
  Vanilla                               GPT-4-Turbo          16.5           16.6          15.9         10.0     22.9     21.7      16.7
  ↓ Actions                             GPT-4-Turbo          25.9           23.5          23.6         24.4     34.9     33.0      12.5
  Above + X Scrolling                   GPT-4-Turbo          31.7           26.2          25.3         35.0     33.0     52.8      14.6
  Above + Obs Opt.                      GPT-4-Turbo          37.1           35.8          37.4         26.7     45.0     57.5      16.7
  Above + History                       GPT-4-Turbo          38.2           33.7          40.1         31.7     50.5     51.9      14.6
  AGENT O CCAM                          GPT-4-Turbo          43.1           40.6          45.6         37.8     46.8     61.3      14.6



agent frequently issuing un-interactive actions like hover. From Table 15, we can observe that
AGENT O CCAM finish the task with the fewest steps, often yielding a task result with 9 steps. Last,
from Table 16, those three agents’ token consumptions are of comparative orders of magnitude.


   (a) Shopping.           (b) Shopping admin.            (c) GitLab.                (d) Map.         (e) Reddit.       (f) Multisite.

Figure 6: Success patterns of AGENT O CCAM (leftmost in each sub figure), AGENT O CCAM + SteP,
and AGENT O CCAM + Judge (rightmost) across different sites on WebArena. The y-axis represents
task ids, with green indicating successful trials and grey indicating unsuccessful trials. Notably,
tasks defined with the same templates are clustered together.

As shown in Figure 6, agents that combing AGENT O CCAM with compound agent policies possess
different behavioral success patterns. For AGENT O CCAM + SteP, it benefits in tasks where the agent
could easily be guided with detailed instructions, such as shopping tasks, with more success (green)
blocks and denser success rate in tasks defined with the identical templates. However, it falls short
in tasks that require generalizable skills like shopping admin tasks, and in tasks where task-specific
strategies distract, like reddit tasks. On the contrary, AGENT O CCAM + Judge agent shares similar
patterns with the AGENT O CCAM agent except that some of the success blocks are denser, thanks to
the behavior rectification enabled by the action generation and selection pipeline.
In addition, we add the success rate figures of the ablation studies in Table 17, which has been vi-
sually represented in Figure 5. During development, we slightly modifies AGENT O CCAM’s prompt
such as improving the wording or correcting the typos of the prompts, which don’t affect the se-
mantic meanings of the prompts or add any additional information, and are reflected in the reported
trajectory logs. As some failed trajectories are induced by the invalid interaction, we improve the
interaction scripts, though not perfectly as it would be beyond the scope of this paper, with the
following code shifts:
# I n b r o w s e r e n v . py
def ex ec ut e ac ti on (
     a c t i o n : Action ,
     p a g e : Page ,
     b ro w s er c tx : BrowserContext ,
     obseration processor : ObservationProcessor ,
) −> Page :
     match a c t i o n t y p e :
              ...
              c a s e A c t i o n T y p e s . CLICK :
                     # check each kind of l o c a t o r in o r d e r
                     # TODO[ s h u y a n z h ] : o r d e r i s temp now


                                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              i f action [” element id ” ] :
                     node = o b s e r a t i o n p r o c e s s o r . g e t n o d e i n f o b y e l e m e n t i d ( i n t ( e l e m e n t i d ) )
                     # i f node and node . r o l e ==” menuitem ” and node . p a r e n t and node . p a r e n t . r o l e ==” combobox ” :
                     i f node and ( node . r o l e ==” menuitem ” o r node . r o l e ==” o p t i o n ” ) :
                             try :
                                    p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . r o l e , name= node . name , e x a c t = T r u e ) . c l i c k ( )
                             except :
                                    try :
                                            p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . r o l e , name= node . name ) . c l i c k ( )
                                    except :
                                            try :
                                                    p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . p a r e n t . r o l e , name= node . p a r e n t . name , e x a c t = T r u e ) .
                                                               s e l e c t o p t i o n ( node . name )
                                            except :
                                                    p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . p a r e n t . r o l e , name= node . p a r e n t . name ) . s e l e c t o p t i o n ( node .
                                                              name )
                     # e l i f n o t o b s e r a t i o n p r o c e s s o r . e l e m e n t i s v i s i b l e ( page , e l e m e n t i d ) :
                     else :
                             try :
                                    p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . r o l e , name= node . name , e x a c t = T r u e ) . c l i c k ( )
                             except Exception as e :
                                    try :
                                            # p r i n t ( ” C a n n o t c l i c k by e l e m e n t r o l e and e x a c t name . ” , e )
                                            p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . r o l e , name= node . name ) . c l i c k ( )
                                    except Exception as e :
                                            # p r i n t ( ” C a n n o t c l i c k by e l e m e n t r o l e and f u z z y name . ” , e )
                                            element id = action [” element id ”]
                                            e l e m e n t c e n t e r = o b s e r a t i o n p r o c e s s o r . g e t e l e m e n t c e n t e r ( e l e m e n t i d , page ) # t y p e
                                                       : ignore [ attr −defined ]
                                            e x e c u t e m o u s e c l i c k ( e l e m e n t c e n t e r [ 0 ] , e l e m e n t c e n t e r [ 1 ] , page )
              e l i f a c t i o n [ ” e l e m e n t r o l e ” ] and a c t i o n [ ” e l e m e n t n a m e ” ] :
                     element role = i n t ( action [” element role ”])
                     element name = a c t i o n [” element name ”]
                     nth = action [” nth ”]
                     e x e c u t e f o c u s ( e l e m e n t r o l e , element name , nth , page )
                     e x e c u t e c l i c k c u r r e n t ( page )
              e l i f a c t i o n [ ” pw code ” ] :
                     p a r s e d c o d e = p a r s e p l a y w r i g h t c o d e ( a c t i o n [ ” pw code ” ] )
                     locator code = parsed code [: −1]
                     # [ s h u y a n z h ] , don ’ t s u p p o r t a c t i o n a r g s and k w a r g s now
                     e x e c u t e p l a y w r i g h t c l i c k ( l o c a t o r c o d e = l o c a t o r c o d e , page=page )
              else :
                     r a i s e V a l u e E r r o r ( ” No p r o p e r l o c a t o r f o u n d f o r c l i c k a c t i o n ” )
       ...
       c a s e A c t i o n T y p e s . TYPE :
              i f action [” element id ” ] :
                     i f n o t o b s e r a t i o n p r o c e s s o r . e l e m e n t i s v i s i b l e ( page , e l e m e n t i d ) :
                             p r e s s e n t e r = T r u e i f i d 2 k e y [ a c t i o n [ ” t e x t ” ] [ − 1 ] ] == ”\n ” e l s e F a l s e
                             node = o b s e r a t i o n p r o c e s s o r . g e t n o d e i n f o b y e l e m e n t i d ( i n t ( e l e m e n t i d ) )
                             try :
                                     if press enter :
                                             p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . r o l e , name= node . name , e x a c t = T r u e ) . f i l l ( ” ” . j o i n ( [ i d 2 k e y [ i d x ]
                                                          for idx in action [” t e x t ” ] [ : − 1 ] ] ) )
                                             time . sleep (1)
                                             page . keyboard . p r e s s ( ” E n t e r ” )
                                     else :
                                             p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . r o l e , name= node . name , e x a c t = T r u e ) . f i l l ( ” ” . j o i n ( [ i d 2 k e y [ i d x ]
                                                          for idx in action [” t e x t ” ] ] ) )
                             except :
                                     if press enter :
                                             p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . r o l e , name= node . name ) . f i l l ( ” ” . j o i n ( [ i d 2 k e y [ i d x ] f o r i d x i n
                                                        action [” text ”][: −1]]) )
                                             time . sleep (1)
                                             page . keyboard . p r e s s ( ” E n t e r ” )
                                     else :
                                             p a g e . g e t b y r o l e ( node . r o l e , name= node . name ) . f i l l ( ” ” . j o i n ( [ i d 2 k e y [ i d x ] f o r i d x i n
                                                        action [” text ” ] ] ) )
                     else :
                             element id = action [” element id ”]
                             e l e m e n t c e n t e r = o b s e r a t i o n p r o c e s s o r . g e t e l e m e n t c e n t e r ( e l e m e n t i d , page ) # t y p e : i g n o r e
                                        [ attr −defined ]
                             e x e c u t e m o u s e c l i c k ( e l e m e n t c e n t e r [ 0 ] , e l e m e n t c e n t e r [ 1 ] , page )
                             p a g e . k e y b o a r d . p r e s s ( ” C o n t r o l +A” )
                             for         in range (1) :
                                     # page . keyboard . p r e s s ( ” D e l e t e ” )
                                     page . keyboard . p r e s s ( ” Backspace ” )
                             e x e c u t e t y p e ( a c t i o n [ ” t e x t ” ] , page )
              e l i f a c t i o n [ ” e l e m e n t r o l e ” ] and a c t i o n [ ” e l e m e n t n a m e ” ] :
                     element role = i n t ( action [” element role ”])
                     element name = a c t i o n [” element name ”]
                     nth = action [” nth ”]
                     e x e c u t e f o c u s ( e l e m e n t r o l e , element name , nth , page )
                     e x e c u t e t y p e ( a c t i o n [ ” t e x t ” ] , page )
              e l i f a c t i o n [ ” pw code ” ] :
                     p a r s e d c o d e = p a r s e p l a y w r i g h t c o d e ( a c t i o n [ ” pw code ” ] )
                     locator code = parsed code [: −1]
                     t e x t = parsed code [ −1][” arguments ” ] [ 0 ]
                     # [ s h u y a n z h ] , don ’ t s u p p o r t a c t i o n a r g s and k w a r g s now
                     execute playwright type (
                             t e x t = t e x t , l o c a t o r c o d e = l o c a t o r c o d e , page=page
                     )
              else :


                                                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          r a i s e NotImplementedError (
                                  ”No p r o p e r l o c a t o r f o u n d f o r t y p e a c t i o n ”
                          )


G        AGENT P ROMPTS
G.1        AGENT O CCAM

The general prompt template:

            • With planning
You a r e an AI a s s i s t a n t p e r f o r m i n g t a s k s on a web b r o w s e r . You w i l l be p r o v i d e d w i t h t a s k o b j e c t i v e , c u r r e n t
       s t e p , web p a g e o b s e r v a t i o n s , p r e v i o u s p l a n s , and i n t e r a c t i o n h i s t o r y . You n e e d t o i s s u e an a c t i o n f o r
       this step .

Generate the response in the following format :
{output specifications}

You a r e ONLY a l l o w e d t o u s e t h e f o l l o w i n g a c t i o n commands . S t r i c t l y a d h e r e s t o t h e g i v e n f o r m a t . Only i s s u e
       one s i n g l e a c t i o n .
I f you t h i n k you s h o u l d r e f i n e t h e p l a n , u s e t h e f o l l o w i n g a c t i o n s :
{planning action specifications}
Otherwise , use the f o l l o w i n g a c t i o n s :
{navigation action specifications}



            • Without planning
You a r e an AI a s s i s t a n t p e r f o r m i n g t a s k s on a web b r o w s e r . You w i l l be p r o v i d e d w i t h t a s k o b j e c t i v e , c u r r e n t
       s t e p , web p a g e o b s e r v a t i o n s , and o t h e r r e l e v a n t i n f o r m a t i o n . You n e e d t o i s s u e an a c t i o n f o r t h i s s t e p .

Generate the response in the following format :
{output specifications}

You a r e ONLY a l l o w e d t o u s e t h e f o l l o w i n g a c t i o n commands . S t r i c t l y a d h e r e s t o t h e g i v e n f o r m a t . Only i s s u e
       one s i n g l e a c t i o n .
{navigation action specifications}


Output specifications:
I n t e r a c t i o n h i s t o r y summary : E m p h a s i z e a l l i m p o r t a n t d e t a i l s i n t h e INTERACTION HISTORY s e c t i o n .
O b s e r v a t i o n d e s c r i p t i o n : D e s c r i b e i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h e CURRENT OBSERVATION s e c t i o n . E m p h a s i z e e l e m e n t s and
           f e a t u r e s t h a t are r e l e v a n t or p o t e n t i a l l y h e l p f u l f or f u l f i l l i n g the o b j e c t i v e in d e t a i l .
Reason : P r o v i d e y o u r r a t i o n a l e f o r p r o p o s i n g t h e s u b s e q u e n t a c t i o n commands h e r e .
Action : S e l e c t your a c t i o n here .
O b s e r v a t i o n H i g h l i g h t : L i s t t h e n u m e r i c a l i d s o f e l e m e n t s on t h e c u r r e n t webpage b a s e d on which you would
           i s s u e y o u r a c t i o n . A l s o i n c l u d e e l e m e n t s on t h e c u r r e n t webpage you would a t t e n d t o i f you f a i l i n t h e
           f u t u r e and h a v e t o r e s t o r e t o t h i s s t e p . Don ’ t i n c l u d e e l e m e n t s from t h e p r e v i o u s p a g e s . S e l e c t e l e m e n t s
             a t a h i g h e r h i e r a r c h i c a l l e v e l i f most t h e i r c h i l d r e n n o d e s a r e c o n s i d e r e d c r u c i a l . S o r t by r e l e v a n c e
           and p o t e n t i a l v a l u e s from h i g h t o low , and s e p a r a t e t h e i d s w i t h commas . E . g . , ‘ 1 3 2 1 , 5 2 , 7 5 6 , 8 3 8 ’ .


Action space specifications:

            • Planning action specifications
b r a n c h [ p a r e n t p l a n i d ] [ n e w s u b p l a n i n t e n t ] : To c r e a t e a new s u b p l a n b a s e d on PREVIOUS PLANS . E n s u r e t h e new
           s u b p l a n i s c o n n e c t e d t o t h e a p p r o p r i a t e p a r e n t p l a n by u s i n g i t s ID . E . g . , ‘ b r a n c h [ 1 2 ] [ N a v i g a t e t o t h e
             ‘ I s s u e ” page t o check a l l t h e i s s u e s . ] ’
p r u n e [ r e s u m e p l a n i d ] [ r e a s o n ] : To r e t u r n t o a p r e v i o u s p l a n s t a t e when t h e c u r r e n t p l a n i s deemed
           i m p r a c t i c a l . E n t e r t h e ID o f t h e p l a n s t a t e you want t o r e s u m e . E . g . , ‘ p r u n e [ 5 ] [ The c u r r e n t p a g e l a c k s
             i t e m s ‘ b l a c k speaker , ’ prompting a r e t u r n t o t h e i n i t i a l page t o r e s t a r t t h e item s e a r c h . ] ’



            • Navigation action specifications
c l i c k [ i d ] : To c l i c k on an e l e m e n t w i t h i t s n u m e r i c a l ID on t h e webpage . E . g . , ‘ c l i c k [ 7 ] ’ I f c l i c k i n g on a
          s p e c i f i c e l e m e n t doesn ’ t t r i g g e r t h e t r a n s i t i o n t o y o u r d e s i r e d web s t a t e , t h i s i s due t o t h e e l e m e n t ’ s
          l a c k o f i n t e r a c t i v i t y o r GUI v i s i b i l i t y . I n s u c h c a s e s , move on t o i n t e r a c t w i t h OTHER s i m i l a r o r
          r e l e v a n t e l e m e n t s INSTEAD .
t y p e [ i d ] [ c o n t e n t ] [ p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r = 0 | 1 ] : To t y p e c o n t e n t i n t o a f i e l d w i t h a s p e c i f i c ID . By d e f a u l t , t h e
          ‘ E n t e r ’ key i s p r e s s e d a f t e r t y p i n g u n l e s s ‘ p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r ’ i s s e t t o 0 . E . g . , ‘ t y p e [ 1 5 ] [ C a r n e g i e
          M e l l o n U n i v e r s i t y ] [ 1 ] ’ I f you can ’ t f i n d what you ’ r e l o o k i n g f o r on y o u r f i r s t a t t e m p t , c o n s i d e r
          r e f i n i n g y o u r s e a r c h k e y w o r d s by b r e a k i n g them down o r t r y i n g r e l a t e d t e r m s .
g o b a c k : To r e t u r n t o t h e p r e v i o u s l y v i e w e d p a g e .
n o t e [ c o n t e n t ] : To t a k e n o t e o f a l l i m p o r t a n t i n f o w . r . t . c o m p l e t i n g t h e t a s k t o e n a b l e r e v i e w i n g i t l a t e r . E .
          g . , ‘ n o t e [ S p e n t $10 on 4 / 1 / 2 0 2 4 ] ’
s t o p [ a n s w e r ] : To s t o p i n t e r a c t i o n and r e t u r n r e s p o n s e . P r e s e n t y o u r a n s w e r w i t h i n t h e b r a c k e t s . I f t h e t a s k
          doesn ’ t r e q u i r e a t e x t u a l a n s w e r o r a p p e a r s i n s u r m o u n t a b l e , i n d i c a t e ‘N/ A’ and a d d i t i o n a l r e a s o n s and
          a l l r e l e v a n t i n f o r m a t i o n you g a t h e r a s t h e a n s w e r . E . g . , ‘ s t o p [ 5 h 47 min ] ’
go home : To r e t u r n t o t h e homepage where you c a n f i n d o t h e r w e b s i t e s .


                                                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Observation space example:
   RootWebArea [ 1 ] ’ D a s h b o a r d / Magento Admin ’
       l i n k [ 1 7 8 ] ’ Magento Admin P a n e l ’
       menubar [ 8 5 ]
                     l i n k [ 8 7 ] ’DASHBOARD’
                     l i n k [ 9 0 ] ’SALES ’
                     l i n k [ 9 6 ] ’CATALOG’
                     l i n k [ 1 0 2 ] ’CUSTOMERS’
                     l i n k [ 1 0 8 ] ’MARKETING’
                     l i n k [ 1 1 4 ] ’CONTENT’
                     l i n k [ 1 2 0 ] ’REPORTS’
                     l i n k [ 1 3 8 ] ’STORES ’
                     l i n k [ 1 4 4 ] ’SYSTEM’
                     l i n k [ 1 5 0 ] ’ FIND PARTNERS & EXTENSIONS ’
       h e a d i n g ’ Dashboard ’
       l i n k [ 2 5 4 ] ’ admin ’
       link [256]
       textbox [894] [ required : False ]
       main
                     t e x t ’ Scope : ’
                     b u t t o n [ 2 6 2 ] ’ A l l S t o r e Views ’
                     l i n k [ 2 6 5 ] ’ What i s t h i s ? ’
                     b u t t o n [ 2 4 0 ] ’ R e l o a d Data ’
                     HeaderAsNonLandmark [ 8 9 8 ] ’ Advanced R e p o r t i n g ’
                     t e x t ” Gain new i n s i g h t s and t a k e command o f y o u r b u s i n e s s ’ p e r f o r m a n c e , u s i n g o u r              dynamic
                                product , order , . . .
                     l i n k [ 9 0 2 ] ’Go t o Advanced R e p o r t i n g ’
                     t e x t ’ C h a r t i s d i s a b l e d . To e n a b l e t h e c h a r t , c l i c k ’
                     l i n k [906] ’ here ’
                     t e x t ’ Revenue ’
                     t e x t ’ Tax ’
                     t e x t ’ Shipping ’
                     t e x t ’ Quantity ’
                     t a b l i s t [57]
                                    t a b [ 5 9 ] ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b c o n t a i n s    invalid data
                                             ...
                                                 l i n k [ 6 7 ] ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b     contains
                                                           invalid data . . .
                                                               t e x t ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . ’
                                                               t e x t ’ This tab c o n t a i n s i n v a l i d data . Please r e s o l v e t h i s            before
                                                                        saving . ’
                                                               t e x t ’ Loading . . . ’
                                    t a b [ 6 1 ] ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b c o n t a i n s    invalid data
                                             ...
                                                 l i n k [ 6 9 ] ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b     contains
                                                           invalid data . . .
                                                               t e x t ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . ’
                                                               t e x t ’ This tab c o n t a i n s i n v a l i d data . Please r e s o l v e t h i s            before
                                                                        saving . ’
                                                               t e x t ’ Loading . . . ’
                                    t a b [ 6 3 ] ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b c o n t a i n s    invalid data
                                             ...
                                                 l i n k [ 7 1 ] ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b     contains
                                                           invalid data . . .
                                                               t e x t ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . ’
                                                               t e x t ’ This tab c o n t a i n s i n v a l i d data . Please r e s o l v e t h i s            before
                                                                        saving . ’
                                                               t e x t ’ Loading . . . ’
                                    t a b [ 6 5 ] ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b c o n t a i n s    invalid data
                                             ...
                                                 l i n k [ 7 3 ] ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b     contains
                                                           invalid data . . .
                                                               t e x t ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . ’
                                                               t e x t ’ This tab c o n t a i n s i n v a l i d data . Please r e s o l v e t h i s            before
                                                                        saving . ’
                                                               t e x t ’ Loading . . . ’
                     t a b p a n e l ’ The i n f o r m a t i o n i n t h i s t a b h a s b e e n c h a n g e d . T h i s t a b c o n t a i n s i n v a l i d   data . . .
                                    table
                                                 row ’ | P r o d u c t | P r i c e | Q u a n t i t y | ’
                                                 row ’ | −−− | −−− | −−− | ’
                                                 row ’ | S p r i t e S t a s i s B a l l 65 cm | 2 7 . 0 0 | 6 | ’
                                                 row ’ | Q u e s t L u m a f l e x Band | 1 9 . 0 0 | 6 | ’
                                                 row ’ | S p r i t e Yoga S t r a p 6 f o o t | 1 4 . 0 0 | 6 | ’
                                                 row ’ | S p r i t e S t a s i s B a l l 55 cm | 2 3 . 0 0 | 5 | ’
                                                 row ’ | O v e r n i g h t D u f f l e | 4 5 . 0 0 | 5 | ’
                     t e x t ’ Lifetime Sales ’
                     t e x t ’ A v e r a g e Order ’
                     t e x t ’ Last Orders ’
                     table
                                    row ’ | C u s t o m e r | I t e m s | T o t a l | ’
                                    row ’ | −−− | −−− | −−− | ’
                                    row ’ | S a r a h M i l l e r | 5 | 1 9 4 . 4 0 | ’
                                    row ’ | G r a c e Nguyen | 4 | 1 9 0 . 0 0 | ’
                                    row ’ | M a t t B a k e r | 3 | 1 5 1 . 4 0 | ’
                                    row ’ | L i l y P o t t e r | 4 | 1 8 8 . 2 0 | ’
                                    row ’ | Ava Brown | 2 | 8 3 . 4 0 | ’
                     t e x t ’ L a s t S e a r c h Terms ’
                     table
                                    row ’ | S e a r c h Term | R e s u l t s | Uses | ’
                                    row ’ | −−− | −−− | −−− | ’
                                    row ’ | t a n k s | 23 | 1 | ’


                                                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   row ’ | n i k e | 0 | 3 | ’
                                   row ’ | J o u s t Bag | 10 | 4 | ’
                                   row ’ | h o l l i s t e r | 1 | 19 | ’
                                   row ’ | A n t o n i a R a c e r Tank | 23 | 2 | ’
                     t e x t ’ Top S e a r c h Terms ’
                     table
                                   row ’ | S e a r c h Term | R e s u l t s | Uses | ’
                                   row ’ | −−− | −−− | −−− | ’
                                   row ’ | h o l l i s t e r | 1 | 19 | ’
                                   row ’ | J o u s t Bag | 10 | 4 | ’
                                   row ’ | A n t o n i a R a c e r Tank | 23 | 2 | ’
                                   row ’ | t a n k s | 23 | 1 | ’
                                   row ’ | WP10 | 1 | 1 | ’
             contentinfo
                     link [244]
                     t e x t ’ C o p y r i g h t 2024 Magento Commerce I n c . A l l r i g h t s r e s e r v e d . ’
                     t e x t ’ ver . 2.4.6 ’
                     l i nk [247] ’ Privacy Policy ’
                     l i n k [ 2 4 9 ] ’ Account A c t i v i t y ’
                     l i n k [ 2 5 1 ] ’ R e p o r t an I s s u e ’


G.2         J UDGE U SED IN AGENT O CCAM + J UDGE E XPERIMENTS
The general prompt template:
You a r e a s e a s o n e d web n a v i g a t o r . You now a s s e s s t h e v a l u e and r i s k o f s e r v e r a l web n a v i g a t i o n a c t i o n s b a s e d
       on t h e o b j e c t i v e , t h e p r e v i o u s i n t e r a c t i o n h i s t o r y and t h e web ’ s c u r r e n t s t a t e . Then , you s e l e c t t h e
       a c t i o n w i t h t h e most v a l u e and l e a s t r i s k w i t h which you would e a r n t h e maximum o b j e c t i v e f u l f i l l m e n t
       reward in the f u t u r e .

Adhere t o t h e f o l l o w i n g o u t p u t f o r m a t :
{output specifications}

Note t h a t ‘ b r a n c h ’ and ‘ p r u n e ’ a r e p l a n n i n g a c t i o n s t h a t w i l l m o d i f y t h e PREVIOUS PLAN s e c t i o n and won ’ t
      i n t e r a c t w i t h t h e web e n v i r o n m e n t .


Output specifications:
P l a n p r o g r e s s a s s e s s m e n t : Review c r i t i c a l l y why t h e p l a n s h a v e n o t b e e n f u l f i l l e d o r t h e o b j e c t i v e a c h i e v e d .
           J u s t i f y y o u r a s s e s s m e n t w i t h d e t a i l e d e v i d e n c e drawn from t h e o b j e c t i v e , o b s e r v a t i o n s , and a c t i o n s t a k e n
           . I t e m i z e t h e a s s e s s m e n t u s i n g t h i s f o r m a t : ‘ − p l a n [{ p l a n i d }]\n\ t [{ s t e p i d s t a k e n f o r t h i s m i l e s t o n e }]
             [{ c o n c r e t e p r o o f f r o m o b s e r v a t i o n }] [{ w h y m i l e s t o n e a n o t s u c c e s s f u l }]\n\ t [{
           s t e p i d s t a k e n f o r t h i s m i l e s t o n e }] [{ c o n c r e t e p r o o f f r o m o b s e r v a t i o n }] [{ w h y m i l e s t o n e b n o t s u c c e s s f u l
           }]\n\ t . . . ’ .
A c t i o n a s s e s s m e n t : A s s e s s t h e v a l u e and r i s k o f e a c h a c t i o n . C o n s i d e r b o t h t h e b e s t − c a s e and w o r s t − c a s e
           o u t c o m e s r e s u l t i n g from i t s i m p l e m e n t a t i o n . I t e m i z e t h e a s s e s s m e n t u s i n g t h i s f o r m a t : ‘ − a c t i o n [
           a c t i o n i d ] : [ a c t i o n v a l u e , i n c l u d i n g b u t n o t l i m i t e d t o what o u t c o m e s you c a n e x p e c t by e x e c u t i n g t h e
           a c t i o n , o r w h e t h e r t h e n o t e i s o f t h e most c o r r e c t and c o m p r e h e n s i v e c o n t e n t ] [ a c t i o n r i s k , i n c l u d i n g
           b u t n o t l i m i t e d t o w h e t h e r t h e n o t e / s t o p c o n t e n t i s c o r r e c t , and w h e t h e r you c a n g a t h e r more i n f o r m a t i o n
             by c o n t i n u i n g p l a y i n g r a t h e r t h a n e n d i n g t h e t r i a l ] [{ b e s t c a s e }] [{ w o r s t c a s e } ] ’ .
A c t i o n s e l e c t i o n : L i s t t h e n u m e r i c a l i d o f y o u r s e l e c t e d a c t i o n h e r e . You c a n o n l y c h o o s e one a c t i o n . E . g . ,
           ‘1 ’.


H        F UTURE D IRECTION : T RAINING E VOLVING W EB AGENTS
Our current alignment of the action and observation space is designed and deployed based on hu-
man heuristics under the assumption that the base models are not trainable. This approach excludes
certain useful web actions or web element formatting that could potentially be learned with minimal
examples, rather than being mastered through training AGENT O CCAM. For instance, incorporating
the scroll action could significantly reduce the observation’s volume and better align with the
design of real web environments, e.g., many shopping websites are designed to load more products
only when a user scrolls down. Considering that the agent can record interaction traces to deter-
mine whether to scroll up or down, it is likely that an LLM could learn this action without extensive
training. By lifting the restriction on the non-trainability of LLMs, incorporating such design con-
siderations might enhance the performance of web agents and reduce operational costs.
Furthermore, given the evolving nature of web layouts and human needs, developing adaptable
agents is essential. Their autonomy is not only reflected by the ability to adapt to ever-so-updating
web tasks, but also by the creation of more sophisticated observation and action mappings (functions
f and g) as tools to get them more familiar with the web environments regarding perception and
action grounding, rather than relying on human heuristics, just as what has been done in this work.
Such agents would be able to autonomously refine their skills and improve system performance.


                                                                                           33
