Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACES: AUTOMATIC C OHORT E XTRACTION S YSTEM
FOR E VENT-S TREAM DATASETS

 Justin Xu
 University of Oxford
 justin.xu@ndm.ox.ac.uk

 Jack Gallifant
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 jgally@mit.edu

 Alistair E. W. Johnson
 University of Toronto
 alistair.johnson@utoronto.ca

 Matthew B. A. McDermott
 Harvard Medical School
 matthew mcdermott@hms.harvard.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Reproducibility remains a significant challenge in machine learning (ML) for
         healthcare. Datasets, model pipelines, and even task or cohort definitions are of-
         ten private in this field, leading to a significant barrier in sharing, iterating, and
         understanding ML results on electronic health record (EHR) datasets. We address
         a significant part of this problem by introducing the Automatic Cohort Extrac-
         tion System (ACES) for event-stream data. This library is designed to simulta-
         neously simplify the development of tasks and cohorts for ML in healthcare and
         also enable their reproduction, both at an exact level for single datasets and at a
         conceptual level across datasets. To accomplish this, ACES provides: (1) a highly
         intuitive and expressive domain-specific configuration language for defining both
         dataset-specific concepts and dataset-agnostic inclusion or exclusion criteria, and
         (2) a pipeline to automatically extract patient records that meet these defined cri-
         teria from real-world data. ACES can be automatically applied to any dataset
         in either the Medical Event Data Standard (MEDS) or Event Stream GPT (ES-
         GPT) formats, or to any dataset in which the necessary task-specific predicates
         can be extracted in an event-stream form. ACES has the potential to significantly
         lower the barrier to entry for defining ML tasks in representation learning, rede-
         fine the way researchers interact with EHR datasets, and significantly improve the
         state of reproducibility for ML studies using this modality. ACES is available at:
         https://github.com/justin13601/aces.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Machine learning (ML) for healthcare suffers from a severe and systemic reproducibility crisis (Mc-
Dermott et al., 2021b). This challenge is further exacerbated by the need to maintain private and
secure datasets, but even with public datasets, ML pipelines are not reliably reproducible from pub-
lished papers alone. For instance, in numerous attempts to reproduce ML for healthcare studies
using the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al., 2016), Johnson et al. found that more than half the
time, the cohorts described in the studies could not be reliably reconstructed. Specifically, experi-
ments led to many discrepancies of up to 25% in cohort sizes, with one study reaching as high as
11,767 patients (Johnson et al., 2017). This is primarily due to sparse descriptions of cohorts in


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


study methods with essential reproducibility details often omitted, along with the absence of openly
available code.
This burden in reproducing even the basic task and problem definitions in ML for healthcare studies
is profoundly detrimental (McDermott, 2025). Beyond the obvious concerns it raises around the
robustness of reported results and their readiness for deployment, our inability to reliably define
shared, canonical, and reproducible task definitions limits our capacity to perform meaningful model
comparisons during methodological development. This is particularly notable in settings where not
all researchers have mutual access to all datasets, as is common in healthcare. Given the critical role
that open benchmarks play in the advancement of ML methods (Zhang & Hardt, 2024; Salaudeen &
Hardt, 2024; Shirali et al., 2023), this deficit directly translates to a significant barrier in our ability,
as a research community, to effectively experiment, iterate, and develop new ML methodologies in
the healthcare space.
Given the clear import of this problem, the research community has naturally explored a number of
prospective solutions. These can largely be categorized into two areas: (1) leveraging existing com-
mon data models (CDMs) to define reproducible task cohorts only for datasets within these schemas,
and (2) defining static benchmarking tasks on individual public datasets. Both of these areas have
generated numerous high-impact works. For example, in the area of CDM-driven tools, systems
such as the ATLAS tool (Gold et al., 2024) for OHDSI’s OMOP CDM (Reich et al., 2024) and
i2b2’s PIC-SURE (Stedman et al., 2024) for the i2b2 CDM (Murphy et al., 2010), as well as various
institution-specific tools, have all been used to drive numerous new lines of inquiry. Unfortunately,
these tools are also extremely limited in that they can only be applied to the specific CDM or insti-
tutional data warehouse for which they have been defined. Further, because many of these CDMs
have had limited penetrance into healthcare’s high-capacity, deep learning ecosystems, they are par-
ticularly ill-posed for task and cohort extraction within the healthcare deep learning communities.
Conversely, public static benchmarks (Harutyunyan et al., 2019; McDermott et al., 2021a; van de
Water et al., 2024) over datasets such as MIMIC-IV (Johnson et al., 2023) or eICU (Pollard et al.,
2018) have also been extremely impactful. However, they are all tied to only a single or small set
of datasets and tasks. Given the highly dynamic nature of clinical data and healthcare requirements,
this is insufficient for the benchmarking and reproducibility needs faced by the ML for healthcare
community.
When considering these existing solutions alongside the realities of healthcare data access and
methodological development, it is clear that they are insufficient for three key reasons:

1. The Need for Interoperability The limited public datasets and only partially used CDMs can-
not capture the diverse clinical populations, needs, and model capacities necessary for tangible ML
progress in healthcare. To address this, systems for automated task extraction must be meaningfully
interoperable across both public and private datasets with diverse input schemas.

2. The Need for Flexibility A single, static benchmark cannot encompass the variety of clinical
tasks relevant to clinicians and informaticians. As existing tools (with limited interfaces for defining
queries using per-set vocabularies) may struggle to generalize to new clinical tasks, ideal solutions
must be sufficiently flexible to accommodate a myriad of new task definitions, criteria formats, and
disease or deployment areas.

3. The Need for Accessibility, Usability, and Applicability in Deep Learning Workflows While
many existing tools feature no-code interfaces (e.g., web platforms to build queries) that are essential
for less technically-literate audiences, integrating such tools with deep learning workflows can prove
challenging. Deep learning systems are often run in a semi-programmatic manner on siloed, private
computational clusters where researchers have minimal control. Hence, existing tools can cause
significant hindrance. Instead, successful software must be able to provide a Python and command-
line interface (CLI) that offer significant ease of use to deep learning researchers, alongside shareable
and readable configuration files that specify task definitions in a manner that can be readily ported
across datasets and environments.

Our Solution: Automatic Cohort Extraction System for Event-Stream Datasets In this work,
we solve these problems with the Automatic Cohort Extraction System for Event-Stream Datasets
(ACES). ACES offers a simple, expressive, and shareable configuration language for task and cohort


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


definitions, as well as a reliable CLI and a straightforward Python library for extracting labeled task
dataframes (Figure 2).
Task definitions in ACES are naturally separated into simple dataset-specific event predicates and
dataset-agnostic inclusion or exclusion criteria, thereby permitting the same task to be used in a
conceptually identical manner across diverse datasets. By requiring users to specify predicates to
realize their ML tasks on their specific datasets, ACES allows users to produce precise, locally-
specific, verifiable cohorts that harmonize only the data elements needed for their task, regardless
of how their input dataset is aligned or misaligned with existing ontologies or CDMs. Further, for
datasets that are fully harmonized (e.g., through OHDSI vocabularies), ACES predicate definitions
can be re-used across datasets without any loss of utility. In this way, ACES accommodates diverse
datasets at various levels of data harmonization in a flexible, transparent manner. Overall, this
approach not only enhances reproducibility but also facilitates community collaboration on task
definitions, inclusion or exclusion criteria, and evaluation metrics for specific clinical use cases.
In contrast to prior task definition systems such as ATLAS, ACES makes minimal assumptions
about the input data structure or source vocabularies. In particular, ACES can be run on any dataset,
provided the necessary task-specific predicates can be pre-extracted in an “event-stream” format
(Figure 1). It can further be run from raw data directly for any dataset in the relatively low-level
and flexible Medical Event Data Standard (MEDS) (Arnrich et al., 2024) or Event Stream GPT
(ESGPT) (McDermott et al., 2023) formats in approximately five lines of template code, offering
high efficiency.

                 Input EHR Dataset as an Event-Stream                           ACES Cohort Extraction                          Output Task Cohort



                                                               Static
                                                            Measurements                                                        Task
                                                                                                                               Cohort
                                                                               predicates:                                                       ML Models
                                                                                      admission:
 subject_id               time code                  numeric_value                         code: ADMISSION
                                                                                      discharge:
      68729               null EYE_COLOR//HAZEL                null                        code: DISCHARGE
      68729               null HEIGHT                   160.3953106                   death:
                                                                                           code: DEATH
      68729 03/09/1978, 0:00:00 DOB                            null                   discharge_or_death:
      68729 05/26/2010, 2:30:56 ADMISSION//PULMONARY           null                        expr: or(discharge, death)

      68729 05/26/2010, 2:30:56 HR                               86            trigger: admission                        subject_id    prediction_time       label
      68729 05/26/2010, 2:30:56 TEMP                            97.8           target:
                                                                                                                              68729    05/26/2010, 2:30:56      1
      68729 05/26/2010, 4:51:52 DISCHARGE                      null                   start: gap.end                         239684   05/11/2010, 17:41:51      0
                                                                                      end: start -> discharge_or_death
     239684               null EYE_COLOR//BROWN                null                   start_inclusive: False
     239684               null HEIGHT                   175.2711152                   end_inclusive: True
                                                                                      label: death
     239684 12/28/1980, 0:00:00 DOB                            null


Figure 1: Workflow for extracting cohorts using ACES. The pipeline shows the expected format
for ACES-supported event-stream datasets and outcome cohorts. The transformation of raw data
into the event-stream format is intentionally designed to be straightforward — primarily merging
relational database tables — minimizing data loss risks associated with other CDMs like OMOP.

Further, we align ACES with the concept of frictionless reproducibility for shared tasks proposed
by David Donoho (Donoho, 2024), especially for the clinical domain. This addresses the “Bring-
Your-Own-Data Challenge”, where much research relies on private patient outcomes data, often
accessible only to a few credentialed researchers under strict usage agreements. Even when bench-
marking platforms and shared code exist, the inability to share data directly remains a significant
barrier and often stifles progress. ACES seeks to overcome these challenges by offering a domain-
specific language (DSL) and novel infrastructure to ensure reproducibility without necessitating data
sharing. Instead of relying on public datasets or reconfiguring code for diverse environments, ACES2

enables researchers to distribute task definitions through configuration files. These files provide a
standardized way to conceptually reproduce cohorts on private datasets or exactly reproduce them
on public datasets.
In sum, ACES represents 3 key contributions:

        1. ACES defines a shareable, simple, and flexible task configuration language that can define
           diverse sets of prediction tasks for ML in healthcare on any event-stream dataset.
        2. ACES provides an easy-to-use library to automatically extract these tasks from diverse
           sources of real-world, structured, and longitudinal electronic health record (EHR) data.


                                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      3. ACES introduces a novel DSL that leverages event-bounded query aggregations, enabling
         more expressive and efficient task definitions that better capture clinical timelines.

In the rest of this work, we first explore ACES in depth in Section 2, beginning with an illustration of
its key concepts before briefly overviewing its core recursive algorithm. We then present a running
example to illustrate how configuration files capture task logic. Next, in Section 3, we demonstrate
the use of ACES across diverse problem areas using real-world data, releasing a collection of task
definitions based on prior ML for healthcare works — both at the dataset-agnostic criteria level
and with dataset-specific predicates for the widely-used MIMIC-IV dataset (Johnson et al., 2023).
Finally, we discuss the limitations and future roadmap of ACES in Section 4, and offer concluding
thoughts in Section 5.

                                                                                                              Predicates:

    A. With ACES                                                                      mortality:

                                                                                        code: DEATH

                                                                                      admission:

                                                                                                              dataset specific
                                                                                                          concepts used to
                                                                                                          define cohorts
                                                                                         code: ADMISSION
                                         Institution

                                                                                      discharge:
                                                  Specific
                                                                                        code: DISCHARGE

                                              Predict in-hospital mortality for       covid:

                                              patients diagnosed with                    code: DX/COVID
                                              COVID-19 prior to admission                                     Windows: dataset
                                              and who have 2 years of                 trigger: admission
     agnostic inclusion-
                                              historic data with 30+ records
                                                                                      input:
                 exclusion criteria
                                                                                        start: trigger - 2y

                                                                                        end: trigger

                                                                                                              relative to predicates
                                                                                        has:
                                                    Generalizable

                                                                                          ANY: (30, null)

                                                                                          covid: (1, null)
                                       Shareable
                                                                                      target:

                                                                                        start: trigger

                                                                                        end: start -> discharge

                                                                                        label: mortality
             Predict in-hospital mortality
             for patients diagnosed with
             COVID-19 prior to admission
             and who have 2 years of
             historic data with 30+ records

                                                                                                                                   Manua
                                                                                                                                   Institution Specifi
                                                                                                                                   Expensiv
                                                                                                                                   Irreproducibl
                                                                                                                                   Hard to share &
                                                                                                                                   collaborate on
    B. Without ACES
Figure 2: ML task cohort extraction process (A) with and (B) without ACES. Predicates are dataset-
specific concepts that are needed to conceptually capture a ML task. Windows are temporal seg-
ments on a patient’s health record and are dataset-agnostic, as they are defined relative to the pred-
icates. This distinction allows researchers to easily share the more complex task logic which is
independent of datasets, facilitating conceptual reproducibility for ML tasks in healthcare.


2   AUTOMATIC C OHORT E XTRACTION S YSTEM FOR E VENT-S TREAM
    DATASETS (ACES)
In this section, we introduce ACES, a novel automatic task and cohort extraction system that fills
the key gaps in interoperability, flexibility, and accessibility left by the existing tools outlined in
Section 1. To use ACES and extract a cohort for downstream ML tasks, a user only needs to do the
following simple steps:

1. Install ACES: A fully functional version of ACES is pushed to PyPI, and any user can easily
install it by simply running pip install es-aces. All dependencies are automatically set up
with no further actions needed.

2. Define Dataset: A dataset in a permitted format, such as MEDS, ESGPT, or as direct predicates,
is required. More information on the data formats is available in Section 2.2.

3. Define Task: A task configuration file is required to define the task that the user wishes to extract.
This configuration language is simple, clear, yet flexible, permitting users to rapidly share and iterate
over task definitions for their clinical settings. Configuration specification is given in Section 2.3.


                                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4. Run the ACES CLI: ACES can be directly run from the command line. Details about the
possible command-line arguments are detailed in Section 2.4. ACES can also be used as a direct
Python import, as mentioned in Section 2.5.
Sample command for basic cohort extraction using ACES CLI:
 1$    aces-cli cohort_name='$TASK' data.path='$DATA_PATH'


5. Get Outputs: ACES outputs a single unified dataframe with all valid patient instances extracted
according to task specifications. Users can subsequently leverage the returned columns with original
patient identifiers and health record timestamps for downstream ML tasks. Further information is
available in Section 2.6.
Critically, after only these five simple steps, a user can immediately, reproducibly extract a full cohort
from their source dataset that matches their task definition, and begin using this task for downstream
representation learning.

2.1     A LGORITHM D ESIGN

ACES addresses the challenge of extracting meaningful windows of data from patient records by
using a recursive approach grounded in a tree-structured configuration file. Each task is represented
as a hierarchy of constraints, with nodes defining boundaries of windows of interest and edges spec-
ifying temporal or event-based relationships between these windows. The algorithm begins by iden-
tifying root anchor events in the dataset that correspond to the triggering criteria of the task. It then
recursively evaluates subtrees of constraints, aggregating predicate counts over defined windows
either through temporal aggregations (e.g., over fixed time intervals) or event-bound aggregations
(e.g., over windows bounded by specific clinical events, such as admissions, diagnoses, etc.). Each
step ensures that the criteria of the subtree are met, filtering out invalid realizations before proceed-
ing to child nodes. This recursive process guarantees that the specified configuration can always be
resolved into valid windows that meet the task’s constraints. The final output is a dataframe contain-
ing all valid patients, task-specific labels, and prediction timestamps, and optionally, window start
and end times as well as aggregated predicate counts. This ensures systematic and deterministic ex-
traction of datasets for ML tasks. It also maintains flexibility and leverages the simple, transparent,
and highly expressive DSL of ACES (Figure 3).

2.2     DATASET C ONFIGURATIONS

ACES is extremely flexible and can handle different input data formats, including MEDS (data
.standard=meds), ESGPT (data.standard=esgpt), or direct predicates (data.standard=
direct), where event-stream features are pre-extracted by the user from any given dataset schema.
Other CDMs are interchangeable with these formats, such as OHDSI OMOP through the MEDS
OMOP ETL1 , which transforms OMOP-compliant datasets into MEDS without data loss or scala-
bility issues.
Using direct predicates to extract cohorts from formats that ACES does not natively support still
significantly reduces the burden on users. Simply creating predicate features is much less cumber-
some than either fully converting the dataset to a CDM in order to use existing tools like ATLAS or
i2b2’s platform, or performing the entire task extraction from scratch by writing in-house dataframe
querying code. Additionally, as ACES configuration files are shareable and easily portable to other
datasets (by simply swapping out predicate definitions), we believe ACES will offer long-term ef-
ficiency benefits. This demonstrates the significant improvement in utility that ACES brings across
diverse data schemas compared to existing tools.

2.3     TASK C ONFIGURATIONS

In ACES, tasks are specified through configuration files that define a collection of dataset-specific
event predicates, which are simple functions evaluated on individual events within a structured
event-stream dataset. Predicate definitions can be stored in a central “database” file specific to each
   1
       https://github.com/Medical-Event-Data-Standard/meds_etl/tree/main


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Identify Subtree Root Anchors
   subject_id     time   predA predB predC                    …    predD

                                                                                       …to mark where predicate
                                                                                         aggregations begin in
                                                                                              recursion

         ⁞          ⁞        ⁞          ⁞         ⁞           ⁞         ⁞
                                                                                           Window
                                                                                          Boundaries
                                                                                                             Time/Event-based Aggregations
                                                                                           Window
                                                                                         Relationships   subject_id   time   predA predB predC        …   predD

                                                                  Aggregations

 …which prunes invalid
realizations that violate
  subtree constraints                                                                                         ⁞        ⁞       ⁞      ⁞       ⁞       ⁞     ⁞



                                                      …
                                                                                                                  predA predB predC       …   predD
                         Filter by Subtree Criteria                                                                 1     8     0         …     2
                subject_id       time       predA predB predC               …    predD

                                                                                                         …summarizes predicate
                                                                                                         counts for each subtree



                    ⁞             ⁞           ⁞           ⁞         ⁞       ⁞      ⁞


Figure 3: Overview of the ACES recursive algorithm. Given a task tree generated from a configura-
tion file, ACES first identifies possible roots of the tree (task triggers) based on the associated pred-                                                         3
icate. It then computes aggregations of predicate counts over time-based (i.e., windows with a time
interval) or event-based (i.e., windows between specified events) periods to summarize predicates
over the edges between the tree nodes. Finally, invalid branches are filtered out if their predicate
counts do not meet the specified criteria. This process is recursed for all child nodes of the task tree.


dataset, such that previously defined features could be easily reused for a variety of downstream
tasks without further effort. Community predicate contributions for public datasets also streamline
collaborative efforts for reproducibility. Additionally, task criteria are defined in a dataset-agnostic
manner through a collection of interrelated windows, which specify segments of a patient’s record
and are constrained by certain relationships. Please see Figure 4 for an example of a task configura-
tion.

2.4     C OMMAND -L INE I NTERFACE

Hydra Arguments The Hydra framework (Yadan, 2019) enhances the CLI by enabling flexible
run configurations and argument parsing for cohort extractions. For instance, specific arguments
are required to define the external source dataset for data loading. Depending on the chosen format
(the data.standard argument), either the path to the data file (for meds or direct) or the path
to the dataset directory (for esgpt) must be specified to indicate the external source data from
which ACES will extract the cohort. Additionally, cohort_dir and cohort_name are essential
for locating and loading the task configuration file, as well as for results and operational logging.

Scaling to Large Datasets An overview of the computational profile of ACES is available in Sec-
tion 3.1. Additionally, for users dealing with large datasets, ACES can also be run over a collection
of sharded files, extracting and storing the matching cohort for each shard individually in corre-
sponding file paths. This can greatly increase computational efficiency by facilitating the processing
of different shards in parallel via Hydra’s multi-run launchers2 .
   2
       https://hydra.cc/docs/1.0/plugins/joblib_launcher/


                                                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sample command for cohort extraction over multiple MEDS shards using ACES CLI and Hydra:
 1$   aces-cli \
 2      --multirun \
 3      cohort_name="<task_config_name>" \
 4      cohort_dir="/directory/to/task/config/" \
 5      data=sharded \
 6      data.standard=meds \
 7      data.root="/directory/to/dataset/shards/" \
 8      data.shard="$(expand_shards <folder>/<num>)" # Sweeps over shards


                              In-hospital Mortality Prediction
          B         C                       D                          E
                            24h


      >= 5 Events               48h
                        No Discharge OR Death
                Admission                                          A            Discharge OR Death


                                       Task Configuration

        predicates:                             A                                             B
            admission:                                   input:
               code: ADMISSION                               start: NULL
            discharge:                                       end: trigger + 24 hours
               code: DISCHARGE                               start_inclusive: True
            death:                                           end_inclusive: True
               code: DEATH                                   has:
            discharge_or_death:                                   _ANY_EVENT: (5, None)
               expr: or(discharge, death)


       trigger: admission                       C        gap:                                D
                                                                start: trigger
                                                                end: start + 48 hours
                                                                start_inclusive: False
       target:
           start: gap.end
                                                E               end_inclusive: True
                                                                has:
           end: start -> discharge_or_death                          admission: (None, 0)
           start_inclusive: False                                    discharge: (None, 0)
           end_inclusive: True                                       death: (None, 0)
           label: death


Figure 4: Example configuration file for the binary prediction of in-hospital mortality 48 hours
after admission. References to predicates and windows are italicized and bolded, respectively. (A)
Dataset-specific task predicates. These concepts are needed to conceptually capture this task and are
used as constraints and boundaries for windows of the patient record. For instance, in this example,
the value of “ADM ISSION ” denotes a hospital admission event in the source dataset. (B) A
window of the task specifying the task inputs for downstream models. Suppose we’d like to use
all historic patient data up to and including 24 hours past the admission. We could also place an
arbitrary criterion requiring more than 5 records in this window to ensure that the extracted cohort
contains sufficient input data. (C) Trigger events for the task, which are hospital admissions as we’d
like to make a mortality prediction for each admission. (D) A window of the task specifying a gap
in the patient timeline. Suppose we’d like to set a minimum length of admission for our cohort
(e.g., 48 hours). A temporal constraint (minimum window duration) of 48 hours could then be set
to represent this requirement. (E) A window of the task specifying the task target, which is set from
the end of (D) to the immediately subsequent discharge or death predicate. This creates our binary
label classes for the task (i.e., discharge = 0; death = 1). All windows are interrelated on the
patient timeline, as shown by how each window references another in the configuration file.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.5   P YTHON API

In addition to the command-line tool, we also provide a Python interface to allow researchers to
easily leverage ACES for cohort extraction in their deep learning code pipelines. A full tutorial is
available on the ACES online documentation.

2.6   E XTRACTION O UTPUT

Finally, with a dataset configured for predicates and a task configuration file, ACES will execute
the extraction for the cohort and return a table where each row is a valid instance as per the criteria
defined in the configuration file. Hence, each instance can be included in our cohort used for the
downstream ML task. At the most basic level, the table contains the patient identifiers of our cohort,
a user-defined timestamp that indexes prediction time, and a task label derived from a user-specified
predicate. In addition, for each of the interrelated windows, a start and end timestamp is provided
to segment the patient record, along with a summary of the number of predicates evaluated in that
window.


3     U SING ACES: A R EPOSITORY OF E XAMPLE TASK C ONFIGURATION F ILES

To demonstrate the flexibility and utility of ACES, we define and publicly release the task con-
figuration files described in Table 1, both with dataset-agnostic criteria and with dataset-specific
predicate realizations based on the MEDS version of the public MIMIC-IV dataset. These vari-
ous tasks have been previously studied, and ACES will facilitate their conceptual reproducibility to
encourage benchmarking efforts and ensure robustness in ML for healthcare.


Table 1: A collection of sample configuration files for various common predictive tasks on MIMIC-
IV. These tasks can be easily generalized to other datasets, such as e-ICU or other private intensive
care unit (ICU) and inpatient datasets by simply swapping out appropriate predicate definitions.
 Task Name                                     Description
 First 24h in-hospital mortality               Predict mortality within a hospital admission using the first
                                               24 hours of data from that admission.
 First 48h in-hospital mortality               Predict mortality within a hospital admission using the first
                                               48 hours of data from that admission.
 First 24h in-ICU mortality                    Predict mortality within an ICU admission using the first 24
                                               hours of data from that admission.
 First 48h in-ICU mortality                    Predict mortality within a ICU admission using the first 48
                                               hours of data from that admission.
 30d post-hospital-discharge mortality         Predict mortality within 30 days of discharge.
 30d re-admission                              Predict hospital readmission within 30 days of discharge.
 Myocardial infarction 1-5Y phenotyping        Predict myocardial infarction (MI) incidence 1-5 years af-
                                               ter hospital admission.
 Reduced echo-derived LVEF 9m post-ECG         Predict reduced echo-derived left ventricular ejection
                                               fraction (LVEF) within 9 months of any ECG.
 CKD onset in diabetics 5Y from kidney panel   Predict chronic kidney disease (CKD) onset in diabetic pa-
                                               tients within 5 years of any kidney panel laboratory test.



3.1   C OMPUTATIONAL P ROFILE

To establish an overview of the computational profile of ACES, the collection of tasks from Table 1
was extracted on MIMIC-IV. The MIMIC-IV MEDS schema has approximately 50,000 patients per
shard with an average of approximately 80,500,000 total event rows per shard over seven shards.
However, only a single shard was used to provide the bounded computational overview of ACES in
Table 2, as the results are applicable even when scaled to larger datasets using Hydra2 . For instance,
if one shard costs M memory and T time, then N shards may be executed in parallel with about
N ∗ M memory and T time, or in series with about M memory and T ∗ N time.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Performance statistics for various common predictive tasks on a single MEDS shard of
MIMIC-IV. This particular shard was 5,494.39 MiBs on disk as a parquet file and 9,661.41 MiBs
when loaded in memory as a dataframe. It consisted of 80,301,208 rows corresponding to 47,954
unique patients. All experiments were executed on a Linux server with 36 cores and 340 GBs of
RAM available.
    Task                                          # Patients   # Samples   Total Time (s)   Max Memory (MiBs)
    First 24h in-hospital mortality                 20,971       58,823           363.09            106,367.14
    First 48h in-hospital mortality                 18,847       60,471           364.62            108,913.95
    First 24h in-ICU mortality                       4,768        7,156           216.81             39,594.37
    First 48h in-ICU mortality                       4,093        7,112           217.98             39,451.86
    30d post-hospital-discharge mortality           28,416       68,547           182.91             30,434.68
    30d re-admission                                18,908      464,821           367.41            106,064.04
    Myocardial Infarction 1-5Y phenotyping           3,329        8,319           198.04             33,427.70
    Reduced echo-derived LVEF 9m post-ECG               14           17           210.02             35,385.79
    CKD onset in diabetics 5Y from kidney panel        736        3,503           238.65             44,221.81



4      D ISCUSSION

4.1        A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

In addition to the existing tools discussed in Section 1, there are several other areas of related work
relevant to ACES. Firstly, ACES serves as a middle ground between solutions that focus on specific
CDMs, such as OHDSI’s ATLAS Gold et al. (2024) and i2b2’s PIC-SURE (Stedman et al., 2024).
Compared to these tools, ACES balances capability with greater ease of use and improved commu-
nicative value. ACES is also not tied to a particular CDM. Built on a flexible event-stream format,
ACES is a no-code solution with a descriptive input format, permitting easy and wide iteration over
task definitions. It can be applied to a variety of schemas, making it a versatile tool suitable for
diverse research needs. ACES could also be directly connected with existing health CDMs through
ETLs, such as OMOP (Reich et al., 2024), i2b2 (Murphy et al., 2010), FHIR (Bender & Sartipi,
2013), and PCORnet (Fleurence et al., 2014). These models provide already-accepted standardized
frameworks for organizing and analyzing healthcare data, and supporting them could greatly en-
hance the utility and interoperability of ACES. Similarly, frameworks such as DescEmb (Hur et al.,
2022) and GenHPF (Hur et al., 2024) hold great synergistic potential with ACES, and we believe
that they can be complementary in enabling new kinds of cross-dataset training, transfer learning,
and evaluation. Static benchmarks that provide standardized datasets, metrics, and baseline meth-
ods for a range of clinical problems, such as YAIB (van de Water et al., 2024), multitask learning
clinical prediction benchmarks (Harutyunyan et al., 2019), and EHR-PT (McDermott et al., 2021a),
can also be directly integrated with ACES to facilitate robust ML in healthcare. Lastly, ACES can
be used in conjunction with various health data management tools, such as TemporAI (Saveliev
& van der Schaar, 2023), PyHealth (Yang et al., 2023), OMOP-learn (Kodialam et al., 2021), and
DPM360 (Suryanarayanan et al., 2021). These tools offer functionalities for pre-processing, manag-
ing, and analyzing health data for downstream tasks, and integrating ACES with them directly can
streamline ML workflows.
Beyond healthcare, ACES is applicable to data from a variety of other domains, such as for finance,
climate, or social media data — essentially, ACES could be used for any structured, longitudinal
data that can be reformatted as an event-stream. This versatility makes ACES a powerful library for
extracting and analyzing complex event-based datasets across different fields.

4.2        L IMITATIONS & F UTURE ROADMAP

ACES has limitations that can be addressed in future work. Firstly, while already very expressive, the
ACES task configuration language can still be further expanded. Expressing more complex kinds of
predicates, window aggregations, labeling functions, and criteria would expand the scope of ACES
significantly. ACES also seeks to provide direct support for cohort extraction based on unstructured
data (notes and memos) in the future. Currently, such predicates need to be manually extracted by
the user, but with the help of community contributions, we hope to be able to incorporate automatic


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


feature extraction from clinical notes, or even images, and integrate them into configuration files for
cohort extraction.
ACES is also very well poised to capture more complex patterns of task and cohort relationships,
including prescribed systems of case-control matching, automated bias analyses, or propensity re-
weighting over excluded populations. It is also possible to enable users to nest ACES configuration
files to leverage extracted task labels as new predicates in more complex tasks and querying pro-
cesses.
To enhance the scalability of ACES, we will seek to maintain support for the expanding MEDS
standard. Direct interoperability with other existing resources in this space, in particular ATLAS
and its OHDSI vocabulary-derived cohort definitions, is a high priority area for future work.
Finally, with the standardization that ACES offers, new opportunities for human interaction with
data are also made available, such as via a natural language interface to define ACES predicates or
configuration files and, thus, to extract downstream tasks, patient cohorts, or derived datasets in a
code-free manner on diverse input EHR formats. We aim to explore the viability of leveraging large
language models (LLMs) to directly format predicate and criteria definitions given a data dictionary,
and to automatically construct configuration files from natural language.

4.3   ACES AS A C ATALYST FOR A N EW E RA OF B ENCHMARKING

In addition to the clear impact of ACES on reproducibility, robustness, and accessibility of ML for
healthcare, we also feel that ACES is critical for a “new kind of benchmark” in the field — and, in so
being, is a portent of what needs to come should ML for healthcare progress to a more productive,
communal, and impactful stage (McDermott, 2025).
In particular, we argue that for this field to progress in the manner desired by the community and to
maximize positive impact for all patients, we need to develop methodologies to test, share, and de-
velop ML solutions across diverse datasets in a meaningful and reproducible manner, even without
said datasets being publicly available to general researchers. This capability is critical because,
without it, we will never be able to offer new inductive insights about which methods are most likely
to work best on novel, private data. In other words, if we cannot test our model training recipes
across the diverse sets of clinical care settings, populations, and conceptual dataset schemas that ex-
ist in the real world, we similarly cannot expect those training recipes to generalize well to a myriad
of downstream deployment areas.
Libraries like ACES, which make it as easy as possible for users to share the conceptual definitions
of their tasks and prediction areas across datasets — in such a way that their colleagues can use
them even over independent, private datasets — can help transform the kinds of benchmarking
studies that we can perform in ML for healthcare. For instance, the MEDS Decentralized Extensible
Validation (MEDS-DEV) (McDermott et al., 2024) effort is one such step towards enabling the
generalizable assessment of ML training recipes across datasets, clinical areas, and beyond.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we present the Automatic Cohort Extraction System for Event-Stream Datasets
(ACES). ACES is a system designed to intuitively define cohorts and downstream tasks of inter-
est for representation learning and reliably extract those cohorts from arbitrary datasets in event-
stream formats. This system enables significantly greater shareability of task definitions, repro-
ducibility of ML training and evaluation recipes, and is as easy to use as installing a package via
pip and running a simple command-line tool. We feel that ACES will be integral in the develop-
ment of new kinds of benchmarks in ML for healthcare, which can be explored across both pub-
lic and private datasets alike, as well as help characterize populations and tasks of interest in a
manner that cleanly separates dataset-specific components from shareable dataset-agnostic compo-
nents. To learn more about ACES and use it today in your work, please visit our GitHub repository
at: https://github.com/justin13601/aces, and the ACES online documentation at:
https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/latest.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND D ISCLOSURE OF F UNDING
MBAM gratefully acknowledges support from a Berkowitz Postdoctoral Fellowship at Har-
vard Medical School. JG is funded by the National Institutes of Health through NIH-USA
R01CA294033. JX greatly appreciates support from supervisors David Eyre (University of Ox-
ford) and Curtis Langlotz (Stanford University). We also acknowledge valuable contributions by
Tom Pollard (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and by the broader MEDS ecosystem of con-
tributors and users.

R EFERENCES
Bert Arnrich, Edward Choi, Jason Alan Fries, Matthew B.A. McDermott, Jungwoo Oh, Tom Pol-
  lard, Nigam Shah, Ethan Steinberg, Michael Wornow, and Robin van de Water. Medical event
  data standard (MEDS): Facilitating machine learning for health. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on
  Learning from Time Series For Health, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=IsHy2ebjIG.
Duane Bender and Kamran Sartipi. Hl7 fhir: An agile and restful approach to healthcare information
  exchange. In Proceedings of the 26th IEEE international symposium on computer-based medical
  systems, pp. 326–331. IEEE, 2013.
David Donoho. Data Science at the Singularity. Harvard Data Science Review, 6(1), jan 29 2024.
  https://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/g9mau4m0.
Rachael L Fleurence, Lesley H Curtis, Robert M Califf, Richard Platt, Joe V Selby, and Jef-
  frey S Brown. Launching pcornet, a national patient-centered clinical research network.
  Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 21(4):578–582, 05 2014. ISSN
  1067-5027. doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2014-002747. URL https://doi.org/10.1136/
  amiajnl-2014-002747.
Sigfried Gold, Chris Knoll, Anthony Sena, Frank DeFalco, Anton Abushkevich, Pavel Grafkin, Vlad
  Belousov, Alex Saltykov, Vitaly Koulakov, Sergey Suvorov, Anastasiia Klochkova, Maria Pozhi-
  daeva, Jungmi Han, Anton Gackovka, Anton Stepanof, Mark Velez, Vlad Belousov, Chen Regen,
  Ekaterina Krivets, Semyon Titarenko, chgl, Joris Borgdorff, Valeri Antonov, Kwang Soo Jeong,
  Gowtham Rao, Alex Odysseus, Ajit Londhe, Alex Cumarav, Kai Kewley, Marc Suchard, Won-
  jun Hong, Tom White, Konstantin Yaroshovets, Shaun Turner, Taha Abdul-Basser, Richard D.
  Boyce, Tiago Novo, and Rowan Parry. Atlas, June 2024. URL https://github.com/
  OHDSI/Atlas. original-date: 2015-07-08T16:26:35Z.
Hrayr Harutyunyan, Hrant Khachatrian, David C. Kale, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Mul-
  titask learning and benchmarking with clinical time series data. Scientific Data, 6(1):96, June
  2019. ISSN 2052-4463. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0103-9. URL https://www.nature.
  com/articles/s41597-019-0103-9. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
Kyunghoon Hur, Jiyoung Lee, Jungwoo Oh, Wesley Price, Younghak Kim, and Edward Choi. Uni-
  fying heterogeneous electronic health records systems via text-based code embedding. PMLR, pp.
  183–203, Apr 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v174/hur22a.html.
Kyunghoon Hur, Jungwoo Oh, Junu Kim, Jiyoun Kim, Min Jae Lee, Eunbyeol Cho, Seong-Eun
  Moon, Young-Hak Kim, Louis Atallah, and Edward Choi. Genhpf: General healthcare predic-
  tive framework for multi-task multi-source learning. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
  Informatics, 28(1):502–513, Jan 2024. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/jbhi.2023.3327951. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.09858.
Alistair E. W. Johnson, Tom J. Pollard, and Roger G. Mark. Reproducibility in critical care: a
  mortality prediction case study. In Proceedings of the 2nd Machine Learning for Healthcare
  Conference, pp. 361–376. PMLR, November 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v68/johnson17a.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
Alistair E. W. Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Lu Shen, Alvin Gayles, Ayad Shammout, Steven Horng,
  Tom J. Pollard, Sicheng Hao, Benjamin Moody, Brian Gow, Li-wei H. Lehman, Leo A. Celi, and


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Roger G. Mark. MIMIC-IV, a freely accessible electronic health record dataset. Scientific Data,
  10(1):1, January 2023. ISSN 2052-4463. doi: 10.1038/s41597-022-01899-x. URL https:
  //www.nature.com/articles/s41597-022-01899-x. Publisher: Nature Publishing
  Group.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.
Rohan Kodialam, Rebecca Boiarsky, Justin Lim, Aditya Sai, Neil Dixit, and David Sontag. Deep
  contextual clinical prediction with reverse distillation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 249–258, 2021.
Matthew McDermott. The (lack of?) science of machine learning for healthcare. In Proceedings
 of the 4th Machine Learning for Health Symposium, volume 259 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 19–29. PMLR, 15–16 Dec 2025. URL https://proceedings.
 mlr.press/v259/mcdermott25a.html.
Matthew McDermott, Bret Nestor, Evan Kim, Wancong Zhang, Anna Goldenberg, Peter Szolovits,
 and Marzyeh Ghassemi. A comprehensive ehr timeseries pre-training benchmark. In Proceedings
 of the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, pp. 257–278, 2021a.
Matthew B. A. McDermott, Shirly Wang, Nikki Marinsek, Rajesh Ranganath, Luca Foschini, and
 Marzyeh Ghassemi. Reproducibility in machine learning for health research: Still a ways to
 go. Science Translational Medicine, 13(586):eabb1655, March 2021b. ISSN 1946-6242. doi:
 10.1126/scitranslmed.abb1655.
Matthew B. A. McDermott, Aleksia Kolo, Chao Pang, Edward Choi, Ethan Steinberg, Hyewon
 Jeong, Jack Gallifant, Jason Alan Fries, Jeffrey N Chiang, Jungwoo Oh, Justin Xu, Kamilė
 Stankevičiūtė, Kiril Vadimovic Klein, Mikkel Fruelund Odgaard, Nassim Oufattole, Patrick Rock-
 enschaub, Pawel Renc, Robin van de Water, Shalmali Joshi, Simon Austin Lee, Teya Berga-
 maschi, Tom Pollard, Vincent Jeanselme, Nigam Shah, Michael Wornow, Aparajita Kashyap,
 XinZhou Jiang, Yanwei Li, Young Sang Choi, Yuta Kobayashi, and Ryan King. Meds decentral-
 ized, extensible validation (meds-dev) benchmark: Establishing reproducibility and comparability
 in ml for health, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=DExp3tRRel.
Matthew B.A. McDermott, Bret Nestor, Peniel N Argaw, and Isaac S. Kohane. Event stream
 GPT: A data pre-processing and modeling library for generative, pre-trained transformers
 over continuous-time sequences of complex events. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=hiO0735tmc.
Shawn N Murphy, Griffin Weber, Michael Mendis, Vivian Gainer, Henry C Chueh, Susanne
  Churchill, and Isaac Kohane. Serving the enterprise and beyond with informatics for integrat-
  ing biology and the bedside (i2b2). Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 17
  (2):124–130, 2010.
Tom J Pollard, Alistair E W Johnson, Jesse D Raffa, Leo A Celi, Roger G Mark, and Omar Badawi.
  The eICU Collaborative Research Database, a freely available multi-center database for critical
  care research. Scientific data, 5(1):1–13, 2018.
Christian Reich, Anna Ostropolets, Patrick Ryan, Peter Rijnbeek, Martijn Schuemie, Alexander
  Davydov, Dmitry Dymshyts, and George Hripcsak. Ohdsi standardized vocabularies—a large-
  scale centralized reference ontology for international data harmonization. Journal of the American
  Medical Informatics Association, 31(3):583–590, 01 2024. ISSN 1527-974X. doi: 10.1093/jamia/
  ocad247. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocad247.
Olawale Salaudeen and Moritz Hardt. Imagenot: A contrast with imagenet preserves model rank-
  ings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02112, 2024.
Evgeny S Saveliev and Mihaela van der Schaar. Temporai: Facilitating machine learning innovation
  in time domain tasks for medicine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12260, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ali Shirali, Rediet Abebe, and Moritz Hardt. A theory of dynamic benchmarks. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=i8L9qoeZOS.
Jason Stedman, Jeremy Nix, James Peck, Nick Benik, Danielle Pillion, Anil Degala, Luke Sik-
  ina, Samantha Piatt, Simran Makwana, and Jaspreet Khanna. Pic-sure all-in-one. https:
  //github.com/hms-dbmi/Access-to-Data-using-PIC-SURE-API, 2024.
Parthasarathy Suryanarayanan, Prithwish Chakraborty, Piyush Madan, Kibichii Bore, William
  Ogallo, Rachita Chandra, Mohamed Ghalwash, Italo Buleje, Sekou Remy, Shilpa Mahatma,
  Pablo Meyer, and Jianying Hu. Disease progression modeling workbench 360, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13265.
Robin van de Water, Hendrik Schmidt, Paul Elbers, Patrick Thoral, Bert Arnrich, and Patrick Rock-
  enschaub. Yet Another ICU Benchmark: A Flexible Multi-Center Framework for Clinical ML,
  March 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05109. arXiv:2306.05109 [cs].
Jason Walonoski, Mark Kramer, Joseph Nichols, Andre Quina, Chris Moesel, Dylan Hall, Carlton
  Duffett, Kudakwashe Dube, Thomas Gallagher, and Scott McLachlan. Synthea: An approach,
  method, and software mechanism for generating synthetic patients and the synthetic electronic
  health care record. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 25(3):230–238, 08
  2017. ISSN 1527-974X. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocx079. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/
  jamia/ocx079.
Omry Yadan. Hydra - a framework for elegantly configuring complex applications. Github, 2019.
 URL https://github.com/facebookresearch/hydra.
Chaoqi Yang, Zhenbang Wu, Patrick Jiang, Zhen Lin, Junyi Gao, Benjamin P. Danek, and Jimeng
  Sun. Pyhealth: A deep learning toolkit for healthcare applications. In Proceedings of the 29th
  ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’23, pp. 5788–5789,
  New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400701030. doi:
  10.1145/3580305.3599178. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3580305.3599178.
Guanhua Zhang and Moritz Hardt. Inherent trade-offs between diversity and stability in multi-task
  benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01719, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    ACES O NLINE D OCUMENTATION I NDEX
The full ACES online documentation is available at: https://eventstreamaces.
readthedocs.io/en/latest. We have also included a compiled PDF version of this doc-
umentation in the Supplementary Material.
To answer specific questions about ACES, please see the below index for the PDF documentation
(links to the associated online documentation are also provided).

 How do you use ACES?
     1. What is a task and how do you specify one?
          Sample task descriptions and specifications are provided in the Task Examples section
          in Chapter 3 (https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
          notebooks/examples.html).
            1.1. What are predicates and how do you specify them?
                For an overview of predicates and how they form the foundation of
                ACES, please refer to the Predicates DataFrame section in Chapter 4
                (https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
                notebooks/predicates.html).
            1.2. What are windows and how do you specify them?
                A window in ACES represents a segment in the patient record. For
                details on how to define a window, please refer to Chapter 1.3.3
                (https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
                readme.html#windows).
       2. How do you extract a task from a dataset?
          For general ACES usage instructions, please refer to Chapter 2.1 (https:
          //eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html#
          quick-start). Additionally, brief end-to-end instructions are also available in
          Chapters 1.2 and 1.3.
            2.1. Detailed Usage Instructions for ACES CLI
                For detailed instructions on using ACES CLI, please refer to the Usage Guide
                in Chapter 2.2 (https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/
                latest/usage.html#detailed-instructions).
            2.2. Tutorial for the ACES Python API
                For a step-by-step tutorial on using the ACES Python API, please refer to the
                Code Example Notebook in Chapter 5 (https://eventstreamaces.
                readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_meds.html).


       3. ACES with / vs. Other Tools
          For an overview of how ACES could be used with other existing complementary tools
          for reproducible ML, please refer to Chapter 1.4.2 (https://eventstreamaces.
          readthedocs.io/en/latest/readme.html#complementary-tools).
          For an overview of how ACES compares to other existing alternative tools
          for semi- or fully-automated cohort extraction, please refer to Chapter 1.4.3
          (https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/latest/readme.
          html#alternative-tools).

 How does ACES work?
     1. What is the formal configuration language specification for ACES?


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          For technical details on the ACES configuration language, please refer to
          the Configuration Language Specification section in Chapter 6.1 (https:
          //eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/latest/technical.html#
          configuration-language-specification).

       2. Glossary of ACES Terminology
          For a glossary of terminology used throughout ACES, please refer to the Algorithm Ter-
          minology section in Chapter 6.3 (https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.
          io/en/latest/technical.html#algorithm-terminology).

       3. What is the ACES extraction algorithm?
          For technical details on the ACES algorithm, please refer to the Algorithm Design
          section in Chapter 6.4 (https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/
          latest/technical.html#algorithm-design).

       4. Full ACES Module API Documentation
          For the complete ACES module documentation, including doctests that ensure algo-
          rithm correctness, please refer to the Module API sections in Chapter 8 (https://
          eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/modules.html).

 How well does ACES work?
       1. Computational Profile
          For an overview of the computational profile of ACES, please refer to the Computational
          Profile section in Chapter 7 (https://eventstreamaces.readthedocs.io/
          en/latest/profiling.html).

       2. Further Examples
          For additional examples of configuration files and criteria of different ML for health-
          care tasks, please refer to the MEDS-DEV benchmarking effort on GitHub: https:
          //github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS-DEV.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTS
We conducted preliminary experiments to quantitatively compare ACES with other alternative tools.
Using the OMOP version of the MIMIC-IV Demo, as well as a synthetic dataset of 1,000 patients
generated using Synthea (Walonoski et al., 2017) and converted into OMOP, we queried four tasks
using ACES and two of the most comparable tools, OMOP-learn and DPM360.
We collected metrics including script runtime, peak memory usage (in MiBs), lines of code required
(including configuration files and any template code needed to execute extraction), and human time
spent. All experiments were conducted on a default A100 GPU instance with 84 GB of RAM and
12 CPU cores from Google Cloud Platform’s Compute Engine.


Table B.1: Quantitative comparison of ACES and other comparable cohort extraction tools across
datasets and tasks.
Dataset         Method                Task                                    Runtime (s)   Peak Memory (MiB)   Lines of Code   Human Time (s)
                                      First 24h in-hospital mortality            0.386             389                35             120
                                      30d post-hospital-discharge mortality     0.236              351                32             90
                ACES via MEDS
                                      30d re-admission                           0.337             355                22              60
                                      End-of-life prediction                     0.449             421                28             120
Synthea-1000
                                      First 24h in-hospital mortality            5.932             390               205           2,126
                                      30d post-hospital-discharge mortality     4.188              550               257           1,200
                DPM360 via OMOP
                                      30d re-admission                           6.260             870               288            2,020
                                      End-of-life prediction                     4.901             387               222            1,500
                                      First 24h in-hospital mortality            0.617             545                35             180
                                      30d post-hospital-discharge mortality     0.301              509                32             90
                ACES via MEDS
                                      30d re-admission                           0.455             532                22              90
                                      End-of-life prediction                     0.349             589                28             300
MIMIC-IV Demo
                                      First 24h in-hospital mortality           12.220             688               172           3,623
                                      30d post-hospital-discharge mortality     8.608              587               199           2,441
                OMOP-learn via OMOP
                                      30d re-admission                          19.710             640               168            2,998
                                      End-of-life prediction                    24.540             932               251           12,000



We also qualitatively compared the adaptability of these approaches to any other given ML task.
While ACES requires simple modifications to the task configuration file to capture new task logic
or cohort criteria, new ATLAS executions, bespoke SQL queries, and changes to Python parameters
may be needed for DPM360 and OMOP-learn.
While we acknowledge potential biases in these results due to our familiarity with ACES and only
surface exposure to other extraction tools, we have aimed for a fair and objective evaluation. Based
on our experience and preliminary user feedback, we find ACES to be intuitive and believe it offers
a significantly improved workflow with more comprehensive functionality.


                                                                     16
