Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C AN V IDEO LLM S R EFUSE TO A NSWER ? A LIGNMENT
FOR A NSWERABILITY IN V IDEO L ARGE L ANGUAGE
M ODELS
 Eunseop Yoon1∗ Hee Suk Yoon1∗ Mark Hasegawa-Johnson2              Chang D. Yoo1†
 1
   Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
 2
   University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC)
 {esyoon97,hskyoon,cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr                   {jhasegaw}@illinois.edu

                                               A BSTRACT

            In the broader context of deep learning, Multimodal Large Language Models
            have achieved significant breakthroughs by leveraging powerful Large Language
            Models as a backbone to align different modalities into the language space. A
            prime exemplification is the development of Video Large Language Models (Video-
            LLMs). While numerous advancements have been proposed to enhance the video
            understanding capabilities of these models, they are predominantly trained on
            questions generated directly from video content. However, in real-world scenarios,
            users often pose questions that extend beyond the informational scope of the video,
            highlighting the need for Video-LLMs to assess the relevance of the question. We
            demonstrate that even the best-performing Video-LLMs fail to reject unfit questions-
            not necessarily due to a lack of video understanding, but because they have not
            been trained to identify and refuse such questions. To address this limitation, we
            propose alignment for answerability, a framework that equips Video-LLMs with
            the ability to evaluate the relevance of a question based on the input video and
            appropriately decline to answer when the question exceeds the scope of the video,
            as well as an evaluation framework with a comprehensive set of metrics designed
            to measure model behavior before and after alignment. Furthermore, we present a
            pipeline for creating a dataset specifically tailored for alignment for answerability,
            leveraging existing video-description paired datasets. The code and the dataset is
            publicly accessible at https://github.com/EsYoon7/UVQA.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The rapid advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023;
Dubey et al., 2024; Anil et al., 2023) have revolutionized natural language processing, laying the
groundwork for the development of Multimodal LLMs (Huang et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024; Su et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022; 2023a; Yoon et al., 2024b). By projecting multimodal data—including images,
audio, and video—into the language space, Multimodal LLMs leverage the powerful reasoning
and generative capabilities of LLMs as a backbone. Among these, Video Large Language Models
(Video-LLMs) (Yoon et al., 2022; 2023; Li et al., 2024b; Ahn et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2023; Maaz
et al., 2024) stand out for their ability to both comprehend video content and generate contextually
relevant responses. This capability opens up numerous real-world applications, such as video-based
question answering, content moderation, and even autonomous surveillance. By processing both
the visual and linguistic aspects of video data, Video-LLMs hold significant potential in enhancing
human-computer interaction and solving complex, video-centric tasks across various domains.
Despite the significant performance improvements Video-LLMs have achieved in video understanding
and question-answering (QA) tasks, driven by advancements in architecture and training techniques,
they are typically trained to answer questions generated directly from the video content. However, in
real-world applications, Video-LLMs often face scenarios where users pose questions that extend
beyond the information provided in the video. Since these models have not been trained to recognize
    ∗
        Equal contribution
    †
        Corresponding Author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Limitations of Current Video-LLMs. (a) While Video-LLMs demonstrate steady
improvements on traditional video understanding and QA benchmarks, their performance on our
unanswerable question evaluation benchmark remains poor, with no meaningful progress observed
across models. (b) Scaling the model size (7B → 72B) leads to improvements on traditional
answerable QA benchmark, while performance on our unanswerable question evaluation benchmark
remains consistently poor. (c) The Video-LLM successfully identifies that there is no cat in the video
when asked a straightforward existence question, which is answerable based on the video content. (d)
However, when the question is framed to ask about the breed of a cat that does not exist in the video,
the model fails to recognize the unanswerability and generates a hallucinated response.

or refuse such unanswerable questions, they often fail, providing incorrect or irrelevant answers. In
Figure 1-(a), we show that while Video-LLMs show a steady increase in performance on standard
video understanding and QA benchmarks (MVSD-QA (Xu et al., 2017b), MSRVTT-QA (Xu et al.,
2016), ActivityNet-QA (Yu et al., 2019)), their performance on our unanswerable question evalu-
ation benchmark highlights a contrasting outcome, with none of the models showing meaningful
improvements. Similarly, Figure 1-(b) demonstrates that while scaling model size leads to notable
improvements on standard answerable QA benchmarks, it has no significant impact on performance
for the unanswerable question evaluation benchmark, underscoring the persistent challenge of han-
dling unanswerable questions. This underscores a critical limitation of current Video-LLMs: their
inability to handle questions that go beyond the informational content of the video.
For instance, in Figure 1-(c), the video depicts a scene without any cats, and the question posed asks if
there is a cat in the video. This type of “existence” question is technically answerable, and the Video-
LLMs correctly identify that no cat is present, providing an accurate response. However, in Figure
1-(d), the same video is used, but the question asks about the breed of a cat, which is unanswerable
since it extends beyond the information contained in the video. Despite the unanswerability of the
question, the model attempts to answer and produce a hallucinated response, as it has not been trained
to recognize or reject such questions.

Contributions To address this limitation identified in current Video-LLMs, we introduce several
key contributions in this paper:

       • Alignment for Answerability: In Section 4.1, we formally define alignment for answerability
         framework designed to equip Video-LLMs with the capability to assess the relevance of
         user queries in relation to the video content. This alignment process enables Video-LLMs to
         enhance the model’s ability to reject queries that exceed the informational boundaries of the
         input video.
       • Evaluation Metrics for Alignment for Answerability: Assessing the degree of alignment of a
         model presents several challenges. For example, we need to evaluate not only if the aligned
         model become more willing to evaluate and refuse answering to unanswerable questions,
         but also if it becomes overly cautious in the pursuit for answerability. To deal with the
         complex nature of evaluating the alignment process, Section 4.2 introduces a set of metrics
         to systematically measure the differences in model behavior before and after alignment,
         capturing various aspects of the answerability performance.
       • Dataset Creation for Alignment for Answerability: Existing instruction-tuning datasets
         for Video-LLMs are limited to cases where the questions are generated directly from the
         video content, restricting the models’ ability to handle questions that exceed the video’s
         informational boundaries. In Section 4.3, we outline the process of creating a novel dataset,
         UVQA, that includes questions designed to extend beyond the content of the video. This is
         accomplished by leveraging existing video datasets consisting of video-description pairs,
         which we modify to generate unanswerable questions.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2   R ELATED W ORK
Video Large Langauge Models (Video-LLMs) Video-LLMs are trained in two stages: vision-
language alignment, where the video data is projected into the LLM’s token space to ensure visual
features are aligned with language representations, and instruction tuning, which enhances multimodal
understanding through task-specific fine-tuning (Maaz et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023b).
Building on these two foundational stages, recent models have introduced additional training phases to
address specific challenges. For instance, LLaMA-VID (Li et al., 2024b) focuses on long video com-
prehension, allowing the model to understand extended content, such as a 3-hour movie. VideoChat2
(Li et al., 2024a) improves upon the vision-language connection between the alignment and instruc-
tion tuning stages for enhanced alignment. VideoLlama2 (Cheng et al., 2024) incorporates joint
audio-video training, enabling the model to process not only video frames but also the accompanying
audio for a more holistic understanding of video. Additionally, to improve video comprehension and
instruction-following of Video-LLMs, some approaches are experimenting with feedback from AI
models (Ahn et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a), inspired by Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), to further align LLMs with video content.

Alignment in Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) Aligning model to human preferences
means that a model’s generation should follow user instructions and account for what the user would
prefer as a response (Ouyang et al., 2022; Yoon et al., 2024a). To achieve this alignment in language
models, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) based on PPO (Ouyang et al., 2022)
or DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) are widely used. Building on these efforts, a growing number of papers
focus on alignment challenges in LVLMs, viewing various issues through the lens of alignment and
attempting to solve them accordingly.
RLHF-V (Yu et al., 2024a) and RLAIF-V (Yu et al., 2024b) tackle the HHH (i.e., Helpfulness,
Harmlessness, and Honesty) alignment in LVLMs using feedback-based training algorithms, similar
to those employed in RLHF for language models. Silkie (Li et al., 2023c), for example, focuses on
improving the helpfulness and faithfulness of model outputs.
One of the problems LVLMs address as an alignment issue is hallucination-the generation of responses
that are not factually grounded. To mitigate hallucination in LVLMs, techniques such as Visual
Contrastive Decoding (Leng et al., 2024), penalization methods (Huang et al., 2024), augmented
generation (Sun et al., 2023), and modified DPO (Zhao et al., 2023) have been applied. These methods
aim to enhance alignment by ensuring that model outputs are grounded in the provided visual inputs.

Unanswerability of Question Answering Determining whether a question is answerable is crucial
for building trustworthy AI. Given its significance, prior works (Brahman et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2023; Wen et al., 2024) investigate answerability in Large Language Models (LLMs), focusing
on cases where questions cannot be answered using the model’s intrinsic knowledge. For Image-
based Vision-Language Models (Image-LLMs), Whitehead et al. (2022); Guo et al. (2023) examine
unanswerability based on image content. However, in Video-based Vision-Language Models (Video-
LLMs), this aspect remains underexplored, as evidenced by the limitations of open-source Video
LLMs in addressing unanswerable questions, shown in Figure 1. In this work, we formalize this
problem and introduce both an evaluation metric and an automated data generation pipeline, providing
a robust framework for training and evaluating the performance of Video-LLMs in addressing this
challenge.

3   P ROBLEM S ETUP
Video Large Language Models (Video-LLMs) The general framework of Video-LLMs (Li et al.,
2024b; Ahn et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2023; Maaz et al., 2024) consist of three main components: (1) a
visual encoder V that processes the video inputs, (2) a vision-language projector P that bridges the
visual and language modalities, and (3) a pre-trained language model L for generating text-based
responses.
The visual encoder V receives the input video, represented as a sequence of frames v =
{v1 , v2 , . . . , vT }, where each vi corresponds to the i-th frame. The encoder extracts spatial and
temporal features, producing a latent video representation zV = V(v) ∈ RdV .


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This encoded representation, zV , is then passed to the vision-language projector P, which aligns it
with the instruction1 input x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }, a sequence of N tokens. The projector maps the
visual features into the language space, yielding an aligned representation zP = P(zV ) ∈ RdP . This
projection prepares the multimodal input for the pre-trained language model L.
The language model, leveraging its vast pre-training on text corpora, processes the aligned represen-
tation and generates a response y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yM }, where M is the response length in tokens
y = L(zP , x) ∈ RM . The generated response y reflects the interplay between the information from
the video and the instruction input, ensuring that the output is contextually relevant to both modalities.

4     A LIGNMENT FOR A NSWERABILITY IN V IDEO -LLM S
In this section, we first present a formal definition of alignment for answerability in Section 4.1.
Following that, in Section 4.2, we address the challenges of evaluating alignment for answerability
and introduce our proposed evaluation metric. Lastly, in Section 4.3, we outline our pipeline for
creating a dataset specifically designed for alignment for answerability.

4.1   D EFINING A LIGNMENT FOR A NSWERABILITY

Although various architectural advancements have been introduced to enhance the video under-
standing capabilities of Video-LLMs, they are exclusively trained on video-question-answer triplets
(v, x, ygt ), where the questions x and corresponding answers ygt are generated directly from the
content of the input video v. However, in real-world scenarios, users may pose questions that extend
beyond the informational scope of the video, emphasizing the need for Video-LLMs to assess the
appropriateness of a given question x in relation to the input video v. In this paper, we define the
process of equipping Video-LLMs with the ability to evaluate question relevance based on the video
content as alignment for answerability. To formally define the process of alignment for answerability,
we draw inspiration from Yang et al. (2023) and begin by categorizing the model’s response y as
follows:                       
                               1,     if type(y) = correct,
                        t(y) = 0,      if type(y) = wrong or unanswerablew ,                      (1)
                                 −1, if type(y) = unanswerablec ,
                               

       • type(y) = correct when the response y does not contain any unanswerable indicators and
         the correct answer ygt is included in y.
       • type(y) = wrong when the response y does not contain any unanswerable indicators and
         the correct answer ygt is not included in y.
       • type(y) = unanswerablew when the response y contains unanswerable indicators (such as
         “The question is unanswerable”, etc.), but the reasoning for why it is unanswerable differs
         from the ground truth ygt .
       • type(y) = unanswerablec when the response y contains unanswerable indicators and the
         reasoning for why it is unanswerable is consistent with the ground truth ygt .
Then, the scoring function for alignment for answerability can be defined as:

                                             1, if k(v, x) · t(y) = 1,
                             s(v, x, y) =                                                                    (2)
                                             0, otherwise,
where k(v, x) is a function that determines whether a question x falls within the informational
boundaries of the input video v. Specifically, k(v, x) = 1 if the question is answerable, and
k(v, x) = −1 if the question is not answerable given the input video v. The alignment process for
answerability involves training the model M to prefer s(v, x, y) = 1 for (v, x) sampled from the
training data and y sampled from the model M resulting in an aligned model M′ :
                                             M′ = f (M, s(·)),                                               (3)
where f (·) represents an alignment algorithm such as supervised fine-tuning (SFT) or Direct Prefer-
ence Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023).
    1
      In this paper, we address scenarios where users pose questions about the input video, and therefore, we use
the terms ‘instruction’ and ‘question’ interchangeably.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: All possible scenarios of model response type changes between the pre-aligned model
(M) and post-aligned model (M′ ). (a) shows cases where the question x is answerable based on the
input video v (i.e., k(v, x) = 1), while (b) depicts the cases where the question x is unanswerable
given the input video v (i.e., k(v, x) = −1). Note that for (a) Answerable Questions, unanswerable
responses are grouped as type(y) = unanswerable, without distinguishing between unanswerablec
and unanswerablew , as reasoning of unanswerability is irrelevant for answerable questions. Each
category is represented by a unique number i.


4.2   E VALUATION M ETRICS FOR A LIGNMENT FOR A NSWERABILITY

Figure 2 illustrates all possible scenarios of model response type (i.e., type(y), as defined in Eq. 1)
changes between the pre-aligned model (M) and the post-aligned model (M′ ). Each category is
represented by a number i, with Ni denoting the number of samples falling into category i. Using
this representation, we formally define the evaluation metrics for alignment for answerability.
A straightforward approach to evaluating the aligned model M′ is to measure its overall accuracy
based on the model’s response:
                                     N1 + N4 + N7 + N12 + N15 + N18
                           Sacc. =                                  .                              (4)
                                                 N1−18
While this provides a simple metric, accuracy alone is insufficient for evaluating alignment for
answerability in Video-LLMs. For example, it is crucial not only to assess whether the aligned model
M′ demonstrates improved ability, compared to the unaligned model M, in recognizing when a
question exceeds the content of the video, but also whether this alignment has made the model overly
conservative, causing it to refuse answering questions that are valid and were previously answered
correctly. To fully capture this complex nature of evaluating the alignment process, we propose an
evaluation framework that establishes a set of metrics to measure the differences in model behavior
before and after alignment on various aspects.

Excessive Refusal Score: When a model is trained to respond with ‘unanswerable’ to certain
questions, it may become excessively reluctant, and the model might avoid answering questions it
actually knows the answers to. This metric evaluates the degree to which the model, after alignment,
declines to answer answerable questions that it was previously capable of answering correctly:
                                                        N3
                                      Sex-ref. =                .                                  (5)
                                                   N1 + N2 + N3

Permissiveness Score: In some cases, the model may incorrectly respond to an answerable question
as unanswerable (i.e., type(y) = unanswerable). This metric measures how much, after alignment,
the model improves its willingness to answer previously refused but answerable questions:
                                                     N7 + N8
                                      Spermis. =                .                                  (6)
                                                   N7 + N8 + N9

Discretion Score: This metric evaluates the model’s improved ability, after alignment, to correctly
decline answering unanswerable questions that it previously failed to recognize as unanswerable. It
measures the extent to which the model is aligned to recognize when a question falls outside the
informational boundaries of the input video and appropriately refrains from providing an incorrect or
speculative response:
                                                N11 + N12
                                    Sdisc. =                    .                                 (7)
                                             N10 + N11 + N12


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Dataset Creation for Alignment for Answerability. The process begins with a video-
description paired dataset (v, d). A Description Altering Process T modifies the original description
d by applying a change c, producing an altered description d′ . The altered description d′ and
the modification c are then input into a large language model (LLM) to generate an unanswerable
question x and the corresponding reasoning for why it is unanswerable, which forms the ground truth
label ygt for x. (a) For the object (O) and relation (R) unanswerable dataset, we use the MOMA-LRG
(Luo et al., 2022), where d is structured as a triplet (source object, relation, target object). (b) For
the attribute (A) unanswerable dataset, we use the DiDeMo (Anne Hendricks et al., 2017), which
provides caption-like descriptions d rich with attribute annotations.


4.3   DATASET C REATION FOR A LIGNMENT FOR A NSWERABILITY

As outlined in Eq. 2, achieving alignment for answerability—i.e., equipping a model to decline
answering unanswerable questions—requires tailoring the model to prefer s(v, x, y) = 1. This
is accomplished by ensuring the model provides a response that is categorized as t(y) = 1 when
k(v, x) = 1, or t(y) = −1 when k(v, x) = −1. However, existing instruction-tuning datasets for
Video-LLMs are limited to cases where questions x are generated directly from the video content v
(i.e., k(v, x) = 1).

Expanding Beyond Current Datasets In this section, we outline the process of creating our pro-
posed UVQA dataset, which includes questions x that extend beyond the informational boundaries
of the input video v (i.e., k(v, x) = −1). Given a dataset consisting of video-description pairs (v,
d), we generate an altered description d′ , which provides an incorrect scene description of v:
                                          (d′ , c) = T (v, d),                                       (8)
where T represents the altering process, and c indicates the specific changes made. Using the altered
description d′ and the changes c, we then prompt an external mature LLM (gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09)
to generate a question x based on d′ along with an answer ygt , where ygt includes an unanswerable
indicator (e.g., “The question is unanswerable”) and provides the reasoning for the unanswerability,
resulting in an unanswerable question x for the video v (the complete prompt can be found in
Appendix A.4.1):
                            (x, ygt ) = LLM(d′ , c), where k(v, x) = −1.                              (9)
Depending on the modification c made during the altering process A, the reasoning for the unanswer-
ability in the resulting ygt will vary. Motivated by Scene Graph (SG) framework (Johnson et al., 2015;
Xu et al., 2017a; Herzig et al., 2018; 2023), which structures a visual scene by capturing objects, their
attributes, and the relationship between them, we categorize the possible changes c to object-related
(O), attribute-related (A), and relation-related (R) (i.e., c ∈ (O ∪ A ∪ R)).

Object & Relation-related Unanswerability If c ∈ O, the resulting question is unanswerable
due to the absence of the object of interest in the video v, whereas if c ∈ R, the objects are present,


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


but the specified relationship between them is not depicted. To create data for these categories, we
use the MOMA-LRG (Luo et al., 2022) dataset as the source for video-description pairs (v, d). The
dataset includes annotations of the video description d in the form of a Scene Graph, represented as
triplets: d = (osrc , r, otgt ), where osrc is the source object, otgt is the target object (osrc , otgt ∈ O), and
r represents the relation between them (r ∈ R).
The MOMA-LRG dataset categorizes objects into 251 classes (e.g., Food, Clothing, Furniture,
Independent Actors, etc.) and relations into 65 classes (e.g., Static Relationships, Intransitive
Actions, etc.). We replace one of the elements in the triplet with another from the same category
to maintain naturalness in the altered description. By ensuring replacements occur within these
predefined categories, we avoid creating descriptions that feel unrealistic or mismatched, such as
objects interacting in ways that do not logically fit within the scene.
                                        ′                             ′
                                       (osrc , r, otgt ), if c = osrc ,
                                   ′               ′                  ′
                                  d = (osrc , r , otgt ), if c = r ,                          (10)
                                          (osrc , r, o′tgt ), if c = o′tgt
                                       


Attribute-related Unanswerability If c ∈ A, the question becomes unanswerable because the
object’s attribute in the question does not match the attribute of the object in the video. To generate
data for this category, we utilize the DiDeMo (Anne Hendricks et al., 2017) dataset, which is designed
for video retrieval tasks and contains detailed attribute annotations for the scenes. Unlike the MOMA-
LRG dataset used for object & relation-related unanswerability, the DiDeMo dataset provides video
descriptions d in the form of caption-like natural language sentences. In order to locate and replace
the attributes in d, we use the Part of Speech (POS) tagging processor spaCy (Honnibal & Montani,
2017) and extract the adjectives (a ∈ A) in the sentence. Similar to the process for creating the
Object & Relation-related Unanswerability dataset, we classify the adjectives into the categories
{Color, Position, Pattern, Material, Size, Status, Shape, Human Status, Uncategorized} and perform
replacements within each category, resulting in d′ where c = a′ .
In Appendix A.4.3, we show examples of our generated UVQA dataset for each category of object,
relation, and attribute-related unanswerable questions.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we begin by describing the statistics of the generated UVQA dataset and the balanced
answerable-unanswerable dataset used for training and evaluation (Section 5.1). Following that,
in Section 5.2, we discuss the alignment algorithms—Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Direct
Preference Optimization (DPO)—and the baseline models used for comparison, along with details
on the experimental implementation, including the base models, optimization strategy, and compu-
tational setup. Section 5.3 presents both the quantitative and qualitative results of our experiments,
highlighting the impact of alignment on the overall performance of the model.

5.1   DATASET

The resulting UVQA dataset from Section 4.3 consists of 10k training samples for each category
of unanswerability (i.e., object, relation, and attribute-related unanswerability), resulting in a total
of 30k training samples. For the evaluation of unanswerable questions, we curated 200 samples
per category, applying human filtering to ensure high-quality and accurate data, yielding 600 clean
evaluation samples. The detailed filtering process is explained in Appendix A.4.2.
As per Eq. 2, alignment for answerability requires coverage of both scenarios: k(v, x) = 1 (answer-
able) and k(v, x) = −1 (unanswerable), ensuring that alignment is not biased towards one scenario.
Therefore, in addition to the unanswerable dataset, we incorporate an answerable dataset using 30k
samples from the Video-ChatGPT (Maaz et al., 2024) for training. For the evaluation of answerable
questions, we use a subset of the ActivityNet QA (Yu et al., 2019), a widely used benchmark for
question-answering tasks in Video-LLMs. Thus, the resulting evaluation dataset consists of 1200
samples, with an equal split of 600 unanswerable from UVQA dataset and 600 answerable samples
from the ActivityNet QA, ensuring a balanced assessment between both scenarios.


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Evaluation of Answerability on Alignment and Absolute Performance: Alignment
performance is assessed using the Excessive Refusal (Sex-ref. ), Permissive (Spermis. ), Discretion (Sdisc. )
Scores, and the overall Alignment Score (Salign. ). Absolute performance is measured through overall
accuracy (Sacc. ) and LLMscore across various base models. Our aligned models (SFT and DPO)
demonstrate improved answerability alignment compared to the unaligned model.

                                    Answerability        Alignment Performance                Absolute Performance
  Base Model             f (·)
                                       F1       Sex-ref. ↓ Spermis. ↑ Sdisc. ↑ Salign ↑       Sacc. ↑    LLMscore ↑
                      unaligned       0.00          0           0        0      0.33           0.24        2.33
  Video-LLaVA         SFT (ours)      0.68        0.50        0.55      0.66    0.66           0.47        2.84
                      DPO (ours)      0.68        0.14        0.61      0.59    0.68           0.49        3.08
                      unaligned       0.00          0           0        0      0.33           0.22        1.93
  VideoChat2          SFT (ours)      0.61        0.25        0.25      0.85    0.62           0.51        2.98
                      DPO (ours)      0.64        0.09        0.46      0.71    0.69           0.54        3.02
                      unaligned       0.00          0           0        0      0.33           0.25        2.36
  VLM-RLAIF           SFT (ours)      0.65        0.10        0.37      0.67    0.65           0.52        2.86
                      DPO (ours)      0.66        0.08         0.5      0.64    0.69           0.53        2.93



5.2      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Baselines We conduct alignment training following the process outlined in Eq. 3. We evaluate
two alignment algorithms for f : Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023). These are compared against an unaligned baseline, where f is
simply the identity function, meaning M′ = M.2 Performance is assessed using both our proposed
alignment metrics (Eq. 5-7) and the absolute accuracy metric (Eq. 4).

Implementation Details To evaluate the general trend of alignment, we utilize various Video
LLMs, including Video-LLaVA (Zhang et al., 2023), VideoChat2 (Li et al., 2024a), and VLM-RLAIF
(Ahn et al., 2024) as our base models. We use the AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) optimizer
with a learning rate of 1e-6 and a constant learning rate scheduler, and we set the batch size to 128
for all experiments. We employ DeepSpeed-Zero Stage 2 (Rasley et al., 2020) with CPU offloading
for the optimizer and gradient checkpointing. All experiments were conducted on 2 x NVIDIA A100
80GB PCIe GPU.

5.3      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULT

Table 1 presents the quantitative results of our experiments, showcasing the Answerability Cor-
rectness, Alignment Performance and Absolute Performance. For the Answerability Cor-
rectness, we evaluate the binary correctness of the answerability prediction of the model using
the F1 score. For the Alignment Performance, we use the metrics introduced in Section 4.2:
Excessive Refusal (Sex-ref. ), Permissiveness (Spermis. ), and Discretion (Sdisc. ) scores. Along with
these metrics, we also report the average alignment score, calculated as the mean of these metrics:
Salign = 13 ((1 − Sex-ref. ) + Spermis. + Sdisc. ).3 For the Absolute Performance, we report the accuracy
(Sacc. ) as defined in Eq. 4. Additionally, following the evaluation methodology of previous Video-
LLMs (Lin et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a;b; Ahn et al., 2024), we include the LLMscore , which assesses
the quality of the model-generated response y in comparison to the ground truth label ygt . This
rating, assigned by GPT-4, is on a scale from 0 to 5. The prompts for determining type(y), needed for
Alignment Performance and accuracy, and LLMscore can be found in Appendix A.5.
Across all base models, both the SFT and DPO models trained using our framework consistently
outperform the unaligned models, exhibiting higher answerability correctness (F1), average alignment
scores (Salign ), accuracy (Sacc. ), and LLMscore . These improvements are primarily driven by superior
performance on the unanswerable UVQA evaluation set. When comparing SFT and DPO, although
Sacc remains comparable between the two, DPO generally achieves lower Sex-ref. , higher Spermis. , and
slightly lower Sdisc. . This suggests that DPO facilitates a softer alignment, allowing the model to
maintain its original performance while still enhancing its ability to handle unanswerable questions.
   2
       For the unaligned model, we still define M′ this way to compute our proposed alignment metrics.
   3
       Since a lower Sex-ref. score indicates better performance, we use (1 − Sex-ref. ) in the average alignment score.


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Examples of model predictions from the unaligned model, the model aligned using
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), and the model aligned using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO),
all based on VLM-RLAIF (Ahn et al., 2024). The examples illustrate (a) Object-related (O), (b)
Relation-related (R), and (c) Attribute-related (A) unanswerable QA predictions. In each case, the
word highlighted in red within the question x identifies the specific reason it is unanswerable. In
Appendix A.7 we present additional examples of model predictions.


In Appendix A.10, we further analyze the trade-off between accuracy on the original answerable QA
evaluation and performance on the unanswerable QA evaluation, highlighting the distinct alignment
dynamics of SFT and DPO. Moreover, in Figure 4, we show examples of the model prediction
between different models. The example clearly shows that the unaligned model failes to detect
the unanswerability, whereas both aligned models (SFT and DPO) trained with our framework and
dataset correctly identify the question as unanswerable and provide the appropriate reasoning of
unanswerability. Additionally, we provided human evaluation results in Appendix A.11.


6    A BLATION S TUDY: C AN Existence-Based Question Splitting D ETECT
     U NANSWERABILITY ?

In Figure 1-(c), we showed an example where a current Video-LLM fails to reject an object-related
(O) unanswerable question (i.e., ‘What is the breed of the cat in the video?’). In contrast, as shown in
Figure 1-(b), the same model successfully recognizes that the object is not present when asked in an
existence-question format (i.e., ‘Is there a cat in the video?’). This raises the question: can we detect
unanswerable questions by reformulating them into a series of existence-based questions?4
    4
      This style of reformulating the detection task into a series of binary existence questions was proposed in
POPE (Li et al., 2023d) for object hallucination detection in image-based vision large language model. Thus, we
refer to this as the “POPE-Style” approach in our work.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Performance Comparison Between Unaligned, POPE-Style, and Aligned Models
(Ours). (a) & (b) The POPE-Style method demonstrates improved performance over the unaligned
baseline on both the alignment metric and overall accuracy. However, it falls short when compared to
the aligned model using our framework. (c) Additionally, the POPE-Style method incurs significantly
higher computational costs, reducing its practicality for real-world applications and underscoring the
importance of our models that are intrinsically aligned for answerability.


For a given question x, we prompt an LLM (gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09) to generate a set of existence-
based questions, x′ = {x′1 , . . . , x′m }, derived from the objects, relations, and attributes in x (see
Appendix A.6 for complete prompt). If ∃x′i ∈ x′ where the model responds ‘no’ and all responses
are correct, we classify it as type(y) = unanswerablec . If ∃x′i ∈ x′ where the model responds ‘no’ but
at least one response is incorrect, it is classified as type(y) = unanswerablew . If ∀x′i ∈ x′ the model
responds ‘yes’, we proceed to ask the original question x, classifying the response as either type(y) =
correct or type(y) = wrong.
Figure 5 shows the performance comparison between the unaligned model, the POPE-Style approach,
and an aligned model using our framework. The alignment metric in Section 4.2 measured the
behavior differences between the pre-aligned (M) and post-aligned (M′ ) models. For the unaligned
baseline, M = M′ , while for the POPE-Style baseline, M′ represents the unaligned model M
augmented with the POPE-Style unanswerability detection mechanism discussed in this section.
As demonstrated in Figure 5-(a), POPE-Style approach improves alignment scores over the unaligned
model without additional training. Figure 5-(b) shows it also enhances the overall accuracy, driven
by improved performance on the unanswerable UVQA evaluation set. However, the POPE-Style
approach has two main limitations compared to our framework: (1) reduced performance and
(2) higher computational cost. Although it improves on the unaligned baseline, it significantly
underperforms compared to models trained with our method. More importantly, the POPE-Style
approach requires converting a single unanswerable question into multiple binary questions, increasing
both the number of model predictions and computational overhead (see Figure 5-(c)). In our
experiments, this led to a four-fold increase in dataset size and a six-fold increase in evaluation cost,
driven by the need for additional predictions and verification by advanced LLM (gpt-4o-2024-05-13).
These limitations reduce the practicality of detecting unanswerability by existence-based question
splitting (i.e., POPE-Style), highlighting the importance of training models that are natively aligned
for answerability using our framework.


7    C ONCLUSION

This paper introduces a comprehensive framework for aligning Video Large Language Models
(Video-LLMs) to effectively handle unanswerable questions—a critical challenge often overlooked
in existing models. We proposed the concept of alignment for answerability, equipping Video-LLMs
to assess and reject questions that extend beyond the informational scope of the video. To support
this, we developed tailored evaluation metrics and introduced UVQA, a novel dataset offering both
training and evaluation data for unanswerable questions, along with detailed reasoning for why they
are unanswerable. Our experiments show that the combination of our framework and the UVQA
dataset significantly improves the ability of the model to align for answerability, resulting in more
accurate and reliable Video-LLMs for real-world applications.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. RS-2022-II0951, Development
of Uncertainty-Aware Agents Learning by Asking Questions), Institute of Information & commu-
nications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT)
(No.RS-2022-II220184, Development and Study of AI Technologies to Inexpensively Conform to
Evolving Policy on Ethics), and Institute for Information & communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No.RS-2021-II211381, Develop-
ment of Causal AI through Video Understanding and Reinforcement Learning, and Its Applications
to Real Environments).

9   E THICS S TATEMENT
We confirm that our research adheres to the highest standards of ethical considerations. All work
presented in this paper is original, and any external contributions or sources have been appropri-
ately cited. Our study does not introduce new datasets, nor does it involve experiments utilizing
demographic or identity characteristics.

R EFERENCES
Daechul Ahn, Yura Choi, Youngjae Yu, Dongyeop Kang, and Jonghyun Choi. Tuning large
  multimodal models for videos using reinforcement learning from AI feedback. In Lun-Wei
  Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 923–940,
  Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.52.
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
Lisa Anne Hendricks, Oliver Wang, Eli Shechtman, Josef Sivic, Trevor Darrell, and Bryan Russell.
  Localizing moments in video with natural language. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 5803–5812, 2017.
Faeze Brahman, Sachin Kumar, Vidhisha Balachandran, Pradeep Dasigi, Valentina Pyatkin, Abhilasha
  Ravichander, Sarah Wiegreffe, Nouha Dziri, Khyathi Chandu, Jack Hessel, Yulia Tsvetkov, Noah A.
  Smith, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. The art of saying no: Contextual noncompliance
  in language models. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  f1UL4wNlw6.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Zesen Cheng, Sicong Leng, Hang Zhang, Yifei Xin, Xin Li, Guanzheng Chen, Yongxin Zhu, Wenqi
  Zhang, Ziyang Luo, Deli Zhao, et al. Videollama 2: Advancing spatial-temporal modeling and
  audio understanding in video-llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07476, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yanyang Guo, Fangkai Jiao, Zhiqi Shen, Liqiang Nie, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Unanswerable visual
  question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10942, 2023.
Roei Herzig, Moshiko Raboh, Gal Chechik, Jonathan Berant, and Amir Globerson. Mapping
  images to scene graphs with permutation-invariant structured prediction, 2018. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1802.05451.
Roei Herzig, Alon Mendelson, Leonid Karlinsky, Assaf Arbelle, Rogerio Feris, Trevor Darrell,
  and Amir Globerson. Incorporating structured representations into pretrained vision & language
  models using scene graphs. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 14077–14098,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  emnlp-main.870. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.870.
Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom
 embeddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. 2017.
Qidong Huang, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Bin Wang, Conghui He, Jiaqi Wang, Dahua Lin, Weiming
  Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. Opera: Alleviating hallucination in multi-modal large language models
  via over-trust penalty and retrospection-allocation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13418–13427, 2024.
Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Wenhui Wang, Yaru Hao, Saksham Singhal, Shuming Ma, Tengchao Lv,
  Lei Cui, Owais Khan Mohammed, Barun Patra, Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal, Zewen Chi, Johan
  Bjorck, Vishrav Chaudhary, Subhojit Som, Xia Song, and Furu Wei. Language is not all you need:
  Aligning perception with language models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=UpN2wfrLec.
Yaochu Jin and Bernhard Sendhoff. Pareto-based multiobjective machine learning: An overview and
  case studies. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, IEEE Transactions
  on, 38:397 – 415, 06 2008. doi: 10.1109/TSMCC.2008.919172.
Justin Johnson, Ranjay Krishna, Michael Stark, Li-Jia Li, David A. Shamma, Michael S. Bernstein,
  and Li Fei-Fei. Image retrieval using scene graphs. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3668–3678, 2015. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298990.
Sicong Leng, Hang Zhang, Guanzheng Chen, Xin Li, Shijian Lu, Chunyan Miao, and Lidong Bing.
  Mitigating object hallucinations in large vision-language models through visual contrastive decod-
  ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 13872–13882, 2024.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2201.12086.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models, 2023a. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2301.12597.
Kunchang Li, Yinan He, Yi Wang, Yizhuo Li, Wenhai Wang, Ping Luo, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and
  Yu Qiao. Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06355, 2023b.
Kunchang Li, Yali Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Yi Wang, Yi Liu, Zun Wang, Jilan Xu, Guo Chen,
  Ping Luo, et al. Mvbench: A comprehensive multi-modal video understanding benchmark. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  22195–22206, 2024a.
Lei Li, Zhihui Xie, Mukai Li, Shunian Chen, Peiyi Wang, Liang Chen, Yazheng Yang, Benyou
  Wang, and Lingpeng Kong. Silkie: Preference distillation for large visual language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.10665, 2023c.
Yanwei Li, Chengyao Wang, and Jiaya Jia. Llama-vid: An image is worth 2 tokens in large language
  models. 2024b.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Evaluating
  object hallucination in large vision-language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 292–305, 2023d.

Bin Lin, Bin Zhu, Yang Ye, Munan Ning, Peng Jin, and Li Yuan. Video-llava: Learning united visual
  representation by alignment before projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10122, 2023.

Xi Lin, Hui-Ling Zhen, Zhenhua Li, Qingfu Zhang, and Sam Kwong. Pareto multi-task learning. In
  Thirty-third Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 12037–12047,
  2019.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2017.

Zelun Luo, Zane Durante, Linden Li, Wanze Xie, Ruochen Liu, Emily Jin, Zhuoyi Huang,
  Lun Yu Li, Jiajun Wu, Juan Carlos Niebles, Ehsan Adeli, and Li Fei-Fei. MOMA-LRG:
  Language-refined graphs for multi-object multi-actor activity parsing. In Thirty-sixth Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=eJhc_CPXQIT.

Muhammad Maaz, Hanoona Rasheed, Salman Khan, and Fahad Khan. Video-ChatGPT: Towards
 detailed video understanding via large vision and language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre
 Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
 for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 12585–12602, Bangkok, Thailand,
 August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.
 org/2024.acl-long.679.

Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. Learning the pareto front with
  hypernetworks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=NjF772F4ZZR.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=HPuSIXJaa9.

Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System optimiza-
   tions enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In Proceedings of
   the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp.
   3505–3506, 2020.

Yixuan Su, Tian Lan, Yahui Liu, Fangyu Liu, Dani Yogatama, Yan Wang, Lingpeng Kong, and Nigel
  Collier. Language models can see: Plugging visual controls in text generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.02655, 2022.

Zhiqing Sun, Sheng Shen, Shengcao Cao, Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yikang Shen, Chuang Gan,
  Liang-Yan Gui, Yu-Xiong Wang, Yiming Yang, et al. Aligning large multimodal models with
  factually augmented rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14525, 2023.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

Bingbing Wen, Jihan Yao, Shangbin Feng, Chenjun Xu, Yulia Tsvetkov, Bill Howe, and Lucy Lu
  Wang. Know your limits: A survey of abstention in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.18418, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Spencer Whitehead, Suzanne Petryk, Vedaad Shakib, Joseph Gonzalez, Trevor Darrell, Anna
  Rohrbach, and Marcus Rohrbach. Reliable visual question answering: Abstain rather than answer
  incorrectly. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 148–166. Springer, 2022.
Danfei Xu, Yuke Zhu, Christopher B Choy, and Li Fei-Fei. Scene graph generation by iterative
  message passing. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 3097–3106. IEEE, 2017a.
Dejing Xu, Zhou Zhao, Jun Xiao, Fei Wu, Hanwang Zhang, Xiangnan He, and Yueting Zhuang. Video
  question answering via gradually refined attention over appearance and motion. In Proceedings of
  the 25th ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp. 1645–1653, 2017b.
Jun Xu, Tao Mei, Ting Yao, and Yong Rui. Msr-vtt: A large video description dataset for bridging
  video and language. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 5288–5296, 2016.
Yuqing Yang, Ethan Chern, Xipeng Qiu, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. Alignment for honesty.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07000, 2023.
Eunseop Yoon, Hee Suk Yoon, SooHwan Eom, Gunsoo Han, Daniel Nam, Daejin Jo, Kyoung-Woon
  On, Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, Sungwoong Kim, and Chang Yoo. TLCR: Token-level continuous
  reward for fine-grained reinforcement learning from human feedback. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre
  Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  ACL 2024, pp. 14969–14981, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024a. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.889. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2024.findings-acl.889/.
Hee Suk Yoon, Eunseop Yoon, Joshua Tian Jin Tee, Kang Zhang, Yu-Jung Heo, Du-Seong Chang,
  and Chang D Yoo. Bi-mdrg: Bridging image history in multimodal dialogue response generation.
  In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 378–396. Springer, 2024b.
Sunjae Yoon, Eunseop Yoon, Hee Suk Yoon, Junyeong Kim, and Chang Yoo. Information-theoretic
  text hallucination reduction for video-grounded dialogue. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva,
  and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
  ral Language Processing, pp. 4182–4193, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.280. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.280/.
Sunjae Yoon, Dahyun Kim, Eunseop Yoon, Hee Yoon, Junyeong Kim, and Chang Yoo. HEAR:
  Hearing enhanced audio response for video-grounded dialogue. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino,
  and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2023, pp. 11911–11924, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.797. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-emnlp.797/.
Tianyu Yu, Yuan Yao, Haoye Zhang, Taiwen He, Yifeng Han, Ganqu Cui, Jinyi Hu, Zhiyuan Liu,
  Hai-Tao Zheng, Maosong Sun, et al. Rlhf-v: Towards trustworthy mllms via behavior alignment
  from fine-grained correctional human feedback. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13807–13816, 2024a.
Tianyu Yu, Haoye Zhang, Yuan Yao, Yunkai Dang, Da Chen, Xiaoman Lu, Ganqu Cui, Taiwen He,
  Zhiyuan Liu, Tat-Seng Chua, et al. Rlaif-v: Aligning mllms through open-source ai feedback for
  super gpt-4v trustworthiness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17220, 2024b.
Zhou Yu, Dejing Xu, Jun Yu, Ting Yu, Zhou Zhao, Yueting Zhuang, and Dacheng Tao. Activitynet-qa:
  A dataset for understanding complex web videos via question answering. In AAAI, pp. 9127–9134,
  2019.
Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-LLaMA: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language
  model for video understanding. In Yansong Feng and Els Lefever (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp.
  543–553, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2023.emnlp-demo.49. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-demo.49.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, haotian Liu, Yong jae Lee, Liangke Gui, Di Fu, Jiashi Feng, Ziwei Liu, and
  Chunyuan Li. Llava-next: A strong zero-shot video understanding model, April 2024a. URL
  https://llava-vl.github.io/blog/2024-04-30-llava-next-video/.
Yuanhan Zhang, Jinming Wu, Wei Li, Bo Li, Zejun Ma, Ziwei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. Video instruc-
  tion tuning with synthetic data, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02713.
Zhiyuan Zhao, Bin Wang, Linke Ouyang, Xiaoyi Dong, Jiaqi Wang, and Conghui He. Beyond
  hallucinations: Enhancing lvlms through hallucination-aware direct preference optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.16839, 2023.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. MiniGPT-4: Enhancing
  vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=1tZbq88f27.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     B ROADER I MPACT

This paper highlights the importance of aligning Video Large Language Models (Video-LLMs) to
handle unanswerable questions, a critical capability often overlooked in favor of improving accuracy
on answerable tasks. By introducing alignment for answerability and leveraging unanswerable
question datasets, this work sets a new standard for developing AI models that are not only accurate
but also robust in real-world scenarios where incomplete or misleading information may arise. The
ability to reject unanswerable questions contributes significantly to the trustworthiness and reliability
of AI systems, especially in applications such as autonomous systems, content moderation, and video-
based question-answering tasks. This research encourages the broader AI community to prioritize
alignment for answerability, enhancing the safety and utility of AI systems in diverse, real-world
applications.

A.2     L IMITATIONS

A key limitation of our approach is the increase in the excessive refusal score (Sex-ref. , Eq. 5)
observed after alignment for answerability. While aligning the model improves its ability to handle
unanswerable questions, it can negatively impact the model’s original performance by leading to
undesired refusals for questions the model could previously answer correctly. This trade-off between
alignment and excessive caution suggests that further consideration is needed. Future work could
focus on developing more sophisticated alignment algorithms f (Eq. 3) that achieve a better balance,
reducing the excessive refusal score without compromising the model’s overall accuracy.

A.3     E THICS S TATEMENT

In our study, we utilize Large Language Models (LLM) to generate our UVQA dataset and evaluate
video-LLMs, which may result in unintended outcomes. However, during the human filtering process
of generating the UVQA evaluation dataset, we thoroughly reviewed the generated data from LLMs
and confirmed that it does not contain any unethical or harmful content.

A.4     UVQA DATASET

In this section, we present the prompts used for data generation (Section A.4.1), detail the filtering
process for creating the dataset (Section A.4.2), and provide examples from the resulting UVQA
dataset (Section A.4.3).

A.4.1    P ROMPT USED FOR UVQA G ENERATION
While creating the UVQA dataset, we prompt an external LLM to generate a question x and its
corresponding answer ygt , based on the altered description d′ and the modification c (Eq. 9). Figures
6, 7, and 8 show the prompts used to generate unanswerable question-answer pairs for the object,
relation, and attribute categories in the UVQA dataset, respectively.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Figure 6: Prompt used to instruct UVQA on object-related O questions


          Figure 7: Prompt used to instruct UVQA on relation-related R questions


          Figure 8: Prompt used to instruct UVQA on attribute-related A questions



                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4.2    DATASET F ILTERING
During the generation of the UVQA dataset, automatic filtering was applied to all UVQA samples
(training and evaluation samples), while human filtering was specifically conducted on the evaluation
set to ensure clean and reliable data for assessment.

Automatic Filtering As described in Section 4.3, after altering the description d to d′ , we prompt
an external mature LLM to generate the unanswerable question-answer pairs (x, ygt ). During this
stage, we apply a filtering process to remove instances where d′ is semantically too similar to
the original description d (Figure 9-(a)) or contains grammatical errors that could interfere with
the question generation process (Figure 9-(b)). This filtering is integrated directly into the LLM
prompting process (Eq. 9), as shown in the prompts provided in Section A.4.1.

Human Filtering For the UVQA evaluation set, human filtering process is incorporated to ensure
high-quality data. In this step, samples are reviewed to identify any questions that are still answerable
based on the video or were missed by the automatic filtering. Well-constructed instances are labeled
as ‘pass,’ while inadequate samples are marked as ‘filtered’. Figure 10 illustrates the interface used
during filtering.


Figure 9: Examples of Automatically Filtered Data in the UVQA Training Set. Two main cases
were filtered: (a) Generated Descriptions with Semantic Similarity and (b) Generated Descriptions
with Grammatical Errors.


Figure 10: Illustration of the interface used for human filtering in the UVQA test set. The
interface displays video frames, the original description d, the altered description d′ , and the
generated QA pair (x, ygt ). Reviewers manually assess the quality of each QA pair based on this
information.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4.3   E XAMPLES OF THE G ENERATED UVQA DATASET
Figures 11, 12, and 13 provide examples of unanswerable question-answer pairs from the UVQA
dataset, categorized by object-, relation-, and attribute-related questions, respectively.


Figure 11: Examples of object-related unanswerable question-answer pair from our generated
UVQA Dataset


Figure 12: Examples of relation-related unanswerable question-answer pair from our generated
UVQA Dataset


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Examples of attribute-related unanswerable question-answer pair from our generated
UVQA Dataset



A.5   P ROMPT USED FOR E VALUATION

To determine the type(y) of the model’s response, we use a GPT-4 model (gpt-4o-2024-05-13)
with the prompts shown in Figure 14. Additionally, following the evaluation methodology of prior
Video-LLM works Lin et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024a;b); Ahn et al. (2024), we report the LLMscore in
Table 1. This score assesses the quality of the model-generated response y against the ground truth
ygt , using a rating scale from 0 to 5, as outlined in the evaluation prompt.


Figure 14: Prompt used for Evaluation: (a) Evaluation prompt for answerable dataset, and (b)
Evaluation prompt for our unanswerable dataset.



A.6   POPE-S TYLE U NANSWERABILITY D ETECTION

In Section 6, we experiment if we can detect unanswerable questions by reformulating them into
a series of existence-based question. To do this, we need to extract existence-based sub-questions
x′ = {x′1 , . . . , x′m } from the original question x, which we achieve by prompting an external LLM.
Figure 15 shows the prompt used for the LLM and Figure 16 illustrates an example of the generated
set of existence-based sub-questions x′ .


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Figure 15: Prompt used to generate POPE-Style question


               Figure 16: Examples of Generated Existence-based Question Set



A.7   A DDITIONAL E XAMPLES OF M ODEL P REDICTIONS

In Figure 17, we provide an additional example of model predictions from the unaligned model
Video-LLaVA (Lin et al., 2023) and the aligned models (SFT and DPO). Similarly, in Figure 18, we
present another example using the unaligned model VLM-RLAIF (Ahn et al., 2024) alongside the
aligned models (SFT and DPO).


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: Additional examples of model prediction from the unaligned model, the model aligned
using Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), and the model aligned using Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO), all based on Video-LLaVA (Li et al., 2024b).


Figure 18: Additional examples of model prediction from the unaligned model, the model aligned
using Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), and the model aligned using Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO), all based on VLM-RLAIF (Ahn et al., 2024).


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Performance Comparison by Unanswerability Type: We report the Sacc (Eq. 4) for the
three primary categories of unanswerability: Object, Relation, and Attribute-related questions. For
Relation-related unanswerable questions, we further classify them into two subtypes: Intra-object
relationships and Inter-object relationships, each subdivided into static and dynamic cases.

                                  Unanswerability Type                           Relation Type
  Base Model        f (·)
                              Object   Relation   Attribute   Intrastatic   Intradynamic   Interstatic   Interdynamic
                 unaligned      0         0           0           0              0             0              0
  Video-LLaVA    SFT (ours)    0.46     0.51        0.30        0.36           0.61          0.43           0.59
                 DPO (ours)    0.45     0.49        0.33        0.35           0.60          0.39           0.56
                 unaligned      0         0           0           0              0             0              0
  VLM-RLAIF      SFT (ours)    0.63     0.69        0.35        0.73           0.67          0.69           0.73
                 DPO (ours)    0.60     0.63        0.42        0.64           0.53          0.62           0.68



A.8    P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS BY U NANSWERABILITY T YPE

We conducted a detailed analysis of model performance across different categories of unanswer-
ability within the UVQA dataset. Specifically, in Table 2, we examined three primary types of
unanswerability: object, relation, and attribute.
For relation-related unanswerability, we further categorized the questions into two subtypes:

      1. Intra-object relationships, involving a single object, and
      2. Inter-object relationships, involving multiple objects.

Both subtypes were further divided into static and dynamic relationships. Examples of each
categories is:

       • Intrastatic : police officer standing
       • Intradynamic : match official walking
       • Interstatic : police officer looking at pedestrians
       • Interdynamic : match official massaging soccer player

The results indicate that object and relation-related unanswerable questions achieve comparable
performance, whereas attribute-related unanswerable questions consistently pose greater challenges
for all evaluated models (i.e., Video-LLaVA (Lin et al., 2023) and VLM-RLAIF (Ahn et al., 2024)).
Importantly, this performance gap is not attributable to data imbalance, as the UVQA dataset was
carefully balanced across these three categories during training, as detailed in Section 5.1. This finding
highlights that models generally struggle more with discerning attribute-related unanswerable
questions, suggesting an inherent difficulty in addressing this category. On the other hand, for
the subcategories of the relation-related unanswerable questions, the performance did not show a
consistent pattern, highlighting variability in the capabilities of different VLMs.

A.9    C AN P ROMPTING D ETECT U NANSWERABILITY

In this section, we investigate whether prompting alone can achieve alignment for answerability.
Specifically, we prepend the following prompt to the question: “If the question cannot be answered
using the video content, state that it is unanswerable and provide a reason.” Table 3 presents the
results of various open-sourced Video-LLMs (i.e., VLM-RLAIF (Ahn et al., 2024), and LLaVA-
Video-Qwen2 (Zhang et al., 2024b)) evaluated in two settings: without the prompt (unaligned) and
with the prompt (prompt-aligned).
The results indicate that even the best-performing open-sourced Video-LLMs, regardless of model
size, fail to benefit from the explicit answerability prompt, showing little to no improvement in
performance. This highlights the limitations of relying solely on prompting to address unanswerability
and underscores the importance of the alignment approach proposed in this work.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Evaluation of Answerability on Alignment and Absolute Performance of Prompting-
based Method

                                            Answerability            Alignment Performance                 Absolute Performance
 Base Model                     f (·)
                                               F1
                                                          ex-ref. ↓
                                                          S             Spermis. ↑   Sdisc. ↑   Salign ↑   Sacc. ↑   LLMscore ↑
                              unaligned        0.00             0           0           0        0.33       0.25       2.36
 VLM-RLAIF (7B)
                           prompt-aligned      0.08           0.02          0         0.06       0.35       0.27       1.66
                             DPO (ours)        0.66           0.08         0.5        0.64       0.69       0.53       2.93
                              unaligned        0.00             0           0           0        0.33       0.38       2.26
 LLaVA-Video-Qwen2 (7B)
                           prompt-aligned      0.04           0.01          0         0.03       0.34       0.38       2.33
                              unaligned        0.02             0           0           0        0.33       0.38       2.35
 LLaVA-Video-Qwen2 (72B)
                           prompt-aligned      0.12             0           0         0.07       0.36       0.41       2.50


A.10    V ISUALIZING THE T RADE - OFF : PARETO F RONT A NALYSIS

In multi-objective optimization, a trade-off often arises between conflicting objectives. This trade-off
can be visualized using a Pareto front, where each point represents a specific balance or equilibrium
between the objectives (Jin & Sendhoff, 2008; Lin et al., 2019; Navon et al., 2021). In Figure 19, we
present a Pareto front analysis to visualize the trade-off between performance on standard answerable
QA dataset and the unanswerable UVQA dataset.
The initial point (Unaligned Model) achieves high accuracy on the answerable QA dataset but
performs poorly on unanswerable questions, highlighting its inability to recognize or handle unan-
swerability effectively. When alignment for answerability is performed using SFT (represented
as a square in the figure), we observe an increase in accuracy on the unanswerable QA (UVQA)
benchmark, accompanied by a slight decrease in accuracy on the answerable QA dataset. In contrast,
alignment using DPO (represented as a star in the figure) achieves a more favorable balance, with
the resulting point positioned closer to the optimal region on the Pareto front compared to SFT. This
demonstrates the effectiveness of DPO alignment in achieving a better trade-off between the two
objectives, in line with the findings presented in the main results in Section 5.3.


       Figure 19: Pareto front visualization using the VLM-RLAIF model (Ahn et al., 2024).


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.11       H UMAN E VALUATION OF M ODEL P REDICTION

In this section, we conduct a human evaluation to assess the model’s prediction results. Five
annotators5 rate each prediction on a scale of 0 to 5, using the criteria outlined in Table 4 for
unanswerable questions and Table 5 for answerable questions.

                         Table 4: Scoring Criteria for Unanswerable Questions

            Score      Description
            0          The model fails to identify the question as unanswerable and generates an answer that falls outside the
                       boundaries of the video’s information.
            1          The model fails to identify the question as unanswerable but includes some correct information from
                       the video, showing partial understanding.
            2          The model correctly identifies the question as unanswerable but provides incorrect reasoning.
            3          The model correctly identifies the question as unanswerable and provides partially correct reasoning.
            4          The model correctly identifies the question as unanswerable and provides correct reasoning without
                       much detail.
            5          The model correctly identifies the question as unanswerable and provides correct reasoning with details
                       supported by comprehensive, accurate video information.



                           Table 5: Scoring Criteria for Answerable Questions

            Score      Description
            0          The model fails to provide the correct answer to the question.
            1          The answer is incorrect but includes some information from the video, showing partial understanding.
            2          The model provides the correct answer but includes additional, incorrect information in the response.
            3          The model provides the correct answer without errors but does not offer additional context or supporting
                       details.
            4          The model gives the correct answer and adds brief but relevant details from the video that enhance the
                       response.
            5          The model delivers the correct answer with comprehensive, detailed context from the video, providing
                       a thorough and nuanced response.


Figure 20-(a) illustrates the interface provided to human annotators, where video content was
presented as individual frames for evaluation. Figure 20-(b) reports the average scores assigned by
the five annotators, based on 100 random samples from the evaluation set for each model, comparing
unaligned model predictions with aligned ones (i.e., SFT and DPO) for the VLM-RLAIF (Ahn et al.,
2024) backbone. Notably, the figure shows that the aligned models outperforms the unaligned model,
with the scores showing a strong correlation with the LLMscore reported in Table 1.


Figure 20: (a) Interface provided to human annotators for evaluation. (b) Comparison of scores
between unaligned predictions and aligned predictions (SFT and DPO) for the VLM-RLAIF (Ahn
et al., 2024) model.


   5
       All annotators have TOEFL iBT scores above 100 and hold at least a bachelor’s degree.


                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Out-of-Distribution Evaluation of Answerability on Alignment and Absolute Perfor-
mance.

                                               Alignment Performance                  Absolute Performance
  Base Model               f (·)
                                      Sex-ref. ↓   Spermis. ↑   Sdisc. ↑   Salign ↑   Sacc. ↑   LLMscore ↑
                       unaligned          0            0           0        0.33       0.27       1.76
  Video-LLaVA          SFT (ours)      0.37          0.33        0.43       0.46       0.41       2.28
                       DPO (ours)      0.12          0.67        0.40       0.58       0.44       2.37
                       unaligned          0            0           0        0.33       0.24       1.56
  VLM-RLAIF            SFT (ours)      0.15          0.25        0.45       0.52       0.45       2.21
                       DPO (ours)      0.14           0.6        0.43       0.63       0.44       2.24


A.12       O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION E VALUATION S ET

Although all videos in the UVQA evaluation set are distinct from those in the training set, it is
valuable to investigate how the use of videos from entirely different sources, coupled with QA pairs
from different distributions, affects the model’s predictions. To this end, we leverage videos from
the MSR-VTT dataset (Xu et al., 2016) and construct human-annotated QA pairs designed to extend
beyond the informational boundaries of the videos, rendering them inherently unanswerable. This
approach allows us to evaluate the model’s ability to recognize unanswerable questions and assess its
robustness when faced with diverse video content and question distributions. We construct the QA
pairs using three human annotators6 and collect 100 human-annotated unanswerable QA pairs for
videos from the MSR-VTT. Figure 21 illustrates the annotation interface and provides an example of
a labeled unanswerable QA pair.


Figure 21: Interface provided to human annotators for collecting out-of-distribution evaluation
set where we use the MSR-VTT (Xu et al., 2016) as the video source and collect human-labeled
unanswerable QA pairs.


In Table 6, we observe that even on the out-of-distribution evaluation set, the aligned model outper-
forms the unaligned model, demonstrating its robustness and ability to generalize beyond the training
distribution. While the improvement in alignment performance and absolute performance is slightly
less compared to the in-distribution evaluation results in Table 1, the aligned model consistently
shows enhanced performance.


   6
       All annotators have TOEFL iBT scores above 100 and hold at least a bachelor’s degree.


                                                        26
