Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARN W ITH I MAGINATION :
S AFE S ET G UIDED S TATE - WISE C ONSTRAINED P OLICY
O PTIMIZATION
 Feihan Li† , Yifan Sun† , Weiye Zhao† , Rui Chen, Tianhao Wei & Changliu Liu ∗
 Robotics Institute
 Carnegie Mellon University
 Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
 {feihanl, yifansu2, weiyezha, ruic3, twei2, cliu6}@andrew.cmu.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             Deep reinforcement learning (RL) excels in various control tasks, yet the absence
             of safety guarantees hampers its real-world applicability. In particular, explorations
             during learning usually results in safety violations, while the RL agent learns from
             those mistakes. On the other hand, safe control techniques ensure persistent safety
             satisfaction but demand strong priors on system dynamics, which is usually hard to
             obtain in practice. To address these problems, we present Safe Set Guided State-
             wise Constrained Policy Optimization (S-3PO), a pioneering algorithm generating
             state-wise safe optimal policies with zero training violations, i.e., learning without
             mistakes. S-3PO first employs a safety-oriented monitor with black-box dynamics
             to ensure safe exploration. It then enforces an "imaginary" cost for the RL agent to
             converge to optimal behaviors within safety constraints. S-3PO outperforms exist-
             ing methods in high-dimensional robotics tasks, managing state-wise constraints
             with zero training violation. This innovation marks a significant stride towards
             real-world safe RL deployment.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has showcased remarkable advancements in domains like control and
games. However, its focus on reward maximization sometimes neglects safety, potentially leading
to catastrophic outcomes (Gu et al., 2022). To rectify this, the concept of safe RL emerged, aiming
to ensure safety throughout or after training. Initial endeavors centered on Constrained Markov
Decision Processes, often emphasizing cumulative or chance constraints (Ray et al., 2019; Achiam
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2021). While effective, these approaches lack instantaneous safety guarantees,
which is crucial for managing emergencies like collision avoidance in autonomous vehicles (Zhao
et al., 2023c; He et al., 2023a). Recent strides Zhao et al. (2023b) leveraged the Maximum Markov
Decision Process to ensure instantaneous safety by bounding violations while integrating trust
region techniques for policy enhancement, resulting in simultaneous improvement of worst-case
performance and adherence to cost constraints. However, these approaches still cannot ensure safety
during learning due to potentially unsafe explorative behaviors.
Meanwhile, safe control methods to continuously meet stringent safety requirements in predictable
environments are widely examined, with energy function-based methods being the most preva-
lent Khatib (1986); Ames et al. (2014); Liu & Tomizuka (2014); Gracia et al. (2013); Wei & Liu
(2019). These methods establish energy functions assigning lower energy to safe states and project
nominal control into energy dissipating control, hence persistently maintaining system safety. How-
ever, these approahces heavily rely on accessible white-box analytical models of system dynamics.
The Implicit Safe Set Algorithm (ISSA) Zhao et al. (2021; 2024) addresses this problem using
black-box optimization over black-box dynamics models. Nevertheless, the reliance on continuous
monitoring to ensure safety imposes significant computational overhead, and the RL policy itself does
    ∗
        † Equal Contribution


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Figure 1: Overview of the principles of the S-3PO algorithm.
not inherently guarantee safe behavior. This combination presents a major obstacle to the successful
deployment of the algorithm in real-time, safety-critical applications.
In summary, a pressing need arises for a method leveraging both the zero-training-time-violation
ability of safe control and optimal convergence of safe RL. To bridge this gap, we introduce a novel
Safe Set Guided State-wise Constrained Policy Optimization (S-3PO) algorithm. S-3PO safeguards
the exploration of immature policies with a black-box safe control method and derives a novel
formulation where RL learns an optimal safe policy by constraining the state-wise “imaginary" safety
violations. An overview of the prescribed S-3PO principles is presented in Figure 1. Empirical
validation underscores S-3PO’s efficacy in training neural network policies encompassing thousands
of parameters for high-dimensional simulated robot locomotion tasks. Our contribution marks a
substantial advancement in the realm of practical safe RL algorithms, poised to find applications in a
multitude of real-world challenges.

2     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

2.1   P RELIMINARIES

Dynamics We consider a robot system described by its state st ∈ S ⊂ Rns at time step t, with ns
denoting the dimension of the state space S, and its action input at ∈ A ⊂ Rna at time step t, where
na represents the dimension of the control space A. The system dynamics are defined as follows:
                                           st+1 = f (st , at ),                                     (1)

where f : S × A → S is a deterministic function that maps the current robot state and control to the
robot’s state in the next time step.
To maintain simplicity, our approach focuses on deterministic dynamics, although it is worth noting
that the proposed method can be readily extended to accommodate stochastic dynamics Zhao et al.
(2021); Noren et al. (2021). Additionally, we assume the access to the dynamics model f is only
in the training phase, and is restricted to an implicit black-box form, as exemplified by an implicit
digital twin simulator or a deep neural network model Zhao et al. (2021). We also assume there is no
model mismatch, while model mismatch can be addressed by robust safe control Wei et al. (2022)
and is left for future work. Post training, the knowledge of the dynamics model is concealed, aligning
with practical scenarios where digital twins of real-world environments are too costly to access during
model deployment.

Markov Decision Process In this research, our primary focus lies in ensuring safety for episodic
tasks, which falls within the purview of finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes (MDP). An MDP is
defined by a tuple (S, A, γ, R, P, µ). The reward function is denoted by R : S ×A 7→ R, the discount
factor by 0 ≤ γ < 1, the initial state distribution by µ : S 7→ R, and the transition probability
function by P : S × A × S 7→ R.
The transition probability P (s′ |s, a) represents the likelihood of transitioning to state s′ when the
previous state was s, and the agent executed action a at state s. This paper assumes deterministic


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dynamics, implying that P (st+1 |st , at ) = 1 when st+1 = f (st , at ). We denote the set of all
stationary policies as Π, and we further denote πθ as a policy parameterized by the parameter θ.
In the context of an MDP, our ultimate objective is to learn a policy π that maximizes a performance
measure J (π), computed via the discounted sum of rewards, as follows:
                                             "H                        #
                                              X
                                                     t
                             J (π) = Eτ ∼π         γ R(st , at , st+1 ) ,                         (2)
                                                 t=0

where H ∈ N denotes the horizon, τ = [s0 , a0 , s1 , · · · ], and τ ∼ π indicates that the distribution
over trajectories depends on π, i.e., s0 ∼ µ, at ∼ π(·|st ), and st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at ).

Safety Specification The safety specification requires that the system state remains within a closed
subset in the state space, denoted as the “safe set” SS . This safe set is defined by the zero-sublevel set
of a continuous and piecewise smooth function ϕ0 : Rns → R, where SS = {s | ϕ0 (s) ≤ 0}. Users
directly specify both SS and ϕ0 , which is easy to specify. For instance, for collision avoidance, ϕ0
can be specified as the negative closest distance between the robot and environmental obstacles.

2.2   P ROBLEM

We are interested in the safety imperative of averting collisions for mobile robots navigating 2D
planes. We aim to persistently satisfy safety specifications at every time step while solving MDP,
following the intuition of State-wise Constrained Markov Decision Process (SCMDP) Zhao et al.
(2023c). Formally, the set of feasible stationary policies for SCMDP is defined as
                                  Π̄C = {π ∈ Π ∀st ∼ τ, st ∈ SS },                                      (3)
where τ ∼ π. Then, the objective for SCMDP is to find a feasible stationary policy from Π̄C that
maximizes the performance measure. Formally,
                                      max J (πθ ), s.t. πθ ∈ Π̄C .                                      (4)
                                        θ


State-wise Safe Policy with Zero Violation Training The primary focus of this paper centers on
solving (4), i.e., ensuring no safety violation during the training process, while achieving convergence
of the policy to the optimal solution of (4).

3     P RIOR W ORKS
3.1   S AFE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Existing safe RL approaches either consider safety after convergence or safety during training Zhao
et al. (2023c). End-to-end approaches are usually used to ensure safety after convergence Liang et al.
(2018); Tessler et al. (2018); Bohez et al. (2019); Ma et al. (2021); He et al. (2023b). However, these
approaches cannot avoid unsafe explorations.
Safety in training is achieved by hierarchical approaches which uses a safeguard to filter out unsafe
explorative actions. The safeguard relies on the knowledge on the system dynamics, which can be
either learned dynamics Dalal et al. (2018); Thananjeyan et al. (2021); Zhao et al. (2022), white-
box dynamics Fisac et al. (2018); Shao et al. (2021), or black-box dynamics Zhao et al. (2021).
Nevertheless, these methods cannot guarantee convergence of the RL policy.
The proposed approach is the first to address safety both during training and after convergence, which
can potentially serve as a general framework to bridge these two types of approaches. In the following,
we choose the most advanced method in each category to form the proposed approach, so that it relies
on the least assumptions.

3.2   I MPLICIT S AFE S ET A LGORITHM

Energy function-based methods Wei & Liu (2019) achieve safe control by designing an energy
function offline such that 1) the low energy states are safe and 2) there always exists a feasible


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


control input to dissipate the energy. A typical design Liu & Tomizuka (2014) was proposed as ϕ =
                        (n)
ϕ∗0 +k1 ϕ̇0 +· · ·+kn ϕ0 . It is shown in Liu & Tomizuka (2014) that if the control input is unbounded
         na
(A = R ), then there always exist a control input that satisfies the constraint ϕ̇ ≤ 0 when ϕ = 0; and
if the control input always satisfies that constraint, then the set S̄ := {s | ϕ(s) ≤ 0}∩{s | ϕ0 (s) ≤ 0}
is forward invariant. In practice, the actual control signal is computed through a quadratic projection
of the nominal control ar to the control constraint
                               a = argmin ∥a − ar ∥2 s.t. ϕ̇ ≤ −η(ϕ),                                 (5)
                                        a∈A

where η(ϕ) is designed to be a positive constant when ϕ ≥ 0 and −∞ when ϕ < 0 according
to SSA Liu & Tomizuka (2014). Here, we define the set of safe control as AS (s) := {a ∈ A |
ϕ̇ ≤ −η(ϕ)}. To match the notion of MDP, we should consider discrete-time safe control set
ADS (s) := {a ∈ A | ϕ(f (s, a)) ≤ max{ϕ(s) − η, 0}}.

Based on these, the implicit safe set algorithm (ISSA) Zhao et al. (2021; 2024) was proposed
to construct the black-box dynamics based safeguard ensuring persistent satisfication of safety
specification. The black-box dynamics can be a digital twin or neural network. Under some mild
assumptions, it first synthesizes a safety index to make sure AS (s) is nonempty for all s (details of
the mild assumptions and safety index synthesis are summarized in Appendix A). Then it manages to
project the reference action generated from RL policy πθ into AS (s) during policy training. In detail,
the nominal control art needs to be projected to AD S (st ) by solving the following optimization:

                                min ∥at − art ∥2
                                at ∈A                                                                 (6)
                               s.t. ϕ(f (st , at )) ≤ max{ϕ(st ) − η, 0}.

To solve (6), they first introduce a sample-efficient Adaptive Momentum Boundary Approximation
(AdamBA) algorithm. Then, ISSA directly uses it to find the safe control with minimum deviation
from the reference control along the boundaries of AD   S (s). If the process fails to return a solution,
grid sampling will be deployed to find a safe control; and AdamBA is deployed again to improve the
solution optimality with respect to (6). We summarize details of AdamBA and ISSA in Algorithm 2
and Algorithm 3, respectively.

3.3   S TATE - WISE C ONSTRAINED P OLICY O PTIMIZATION

Safe RL algorithms under the framework of Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) do not
consider state-wise constraints. To address this gap, State-wise Constrained Policy Optimization
(SCPO) was proposed Zhao et al. (2023b) to provide guarantees for state-wise constraint satisfaction
in expectation, which is under the framework of State-wise CMDP (SCMDP). To achieve this, SCPO
directly constrain the expected maximum state-wise cost along the trajectory. And they introduced
Maximum MDP (MMDP). In this setup, a running maximum cost value is associated with each state,
and a non-discounted finite MDP is utilized to track and accumulate non-negative increments in cost.
The format of MMDP will be introduced in Section 4.

4     S AFETY I NDEX G UIDED S TATE - WISE C ONSTRAINED P OLICY
      O PTIMIZATION

The core idea of S-3PO is to enforce zero safety violation during training by projecting unsafe actions
to the safe set, and then constrain the "imaginary" safety violation (i.e., what if the projection is not
done) to ensure convergence of the policy to an optimal safe policy.

Zero Violation Exploration To ensure zero violation exploration, we safeguard nominal control
via solving (6) at every time step during policy training. In this paper, we adopt ISSA to solve (6).
For the 2D collision avoidance problem considered in this paper, we choose the same safety index
synthesis rule as [Section 4.1, (Zhao et al., 2021)], which is summarized in Appendix A. We show in
Section 6 that with the safety index synthesis rule, ISSA is guaranteed to find a feasible solution of
(6), making the system forward invariance in the set S̄.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Learning Safety Measures Safely While eliminating safety violations during training is good, this
also brings inevitable challenges for the policy learning as it directly eliminates the unsafe experience,
making the policy unable to distinguish between safe and unsafe actions. To overcome this challenge,
the main intuition we have is that instead of directly experiencing unsafe states, i.e. s ∈  / SS , policy
can learn to act safely from “imagination", i.e., how unsafe it will be if the safeguard had not been
triggered? The critical observation we rely upon is that:
                                                      .
Observation 1. Define ∆ϕt = ∆ϕ(st , at , st+1 ) = ϕ(f (st , art )) − ϕ(f (st , at )), i.e. the degree of
                                    r
required correction to safeguard at . Therefore, ∆ϕt can be treated as an imagination on how unsafe
the reference action would be, where ∆ϕt ≤ 0 means art ∈ AD        S (st ).

Following Observation 1, Equation (4) can be translated to:
                        max J (πθ ), s.t. πθ ∈ {π ∈ Π ∀∆ϕt ∼ τ, ∆ϕt ≤ 0}.                               (7)
                          θ

Remark 1. Policies satisfying (7) ensure there is no imaginary safety violation for any possible art ,
making πθ a safe policy as required by (4).

4.1   T RANSFROM S TATE - WISE C ONSTRAINT INTO M AXIMUM C ONSTRAINT

For (7), each state-action transition pair corresponds to a constraint, which is intractable to solve.
Inspired by Zhao et al. (2023c), we constrain the expected maximum state-wise ∆ϕ along the
trajectory instead of individual state-action transition ∆ϕ.
Next, by treating ∆ϕt as an “imaginary” cost, we define a MMDP Zhao et al. (2023c) by introducing
(i) an up-to-now maximum state-wise cost M within M ⊂ R, and (ii) a "cost increment" function
D, where D : (S, M) × A × S 7→ [0, R+ ] maps the augmented state-action transition tuple to
                                                                                      .
non-negative cost increments. We define the augmented state ŝ = (s, M ) ∈ (S, M) = Ŝ, where Ŝ is
the augmented state space. Formally,

                            D ŝt , at , ŝt+1 = max{∆ϕ(st , at , st+1 ) − M, 0}.                 (8)
                                                                Pt−1
By setting D ŝ0 , a0 , ŝ1 = ∆ϕ(s0 , a0 , s1 ), we have M = k=0 D ŝk , ak , ŝk+1 for t ≥ 1. Hence,
we define expected maximum state-wise cost (or D-return) for π:
                                                   " H                      #
                                                    X
                                   JD (π) = Eτ ∼π       D ŝt , at , ŝt+1 .                      (9)
                                                           t=0

With (9), (7) can be rewritten as:
                                         max J (π), s.t. JD (π) ≤ 0,                                  (10)
                                            π

                                                                       .
                       hP                              i
                         H
where J (π) = Eτ ∼π                t
                                                    and R(ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) = R(s, a, s′ ). With R(τ ) being the
                              t=0 γ R(ŝt , at , ŝt+1 )
                                                                                        .
discounted return of a trajectory, we define the on-policy value function as V π (ŝ) = Eτ ∼π [R(τ )|ŝ0 =
                                              π       .
ŝ], the on-policy action-value function as Q (ŝ, a) = Eτ ∼π [R(τ )|ŝ0 = ŝ, a0 = a], and the advantage
                        .
function as Aπ (ŝ, a) = Qπ (ŝ, a) − V π (ŝ).
Lastly, we define on-policy value functions, action-value functions, and advantage functions for the
cost increments in analogy to V π , Qπ , and Aπ , with D replacing R, respectively. We denote those
by VDπ , QπD and AπD .
Remark 2. Equation (7) is difficult to solve since there are as many constraints as the size of
trajectory τ . With (10), we turn all constraints in (7) into only a single constraint on the maximal
∆ϕ along the trajectory, yielding a practically solvable problem.

4.2   S-3PO

To solve (10), we propose S-3PO inspired by recent trust region optimization methods Schulman et al.
(2015). S-3PO uses KL divergence distance to restrict the policy search in (10) within a trust region
around the most recent policy πk . Moreover, S-3PO uses surrogate functions for the objective and


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


constraints, which can be easily estimated from sample trajectories by πk . Mathematically, S-3PO
updates policy via solving the following optimization:
                     πk+1 = argmax Eπ [Aπk (ŝ, a)]                                                (11)
                                 π∈Πθ        ŝ∼d k
                                               a∼π
                      s.t. Eŝ∼d¯πk [DKL (π∥πk )[ŝ]] ≤ δ,
                                         "            #                       r
                                                                                  1
                        JD (πk ) +      Eπ     AπDk (ŝ, a)   + 2(H + 1)ϵπD         δ ≤ 0.
                                     ŝ∼d¯ k                                      2
                                       a∼π

where DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ] is KL divergence between two policy (π ′ , π) at state ŝ, the set {π ∈
                                                                   .         PH
Πθ : Eŝ∼d¯πk [DKL (π∥πk )[ŝ]] ≤ δ} is called trust region, dπk = (1 − γ) t=0 γ t P (ŝt = ŝ|πk ),
     . PH                             .
d¯πk = t=0 P (ŝt = ŝ|πk ) and ϵπD = maxŝ |Ea∼π [AπDk (ŝ, a)]|.
Remark 3. Despite the complex forms, the objective and constraints in (11) can be interpreted in two
steps. First, maximizing the objective (expected reward advantage) within the trust region (marked by
the KL divergence constraint) theoretically guarantees the worst performance degradation. Second,
constraining the current cost advantage AπDk based on the previous value JD (πk ) guarantees that
the worst-case “imagionary” cost is non-positive at all steps as in (7). In turn, the original safety
constraint (4) is satisifed.

We then show in Section 6 that S-3PO achieves (i) state-wise safety guarantee of satisfying (3), and
(ii) bounded worst case performance degradation for policy update, by establishing new bounds on
the difference in returns between two stochastic policies π and π ′ for MMDPs.

5    P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION
In this section, we summarize implementation techniques that helps with S-3PO’s practical perfor-
mance. The pseudocode of S-3PO is give as algorithm 1.

Weighted loss for cost value targets A critical step in S-3PO requires fitting of the cost increment
value functions, denoted as VDπ (ŝt ). By definition, VDπ (ŝt ) is equal to the maximum cost increment
in any future state over the maximal state-wise cost so far. In other words, VDπ (ŝt ) forms a non-
increasing stair shape along the trajectory. Here we visualize an example of VDπ (ŝt ) in Figure 2.
To enhance the accuracy of fitting this stair shape function, a weighted loss strategy is adopted,
capitalizing on its monotonic property. Specifically, we define a weighted loss Lweight :
                        Lweight = L(ŷt − yt ) ∗ (1 + w ∗ 1[(ŷt − yt−1 ) > 0])

where L denotes Mean Squared Error (MSE), ŷt is the pre-
diction, yt is the fitting target and w is the penalty weight.
To account for the initial step (t = 0), we set yt−1 to suf-
ficiently large, thereby disregarding the weighted term
associated with the first step. In essence, the rationale is
to penalize any prediction that violates the non-increasing
characteristics of the target sequence, thereby leading to
an improved fitting quality.

Line search scheduling Note that in (11), there are two
constraints: (a) the trust region and (b) the bound on ex-
pected advantages. In practice, due to approximation er-
rors, constraints in (11) might become infeasible. In that
case, we perform a recovery update that only enforces the Figure 2: V[D ]π (ŝ) target of five sampled
                                                                             i
cost advantage AπD to decrease starting from early training episodes.
steps (in first ksafe updates), and starts to enforce reward
improvements of Aπ towards the end of training. This is different from Zhao et al. (2023b), where
the reward improvements are enforced at all times. This is because SCPO only guarantees safety
(constraint satisfaction) after convergence, while S-3PO prioritizes constraining imaginary safety
violation. With our line search scheduling, S-3PO is able to first grasp a safe policy, and then improve


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the reward performance. In that way, S-3PO achieves zero safety violation both during training and
in testing with a worst-case performance degradation guarantee.

6     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

In this section, We present three theorems, including (i) zero violation exploration (Theorem 1), (ii)
state-wise safety guarantee of S-3PO (Theorem 2), and (iii) worst case performance guarantee of
S-3PO (Theorem 3). The proofs of the three theorems are summarized in Appendix C, Appendix D
and Appendix E, respectively.
Theorem 1 (Zero Training Time Violation). If the system satisfies Assumption 1, and the safety index
design follows the rule described in (12), the implicit safe set algorithm ensures the system is forward
invariant in S̄ ⊂ SS .
Theorem 2 (Safety Guarantee of S-3PO). If πk , πk+1 are related by applying S-3PO and st ∈ S̄,
then st+1 = f (st , πk+1 (st )) ∈ S̄ in expectation.
Theorem 3 (Worst-case Performance Degradation in S-3PO.). After ksaf e updates, suppose πk , πk+1
                                               .
are related by S-3PO update rules, with ϵπk+1 = maxŝ |Ea∼πk+1 [Aπk (ŝ, a)]|, then performance
return for πk+1 satisfies
                                                     √
                                                       2δγϵπk+1
                             J (πk+1 ) − J (πk ) ≥ −            .
                                                        1−γ
Remark 4. Theorem 1 shows zero safety violation exploration by proving the system state will never
leave S̄ under the safeguard of ISSA. Theorem 2 shows that by satisfying the constraint of (11), the
new policy is guaranteed to generate safe action, i.e. a ∈ AD
                                                            S , in expectation. Intuitively, Theorem 3
shows that with enough training epochs, the reward performance of S-3PO will not deteriorate too
much after each update.

7     E XPERIMENTS

In our experiments, we aim to answer the following questions:
Q1: Does S-3PO achieve zero-violation during the training?
Q2: How does S-3PO without safeguard compare with other state-of-the-art safe RL methods?
Q3: Does S-3PO learn to act without safeguard?
Q4: How does weighted loss trick impact the performance of S-3PO?
Q5: Is “imaginary” cost necessary to achieve zero violation?
Q6: How does S-3PO scale to high dimensional robots?

7.1     E XPERIMENTS S ETUP

To answer these questions, we conducted our experiments on the safe reinforcement learning bench-
mark GUARD Zhao et al. (2023a) which is based on Mujoco and Gym interface.


      (a) Point      (b) Swimmer        (c) Ant             (d) Hazard                  (e) Pillar

                  Figure 3: Robots and constraints for benchmark problems in our environment.


Environment Setting We design experimental environments with different task types, constraint
types, constraint numbers and constraint sizes. We name these environments as {Robot}_{Constraint


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Point_1Hazard         (b) Point_8Hazard           (c) Point_1Pillar       (d) Swimmer_1Hazard

Figure 4: Zero violation performance from four representative test suites in low dimensional systems (evaluated
with the safeguard).

Number}{Constraint Type}. All of environments are based on Goal where the robot must navigate
to a goal.
Our experiments revolve around four distinct robotic entities that can be categorized into two primary
types:

       1. Wheel Robot: this category encompasses robots that use wheels for locomotion, maintaining
          a continuous and seamless interaction with their surrounding environment. An example is
          the Point in fig. 3a which is designated as A ⊆ R2 .
       2. Link Robot: this group includes robots composed of multiple connected links, which interact
          intermittently with their surroundings through the extremities of these links. Furthermore, the
          shape of these robots can undergo dynamic changes during these interactions. Specifically,
          in our environment, we have 1) Swimmer shown in fig. 3b as a three-link robot (A ⊆ R2 );
          2) Ant shown in fig. 3c as a quadrupedal robot (A ⊆ R8 ).

Two different types of constraints are considered.

       1. Hazard: Dangerous areas shown in fig. 3d. Hazards are trespassable circles on the ground.
          The agent is penalized for entering them.
       2. Pillar: Fixed obstacles shown in fig. 3e. The agent is penalized for hitting them.
          More details about the experiments are discussed in Appendix F.1.

Comparison Group The methods in the comparison group include: (i) unconstrained RL algorithm
TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) and TRPO-ISSA. (ii) end-to-end constrained safe RL algorithms
CPO (Achiam et al., 2017), TRPO-Lagrangian (Bohez et al., 2019), PCPO (Yang et al., 2020),
SCPO (Zhao et al., 2023b). (iii) We select TRPO as our baseline method since it is state-of-the-art
and already has safety-constrained derivatives that can be tested off-the-shelf. For all experiments,
the policy π, the value (V π , VDπ ) are all encoded in feedforward neural networks using two hidden
layers of size (64,64) with tanh activations. The full list of parameters of all methods compared can
be found in Appendix F.2.

Evaluation Metrics For comparison, we evaluate algorithm performance based on (i) reward
performance, (ii) average episode cost and (iii) cost rate. More details are provided in Appendix F.3.
We set the limit of cost to 0 for all the safe RL algorithms since we aim to avoid any violation of the
constraints.

7.2    E VALUATING S-3PO AND C OMPARISON A NALYSIS

Zero Violation During Training The training performance of four representative test suites are
summarized in Figure 4, where the S-3PO algorithm clearly outperforms other baseline methods


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     (a) Point_1Hazard          (b) Point_8Hazard            (c) Point_1Pillar       (d) Swimmer_1Hazard

Figure 5: Results from four representative test suites in low dimensional systems (evaluated without the
safeguard).


     (a) Point_1Hazard          (b) Point_8Hazard            (c) Point_1Pillar       (d) Swimmer_1Hazard

Figure 6: Triggering frequency of the safeguard from four representative test suites in low dimensional systems.

by achieving zero violations, consistent with the safety guarantee outlined in Theorem 1. For more
experiments, please check Appendix F. This superior performance is attributed to the safeguard
mechanism within the S-3PO framework, which effectively corrects unsafe actions at every step,
particularly during training. Furthermore, as demonstrated in Figure 5, the reward performance
continues to improve throughout the learning process, remaining comparable to state-of-the-art
baselines. This distinct capability of S-3PO ensures safe reinforcement learning with zero safety
violations, even in real-world scenarios, addressing Q1.

State-wise Safety Without Safety Monitor To assess the performance of the S-3PO policy without
the safeguard, evaluations are conducted at the end of each epoch. During these evaluations, the
S-3PO policy is tested over 10,000 steps without the safeguard. This allows us to determine whether
S-3PO effectively learns a state-wise safe policy through the guidance of the safe set-guided cost.
The comparative results are presented in Figure 5. When contrasted with other baseline safe RL
approaches, S-3PO demonstrates superior performance even without the safeguard, achieving (i) near-
zero average episode cost and (ii) significantly reduced cost rates, all while maintaining competitive
reward performance. These findings are consistent with Theorem 2 and Theorem 3, highlighting that
by minimizing imaginary safety violations, the policy rapidly learns to act safely, which addresses
Q2.

Learn to Act without Safeguard As highlighted in Observation 1, the key concept behind penaliz-
ing imaginary safety violations is to minimize the activation of the safeguard, thereby significantly
reducing its computational complexity and enabling real-time implementation. To illustrate this, we
visualize the average number of times the ISSA-based safeguard is triggered per step in Figure 6. For
comparison, TRPO-ISSA is included as a baseline, which relies continuously on the safeguard to


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


maintain safe control. Figure 6 shows that S-3PO dramatically reduces the frequency of safeguard
activations, approaching zero, indicating that a state-wise safe policy has been effectively learned,
thus addressing Q3.

Ablation on Weighted Loss for Fitting Cost Increment Value Targets As pointed in Section 5,
fitting VDi (ŝt ) is a critical step towards solving S-3PO, which is challenging due to non-increasing
stair shape of the target sequence. To elucidate the necessity of weighted loss for solving this
challenge, we evaluate the cost rate of S-3PO under six distinct weight settings (0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8,
1.0) on Point_4Hazard test suite. The results shown in Figure 7a validates that a larger weight
(hence higher penalty on predictions that violate the characteristics of value targets) results in better
cost rate performance. This ablation study answers Q4.

Necessity of “Imaginary” Cost To un-
derstand the importance of the "imaginary"
cost within the S-3PO framework, we com-
pare it to another cost based on the mag-
nitude of action correction Chen & Liu
(2021). This empirical analysis is con-
ducted using the Point_4Hazard test
suite. As shown in Figure 7b, the "imagi-
nary" cost yields superior cost rate perfor- (a) Comparison of cost rate (b) Comparison between
mance. This suggests that the "imaginary" performance with 6 different “imaginary” cost and action
cost offers deeper insights into the com- weights.                       correction cost.
plex dynamics between the robot and its               Figure 7: Comparison results of S-3PO
environment, thereby addressing Q5.

Scale S-3PO to High-Dimensional Link
Robots To showcase S-3PO’s scalabil-
ity and performance with complex, high-
dimensional link robots, we conducted ad-
ditional tests on Ant_1Hazard featuring
8 dimensional control spaces. As shown
in Figure 8, S-3PO effectively drives the
cost to zero and rapidly reduces the cost
rate, showcasing its clear superiority in       Figure 8: Cost and cost rate performance of Ant_1Hazard.
high-dimensional safety policy learning
and highlighting its exceptional scalability
to more complex systems.

8    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE P ROSPECTUS
In this study, we introduce Safe Set Guided State-wise Constrained Policy Optimization (S-3PO),
a novel algorithm pioneering state-wise safe optimal policies. This distinction is underlined by the
absence of training violations, signifying an error-free learning paradigm. S-3PO employs a safeguard
anchored in black-box dynamics to ensure secure exploration. Subsequently, it integrates a novel
“imaginary” safety cost to guide the RL agent towards optimal safe policies. S-3PO outperforms
existing methods in complex high-dimensional robotics tasks.
Nevertheless, a noteworthy limitation pertains to the potential costliness of acquiring a physical
engine-based simulator (black-box dynamics model). A forward-looking perspective entails replacing
the black-box dynamics model with a learned surrogate model, factoring in the nuances of errors in
learned dynamics. This strategic move holds the promise of obliterating the final barrier impeding
the seamless integration of safe RL training into real-world applications.

R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 22–31. PMLR, 2017.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aaron D Ames, Jessy W Grizzle, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier function based quadratic
  programs with application to adaptive cruise control. In 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and
  Control, pp. 6271–6278. IEEE, 2014.
Steven Bohez, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Michael Neunert, Jonas Buchli, Nicolas Heess, and Raia Hadsell.
  Value constrained model-free continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04623, 2019.
Hongyi Chen and Changliu Liu. Safe and sample-efficient reinforcement learning for clustered
  dynamic environments. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 6:1928–1933, 2021.
Gal Dalal, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Matej Vecerik, Todd Hester, Cosmin Paduraru, and Yuval
  Tassa. Safe exploration in continuous action spaces. CoRR, abs/1801.08757, 2018.
Jaime F Fisac, Anayo K Akametalu, Melanie N Zeilinger, Shahab Kaynama, Jeremy Gillula, and
   Claire J Tomlin. A general safety framework for learning-based control in uncertain robotic
   systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 64(7):2737–2752, 2018.
Luis Gracia, Fabricio Garelli, and Antonio Sala. Reactive sliding-mode algorithm for collision
  avoidance in robotic systems. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, 21(6):2391–
  2399, 2013.
Shangding Gu, Long Yang, Yali Du, Guang Chen, Florian Walter, Jun Wang, Yaodong Yang, and
  Alois Knoll. A review of safe reinforcement learning: Methods, theory and applications. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2205.10330, 2022.
Suqin He, Weiye Zhao, Chuxiong Hu, Yu Zhu, and Changliu Liu. A hierarchical long short term safety
  framework for efficient robot manipulation under uncertainty. Robotics and Computer-Integrated
  Manufacturing, 82:102522, 2023a.
Tairan He, Weiye Zhao, and Changliu Liu. Autocost: Evolving intrinsic cost for zero-violation
  reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023b.
Oussama Khatib. Real-time obstacle avoidance for manipulators and mobile robots. In Autonomous
  robot vehicles, pp. 396–404. Springer, 1986.
Qingkai Liang, Fanyu Que, and Eytan Modiano. Accelerated primal-dual policy optimization for
  safe reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06480, 2018.
Changliu Liu and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Control in a safe set: Addressing safety in human-robot
  interactions. In ASME 2014 Dynamic Systems and Control Conference. American Society of
  Mechanical Engineers Digital Collection, 2014.
Yongshuai Liu, Avishai Halev, and Xin Liu. Policy learning with constraints in model-free reinforce-
  ment learning: A survey. In The 30th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  (IJCAI), 2021.
Haitong Ma, Changliu Liu, Shengbo Eben Li, Sifa Zheng, Wenchao Sun, and Jianyu Chen. Learn
  zero-constraint-violation policy in model-free constrained reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.12953, 2021.
Charles Noren, Weiye Zhao, and Changliu Liu. Safe adaptation with multiplicative uncertainties
  using robust safe set algorithm. In Modeling, Estimation and Control Conference, 2021.
Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep reinforcement
  learning. CoRR, abs/1910.01708, 2019.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
Yifei Simon Shao, Chao Chen, Shreyas Kousik, and Ram Vasudevan. Reachability-based trajectory
  safeguard (rts): A safe and fast reinforcement learning safety layer for continuous control. IEEE
  Robotics and Automation Letters, 6(2):3663–3670, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chen Tessler, Daniel J Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11074, 2018.
Brijen Thananjeyan, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Michael Luo, Krishnan Srinivasan, Minho
  Hwang, Joseph E Gonzalez, Julian Ibarz, Chelsea Finn, and Ken Goldberg. Recovery rl: Safe
  reinforcement learning with learned recovery zones. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 6(3):
  4915–4922, 2021.
Tianhao Wei and Changliu Liu. Safe control algorithms using energy functions: A unified framework,
  benchmark, and new directions. In 2019 IEEE 58th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC),
  pp. 238–243. IEEE, 2019.
Tianhao Wei, Shucheng Kang, Weiye Zhao, and Changliu Liu. Persistently feasible robust safe
  control by safety index synthesis and convex semi-infinite programming. IEEE Control Systems
  Letters, 7:1213–1218, 2022.
Tsung-Yen Yang, Justinian Rosca, Karthik Narasimhan, and Peter J Ramadge. Projection-based
  constrained policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03152, 2020.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, and Changliu Liu. Model-free safe control for zero-violation reinforcement
 learning. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, and Changliu Liu. Probabilistic safeguard for reinforcement learning using
 safety index guided gaussian process models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01041, 2022.
Weiye Zhao, Rui Chen, Yifan Sun, Ruixuan Liu, Tianhao Wei, and Changliu Liu. Guard: A safe
 reinforcement learning benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13681, 2023a.
Weiye Zhao, Rui Chen, Yifan Sun, Tianhao Wei, and Changliu Liu. State-wise constrained policy
 optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12594, 2023b.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, Rui Chen, Tianhao Wei, and Changliu Liu. State-wise safe reinforcement
 learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03122, 2023c.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, Feihan Li, and Changliu Liu. Implicit safe set algorithm for provably safe
 reinforcement learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02754.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     I MPLICIT S AFE S ET A LGORITHM D ETAILS


                                           Figure 9: Notations.


A.1    C IRCUMSTANCES AND A SSUMPTIONS

In our treatment, both the robot and obstacles assume the form of point-mass circles, confined by
finite collision radii. The safety criterion adopts the form ϕ0 = maxi ϕ0 i , with ϕ0 i = dmin − di .
Here, di captures the separation between the robot’s center and the i-th obstacle, encompassing both
static and non-static entities. In this context, we introduce z and w to signify the relative acceleration
and relative angular velocity of the robot, respectively, within the obstacle’s frame, as depicted in
Figure 9. Importantly, the synthesis of the safety index for 2D collision evasion remains independent
of specific dynamic models, but under the following assumption:
Assumption 1 (2D Collision Avoidance). 1) The state space is bounded, and the relative acceleration
and angular velocity are bounded and both can achieve zeros, i.e., w ∈ [wmin , wmax ] for wmin ≤
0 ≤ wmax and z ∈ [zmin , zmax ] for zmin ≤ 0 ≤ zmax ; 2) For all possible values of z and w, there
always exists a control a to realize such z and w; 3) The discrete-time system time step dt → 0; 4)
At any given time, there can at most be one obstacle becoming safety critical, such that ϕ − η ≥ 0
(Sparse Obstacle Environment).

The bounds in the first assumption will be directly used to synthesize ϕ. The second assumption
enables us to turn the question on whether these exists a feasible control in AD
                                                                               S to the question on
whether there exists z and w to decrease ϕ. The third assumption ensures that the discrete time
approximation error is small. The last assumption enables safety index design rule applicable with
multiple moving obstacles.

A.2    S AFETY I NDEX S YNTHESIS

Following the rules in (Liu & Tomizuka, 2014), we parameterize the safety index as ϕ = maxi ϕi ,
and ϕi = σ + dnmin − dni − k d˙i , where all ϕi share the same set of tunable parameters σ, n, k, η ∈ R+ .
Our goal is to choose these parameters such that AD     S (s) is always nonempty. By setting η = 0, the
parameterization rule of safety index design rule is defined as:
                                                         n−1
                                n(σ + dnmin + kvmax ) n            −zmin
                                                               ≤                                     (12)
                                            k                      vmax
where vmax is the maximum relative velocity that the robot can achieve in the obstacle frame. Note
that the kinematic constraints vmax , zmin can be obtained by sampling the environment Zhao et al.
(2021).


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     A LGORITHMS
B.1     S-3PO A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 S-3PO
    Input: Initial policy π0 ∈ Πθ .
    for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
        for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
            Sample nominal action art ∼ πk (st )
            Compute and execute at = ISSA(st , art )
            Log τ ← τ ∪ {(st , at , rt , st+1 , ∆ϕt )}
        end for
        g ← ∇θ Eŝ,a∼τ [Aπ (ŝ, a)]|θ=θk
        b ← ∇θ Eŝ,a∼τ [AπD (ŝ, a)]|θ=θk
                                       p
        c ← JD (πk ) + 2(H + 1)ϵπD δ/2
        H ← ∇2θ Eŝ∼τ [DKL (π∥πk )[ŝ]] θ=θ
                                                k
         ∗
        θk+1  = argmax g ⊤ (θ − θk ) s.t.
                      θ
                     ⊤
         1
         2 (θ − θ k )   H(θ − θk ) ≤ δ, c + b⊤ (θ − θk ) ≤ 0
        Get search direction ∆θ∗ ← θk+1 ∗
                                            − θk
         for j = 0, 1, 2, . . . do                                                            ▷ Line search
             θ′ ← θk + ξ j ∆θ∗
             if
               E  ŝ∼τ [DKL (πθ ′ ∥πk )[ŝ]]
                                           ≤ δ and
                π
    Eŝ,a∼τ ADθ′ (ŝ, a) − AπDk (ŝ, a) ≤ max(−c, 0) and
    (k ≤ ksafe or Eŝ,a∼τ [Aπθ′ (ŝ, a)] ≥ Eŝ,a∼τ [Aπk (ŝ, a)]) then
                 θk+1 ← θ′                                                                 ▷ Update policy
                 break
             end if
         end for
    end for


B.2     A DDITIONAL A LGORITHMS

The main body of AdamBA algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2, and the main body of ISSA
algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 3. The inputs for AdamBA are the approximation error bound
(ϵ), learning rate (β), reference control (ar ), gradient vector covariance (Σ), gradient vector number
(n), reference gradient vector (⃗v r ), safety status of reference control (S), and the desired safety status
of control solution (Sgoal ). The inputs for ISSA are the approximation error bound (ϵ), the learning
rate (β), gradient vector covariance (Σ), gradient vector number (n) and reference unsafe control
(ar ).


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Adaptive Momentum Boundary Approximation
 1: procedure A DAM BA(ϵ, β, Σ, n, ar , ⃗     v r , S, Sgoal )
 2:    Initialize:
 3:    if ⃗v r is empty then
 4:          Generate n Gaussian distributed unit gradient vectors ⃗vi ∼ N (0, Σ), i = 1, 2, . . . , n
 5:    else                                                    r
 6:          Initialize one unit gradient vector ⃗v1 = ∥⃗⃗vvr ∥
 7:    end if
 8:    Approximation:
 9:    for i = 1, 2, · · · , n do
10:          Initialize the approximated boundary point Pi = ar , and stage = exponential outreach.
11:          while stage = exponential outreach do
12:               Set PS ← Pi and PN S ← Pi
13:               Pi = Pi + ⃗vi β
14:               if Pi is out of the control set then
15:                   break
16:               end if
17:               if Pi safety status ̸= S then
18:                   Set PN S ← Pi , stage ← exponential decay
19:                   break
20:               end if
21:               β = 2β
22:          end while
23:          if stage = exponential decay then
24:               Apply Bisection method to locate boundary point until ∥PN S − PS ∥ < ϵ
25:               Set Pi ← PS if Sgoal = S, Pi ← PN S otherwise
26:          end if
27:    end for
28:    Return Approximated Boundary Set P
29: end procedure


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Implicit Safe Set Algorithm (ISSA)
 1: procedure ISSA(ϵ, β, Σ, n, ar )
 2:    Phase 1:                                                                       ▷ Phase 1
 3:    Use AdamBA(ϵ, β, Σ, n, ar , ∅, UNSAFE, SAFE) to sample a collection S of safe control on
    the boundary of AD S.
 4:     if S = ∅ then
 5:         Enter Phase 2
 6:     else
 7:         For each primitive action ai ∈ S, compute the deviation di = ∥ai − ar ∥2
 8:         return argminai di
 9:     end if
10:
11:      Phase 2:                                                                                   ▷ Phase 2
12:      Use grid sampling by iteratively increasing sampling resolution to find an anchor safe control
    au , s.t. safety status of au is SAFE.
                               r   u                   u    r
13:      Use AdamBA(ϵ, ∥a −a     4
                                     ∥
                                       , Σ, 1, ar , ∥aau −a
                                                         −ar ∥ , UNSAFE, SAFE) to search for boundary point
    a∗
14:      if a∗ is not found then r u                        r    u
15:           Use AdamBA(ϵ, ∥a −a    4
                                          ∥
                                            , Σ, 1, au , ∥aar −a
                                                              −au ∥ , SAFE, SAFE) to search for boundary point
    au ∗
16:           Return au ∗
17:      else
18:           Return a∗
19:      end if
20: end procedure


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

To prove the Theorem 1 we introduce two important corollaries to show that 1) the set of safe control
is always nonempty if we choose a safety index that satisfies the design rule in (12); and 2) the
proposed algorithm 3 is guaranteed to find a safe control if there exists one. With these two corollaries,
it is then straightforward to prove the Theorem 1.

C.1     F EASIBILITY OF THE S AFETY I NDEX FOR C ONTINUOUS -T IME S YSTEM

Corollary 1 (Non-emptiness of the set of safe control). If 1) the dynamic system satisfies the
conditions in Assumption 1; and 2) the safety index is designed according to the rule in Appendix A,
then the robot system in 2D plane has nonempty set of safe control at any state, i.e., AD
                                                                                        S (s) ̸= ∅, ∀s.

Note that the set of safe control ADS (s) := {a ∈ A | ϕ(f (s, a)) ≤ max{ϕ(s) − η, 0}} is non-empty
if and only if it is non-empty in the following two cases: ϕ(s) − η < 0 or ϕ(s) − η ≥ 0. In the
following discussion, we first show that the safety index design rule guarantees a non-empty set of
safe control if there’s only one obstacle when ϕ(s) − η ≥ 0 (Lemma 1). Then we show that the set of
safe control is non-empty if there’s only one obstacle when ϕ(s) − η < 0 (Lemma 2). Finally, we
leverage Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 to show AD       S (s) is non-empty if there’re multiple obstacles at any
state.
Lemma 1. If the dynamic system satisfies the conditions in Assumption 1 and there is only one
obstacle in the environment, then the safety index design rule in Appendix A ensures that AD
                                                                                           S (s) ̸= ∅
for x such that ϕ(s) − η ≥ 0.

Proof. For x such that ϕ(s) − η ≥ 0, the set of safe control becomes

                             AD
                              S (s) = {a ∈ A | ϕ(f (s, a)) ≤ ϕ(s) − η}                               (13)

According to the third condition in Assumption 1, we have dt → 0. Therefore, the discrete-time
approximation error approaches zero, i.e., ϕ(f (s, a)) = ϕ(s) + dt · ϕ̇(s, a) + ∆, where ∆ → 0. Then
we can rewrite (13) as:

                                   AD
                                    S (s) = {a ∈ A | ϕ̇ ≤ −η/dt}                                     (14)

According to the definition of ϕ, we have ϕ̇ = −ndn−1 d˙ − k d.
                                                              ¨ We ignored the subscript i since it is
assumed that there is only one obstacle. Therefore, the non-emptiness of AD
                                                                          S (s) in (14) is equivalent
to the following condition

                                                              η/dt − ndn−1 d˙
                            ∀s s.t. ϕ(s) ≥ η, ∃a, s.t. d¨ ≥                   .                      (15)
                                                                    k

Note that in the 2D problem, d¨ = −z cos(α) + v sin (α)w and d˙ = −v cos(α). According to
Assumption 1, there is a surjection from a to (z, w) ∈ W := {(z, w) | zmin ≤ z ≤ zmax , wmin ≤
w ≤ wmax }. Moreover, according to the definition of safety index, ϕ for the 2D problem only
depends on α, v, and d. Hence condition ∀s s.t. ϕ(s) ≥ η can be translated to ∀(α, v, d) s.t. σ +
dnmin − dn − kv cos(α) ≥ η. Denote the later set as
      Φ := {(α, v, d) | σ + dnmin − dn − kv cos(α) ≥ η, v ∈ [0, vmax ], d ≥ 0, α ∈ [0, 2π)}.         (16)
Consequently, condition (6) is equivalent to the following condition
                                                                        η/dt + ndn−1 v cos(α)
      ∀(α, v, d) ∈ Φ, ∃(z, w) ∈ W, s.t. − z cos(α) + v sin(α)w ≥                              .      (17)
                                                                                 k

According to the safety index design rule, we have η = 0. Then we show (17) holds in different
cases.
Case 1: v = 0. In this case, we can simply choose z = 0, then the inequality in (17) holds.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Case 2: v ̸= 0 and cos(α) ≤ 0. Note that velocity v is always non-negative. Hence v > 0. In this
case, we just need to choose z = w = 0, then the inequality in (17) holds, where the LHS becomes
                              n−1
zero and the RHS becomes nd vk cos(α) which is non-positive.
Case 3: v ̸= 0 and cos(α) > 0. Dividing v cos(α) on both sides of the inequality and rearranging
the inequality, (17) is equivalent to
                                                      z             ndn−1
                ∀(α, v, d) ∈ Φ, ∃(z, w) ∈ W, s.t. −     + tan(α)w −       ≥ 0,                 (18)
                                                      v               k
and (18) can be verified by showing:
                                          z            ndn−1
                          min       max (− + tan(α)w −       ) ≥ 0.                            (19)
                        (α,v,d)∈Φ (z,w)∈W v              k

Now let us expand the LHS of (19):
                     z              ndn−1
     min     max (− + tan(α)w −            )                                                   (20)
 (α,v,d)∈Φ (z,w)∈W   v                 k
              zmin                                     ndn−1
= min (−           + [tan(α)]+ wmax + [tan(α)]− wmin −       )                                 (21)
 (α,v,d)∈Φ      v                                        k
                                                                                                 n−1
                          zmin                                     n(σ + dnmin + kv cos(α)) n
=        min           (−      + [tan(α)]+ wmax + [tan(α)]− wmin −                            )
  α∈[0,2π),v∈(0,vmax ]     v                                                    k
                                                                                         (22)
                                       n−1
     zmin      n(σ + dnmin + kvmax ) n
=−          −                            .                                                     (23)
     vmax                   k
The first equality eliminates the inner maximization where [tan(α)]+ := max{tan(α), 0} and
[tan(α)]− := min{tan(α), 0}. The second equality eliminates d according to the constraint in Φ.
The third equality is achieved when α = 0 and v = vmax . According to the safety index design rule
in Appendix A, (23) is greater than or equal to zero. Hence (19) holds, which then implies that the
inequality in (17) holds.
The three cases cover all possible situations. Hence (17) always hold and the claim in the lemma is
verified.
Lemma 2. If the dynamic system satisfies the contidions in Assumption 1 and there is only one
obstacle in the environment, then the safety index design rule in Appendix A ensures that AD
                                                                                           S (s) = A
for any s that ϕ(s) − η < 0.

Proof. For s such that ϕ(s) − η < 0, the set of safe control becomes
                                AD
                                 S (s) = {a ∈ A | ϕ(f (s, a)) ≤ 0}                             (24)

According to the third assumption in Assumption 1, we have dt → 0. Therefore, the discrete-time
approximation error approaches zero, i.e., ϕ(f (s, a)) = ϕ(s) + dt · ϕ̇(s, a) + ∆, where ∆ → 0. Then
we can rewrite (24) as:
                                 AD
                                  S (s) = {a ∈ A | ϕ̇ ≤ −ϕ/dt}                                 (25)

Note that η = 0 according to the safety index design rule, then ϕ(s) − η < 0 implies that ϕ(s) < 0.
Hence −ϕ/dt → ∞ since dt → 0. Then as long as ϕ̇ is bounded, AD     S (s) = A.

Now we show that ϕ̇ is bounded. According to the definition of safety index design rule, ϕ̇ =
−ndn−1 d˙ − k d.¨ We ignored the subscript i since it is assumed that there is only one obstacle.
According to Assumption 1, we have the state space is bounded, thus both d and d˙ are bounded, which
implies that ndn−1 d˙ is bounded. Moreover, we have for all possible values of z and w, there always
exists a control a to realize such z and w according to Assumption 1, which indicates the mapping
from a to (z, w) is surjective. Since z and w are bounded and both can achieve zeros according to
Assumption 1, we have ∀a, the corresponding (z, w) are bounded. Since d¨ = −z cos(α) + v sin(α)w,
then d¨ is bounded. Hence AD  S (s) = A any s that ϕ(s) − η < 0 and the claim is true.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Corollary 1.

Proof. If there is one obstacle, then lemma 1 and lemma 2 have proved that AD    S (s) ̸= ∅ for all s.
Now we need to consider the case where there are more than one obstacle but the environment is
sparse in the sense that at any time step, there is at most one obstacle which is safety critical, i.e.
ϕi ≥ 0. To show nonemptiness of AD     S (s), we consider the following two cases. In the following
discussion, we set η = 0 according to the safety index design rule.
Case 1: ϕ(s) = maxi ϕi (s) ≥ 0. Denote j := arg maxi ϕi (s). Since there is at most one obstacle
that is safety critical, then ϕj (s) ≥ 0 and ϕk (s) < 0 for all k ̸= j.
Denote AD                                                                     D
           S j (s) := {a ∈ A | ϕj (f (s, a)) ≤ ϕj (s)}. Lemma 1 ensures that AS j (s) is nonempty.
           D
Denote AS k (s) := {a ∈ A | ϕk (f (s, a)) ≤ 0} where k ̸= j. Since ϕk (s) < 0, lemma 2 ensures
that AD
      S k (s) = A.

Note that the set of safe control can be written as:
                         AD
                          S (s) := {a ∈ A | max ϕi (f (s, a)) ≤ max ϕi (s)}                          (26a)
                                                 i                    i
                                 = {a ∈ A | max ϕi (f (s, a)) ≤ ϕj (s)}                             (26b)
                                                i
                                 = ∩i {a ∈ A | ϕi (f (s, a)) ≤ ϕj (s)}                               (26c)
                                 = AD
                                    S j (s) ̸= ∅                                                    (26d)
Note that the last equality is due to the fact that {a ∈ A | ϕi (f (s, a)) ≤ ϕj (s)} ⊇ {a ∈ A |
ϕi (f (s, a)) ≤ 0} = A ⊇ AD S j (s) for i ̸= j.

Case 2: ϕ(s) = maxi ϕi (s) < 0. Therefore, we have ϕi (s) < 0 for all i. According to Lemma 2,
{a ∈ A | ϕi (f (s, a)) ≤ 0} = A. Hence the set of safe control satisfies the following relationship
                              AD
                               S (s) := {a ∈ A | max ϕi (f (s, a)) ≤ 0}                              (27a)
                                                          i
                                      = ∩i {a ∈ A | ϕi (f (s, a)) ≤ 0}                              (27b)
                                      =A=  ̸ ∅                                                      (27c)

In summary, AD
             S (s) ̸= ∅, ∀s and the claim holds.


C.2    F EASIBILITY OF ISSA

Corollary 2 (Feasibility of Algorithm 3). If the set of safe control is non-empty, Algorithm 3 can
always find a sub-optimal solution of (6) with a finite number of iterations.

Algorithm 3 executes two phases consecutively where the second phase will be executed if no solution
of (6) is returned in the first phase. Hence, Algorithm 3 can always find a sub-optimal solution of (6)
(safe control on the boundary of AD    S ) if the solution of (6) can always be found in phase 2.

Note that Phase 2 first finds an anchor safe control au , then use it with AdamBA (Algorithm 2) to
find the solution of (6). In the following discussion, we first show that the safety index design rule
guarantees au can be found with finite iterations (Lemma 3). Then we show that AdamBA will return
a solution if it enters the exponential decay phase (Lemma 4). Subsequently, we show that the evoked
AdamBA procedures in phase 2 will definitely enter exponential decay phase (Lemma 5). Finally, we
provide a upper bound of the computation iterations for Algorithm 3.
Lemma 3 (Existence). If the synthesized safety index can guarantee a non-empty set of safe control,
then we can find an anchor point in phase 2 of Algorithm 3 with finite iterations (line 11 in algorithm 3).


Proof. If the synthesized safety index guarantees a non-empty set of safe control AD      S , then there
exists a hypercube inside of ADS , i.e. ∃Q ⊂ A D
                                               S , where Q   is  a n u -dimensional hypercube   with the
same side length of l > 0. Denote ζ[i] = maxj,k ∥aj[i] − ak[i] ∥, where a[i] denotes the i-th dimension
of control a, and aj ∈ AD    k
                        S , a ∈ AS .
                                     D



                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Figure 10: Illustration of the grid sampling to find an anchor control point.


                                                               ∗
By directly applying grid sampling in AD
                                       s with sample interval l at each control dimension, such
          ∗                                      a
that 0 < l < l, the maximum sampling iteration T for finding an anchor point in phase 2 satisfies
the following condition:
                                              nu
                                             Y    ζ[i]
                                       Ta <      ⌈ ∗ ⌉,                                     (28)
                                             i=1
                                                   l
where T a is a finite number since l∗ > 0. Then we have proved that we can find an anchor point in
phase 2 of Algorithm 3 with finite iteration (i.e., finite sampling time). The grid sampling to find an
anchor control point is illustrated in Figure 10.


Lemma 4 (Convergence). If AdamBA enters the exponential decay phase, then it can always return
a boundary point approximation (with desired safety status) where the approximation error is upper
bounded by ϵ.

Proof. According to Algorithm 2, exponential decay phase applies Bisection method to locate the
boundary point Pb until ∥PN S − PS ∥ < ϵ. Denote the returned approximated boundary point as
Preturn , according to line 25, Preturn is either PN S or PS , thus the approximation error satisfies:
                         ∥Preturn − Pb ∥ ≤ max{∥PN S − Pb ∥, ∥PS − Pb ∥}                            (29)
                                         ≤ ∥PN S − PS ∥
                                         < ϵ.



Lemma 5 (Feasibility). If we enter the phase 2 of Algorithm 3 with an anchor safe control being
sampled, we can always find a local optimal solution of (6).

Proof. According to line 13-15, after an anchor safe control is being sampled, phase 2 of Algorithm 3
will evoke at most two AdamBA processes. Hence, Lemma 5 can be proved by showing one of the
two AdamBA will return a local optimal solution for (6). Next we show Lemma 5 holds in two cases.

Case 1:    line 13 of Algorithm 3 finds a solution.
In this case, the first AdamBA process finds a safe control au solution (the return of AdamBA is a set,
whereas the set here has at most one element). According to Algorithm 2, a solution will be returned
only if AdamBA enters exponential decay stage. Hence, according to Lemma 4, au is close to the
boundary of the set of safe control with approximation error upper bounded by ϵ.

Case 2:    line 13 of Algorithm 3 fails to find a solution.
In this case, the second AdamBA process is evoked (line 15 of Algorithm 3). Since no solution is
returned from the first AdamBA process (13 of Algorithm 3), where we start from ar and exponentially
                                       u   r
outreach along the direction ⃗va = ||aau −a
                                         −ar || , then all the searched control point along ⃗
                                                                                            va is UNSAFE.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Figure 11: Illustration of the case when it is unable to find u∗ .


Specifically, we summarize the aforementioned scenario in Figure 11, the searched control points are
represented as red dots along ⃗va (red arrow direction). Note that the exponential outreach starts with
                 u   r
step size β = ∥a −a4
                       ∥
                         , indicating two points {a1s , a2s } are sampled between ar and au such that
                                                u    r
                                (                                  r   u
                                   a1s = ar + ∥a −a
                                                  4 r⃗
                                                       ∥
                                                         va = 3a4 + a4
                                                 u                 r    u                           (30)
                                   a2s = ar + 3∥a 4−a ∥ ⃗va = a4 + 3a4

where the safety statuses of both a1s and a2s are UNSAFE.
During the second AdamBA process (line 15 of Algorithm 3), we start from au and exponentially
                                         r   u                               ∥ar −au ∥
outreach along the direction ⃗vr = ||aar −a−au || with initial step size β =     4     . Hence, denote ā1s as
                                         1
the first sample point along ⃗vr , and ās satisfies
                                               ∥ar − au ∥       ar   3au
                                 ā1s = au +              ⃗vr =    +     ,                               (31)
                                                   4            4     4

which indicates ā1s = a2s , and the safety status of ā1s is UNSAFE. Since the safe status of au is
SAFE and a UNSAFE point can be sampled during the exponential outreach stage, the second
AdamBA process (line 15 of Algorithm 3) will enter exponential decay stage. Therefore, according
to Lemma 4, au ∗ will always be returned and au ∗ is close to the boundary of the set of safe control
with approximation error upper bounded by ϵ.
The two cases cover all possible situations. Hence, after an anchor safe control au is sampled, phase
2 of Algorithm 3 can always find a local optima of (6).



Proof of Corollary 2.

Proof. According to Lemma 3 and Lemma 5, Algorithm 3 is able to find local optimal solution of
(6). Next, we will prove Algorithm 3 can be finished within finite iterations.
According to Algorithm 3, ISSA include (i) one procedure to find anchor safe control aa , and (ii) at
most three AdamBA procedures. Firstly, based on Lemma 3, aa can be found within finite iterations.
Secondly, each AdamBA procedure can be finished within finite iterations due to:

       • exponential outreach can be finished within finite iterations since the control space is
         bounded.
       • exponential decay can be finished within finite iterations since Bisection method will exit
         within finite iterations.

Therefore, ISSA can be finished within finite iterations.



                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Before we prove Theorem 1, we first define set SSD := {s|ϕ(s) ≤ 0}, and we start with a preliminary
result regarding SSD that is useful for proving the main theorem:
Lemma 6 (Forward Invariance of SSD ). If the control system satisfies Assumption 1, and the safety
index design follows the rule described Appendix A, the implicit safe set algorithm guarantees the
forward invariance to the set SSD .


Proof. If the control system satisfies the assumptions in Assumption 1, and the safety index design
follows the rule described Appendix A, then we can ensure the system has nonempty set of safe
control at any state by Corollary 1. By Corollary 2, the implicit safe set algorithm can always find
local optima solution of (6). The local optima solution always satisfies the constraint ϕ(f (st , at )) ≤
max{ϕ(st ) − η, 0}, which indicates that 1) if ϕ(st0 ) ≤ 0, then ϕ(st ) ≤ 0, ∀t ≥ t0 . Note that
ϕ(s) ≤ 0 demonstrates that s ∈ SSD .


Proof the Theorem 1


Proof. Leveraging Lemma 6, we then proceed to prove that the forward invariance to the set SSD
guarantees the forward invariance to the set S̄ ⊆ SS which S̄ = SS ∩ SSD . Depending on the
relationship between SSD and SS , there are two cases in the proof which we will discuss below.
Case 1: SSD = {s|ϕ(s) ≤ 0} is a subset of SS = {s|ϕ0 (s) ≤ 0}.
In this case, S̄ = SSD . According to Lemma 6, If the control system satisfies the assumptions in
Assumption 1, and the safety index design follows the rule described Appendix A, the implicit safe
set algorithm guarantees the forward invariance to the set SSD and hence S̄.
Case 2: SSD = {s|ϕ(s) ≤ 0} is NOT a subset of SS = {s|ϕ0 (s) ≤ 0}.
In this case, if st ∈ S̄, we have ϕ0 (st ) = maxi ϕ0 i (st ) ≤ 0, which indicates ∀i, ϕ0 i ≤ 0.
Firstly, we consider the case where ϕ0 i (st ) < 0. Note that ϕ0 i (st+1 ) = ϕ0 i (st ) + ϕ˙0 i (st )dt +
ϕ¨0 i (st )dt2
       2!      + · · · , since the state space and control space are both bounded, and dt → 0 according to
Assumption 1, we have ϕ0 i (st+1 ) → ϕ0 i (st ) ≤ 0.
Secondly, we consider the case where ϕ0 i (st ) = 0. Since st ∈ S̄, we have maxi ϕi (st ) ≤ 0, which
indicates ∀i, σ + dnmin − dni − k d˙i ≤ 0. Since ϕ0 i (st ) = 0, we also have di = dmin . Therefore, the
following condition holds:

                                              σ − k d˙i ≤ 0                                           (32)
                                                          σ
                                                    d˙i ≥
                                                          k

According to the safety index design rule, we have k, σ ∈ R+ , which indicates d˙i > 0. Therefore,
we have ϕ0 i (st+1 ) < 0.
Summarizing the above two cases, we have shown that if ϕ0 i (st ) ≤ 0 then ϕ0 i (st+1 ) ≤ 0, which
indicates if ∀i, ϕ0 i (st ) ≤ 0 then ∀i, ϕ0 i (st+1 ) ≤ 0. Note that ∀i, ϕ0 i (st+1 ) ≤ 0 indicates that
ϕ0 (st+1 ) = maxi ϕ0 i (st+1 ) ≤ 0. Therefore, we have that if st ∈ S̄ then st+1 ∈ SS . Thus, we also
have st+1 ∈ S̄ by Lemma 6. By induction, we have if st0 ∈ S̄, st ∈ S̄, ∀t > t0 .
In summary, by discussing the two cases of whether SSD is the subset of SS , we have proven that if
the control system satisfies the assumptions in Assumption 1, and the safety index design follows the
rule described in Appendix A, the implicit safe set algorithm guarantees the forward invariance to
the set S̄ ⊆ SS . Thus, if the initial state is safe, then the following state will always stay in S̄ which
means ISSA can ensure the safety during training.



                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
Mathematically, S-3PO requires the policy update at each iteration is bounded within a trust region,
and updates policy via solving following optimization:
                    πk+1 = argmax Eπ [Aπk (ŝ, a)]                                                        (33)
                                π∈Πθ     ŝ∼d k
                                           a∼π
                        s.t. Eŝ∼d¯πk [DKL (π∥πk )[ŝ]] ≤ δ,
                                             "           #                        r
                                                                                      1
                            JD (πk ) +      Eπ       AπDk (ŝ, a) + 2(H + 1)ϵπD         δ≤0
                                         ŝ∼d¯ k                                      2
                                           a∼π

where DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ] is KL divergence between two policy (π ′ , π) at state ŝ, the set {π ∈
                                                                          .        PH
Πθ : Eŝ∼d¯πk [DKL (π∥πk )[ŝ]] ≤ δ} is called trust region, dπk = (1 − γ) t=0 γ t P (ŝt = ŝ|πk ),
     .    H                                .
d¯πk = t=0 P (ŝt = ŝ|πk ), and ϵπD = maxŝ |Ea∼π [AπDk (ŝ, a)]|. In practice, if ISSA is triggered, we
       P
take D(ŝt , at , ŝt+1 ) = max{(ϕ(f (ŝt , art )) − ϕ(f (ŝt , at ))) − M, 0} = max{∆ϕt , 0}. Otherwise
we take D(ŝt , at , ŝt+1 ) = 0 directly.

D.1    P RELIMINARIES

d˙π we used is defined as
                                                     H
                                                     X
                                        d˙π (ŝ) =         γ t P (ŝt = ŝ|π).                            (34)
                                                     t=0

which has a little difference with dπ and is used to ensure the continuity of function we used for proof
later. Then it allows us to express the expected discounted total reward or cost compactly as:
                                        Jg (π) = E [g(ŝ, a, ŝ′ )] ,                                     (35)
                                                      ŝ∼d˙π
                                                       a∼π
                                                      ŝ′ ∼P

where by a ∼ π, we mean a ∼ π(·|ŝ), and by ŝ′ ∼ P ,we mean ŝ′ ∼ P (·|ŝ, a). g(ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) represents
the cost or reward function. We drop the explicit notation for the sake of reducing clutter, but it
should be clear from context that a and ŝ′ depend on ŝ.
Define P (ŝ′ |ŝ, a) is the probability of transitioning to state ŝ′ given that the previous state was ŝ and
the agent took action a at state ŝ, and µ̂ : Ŝ 7→ [0, 1] is the initial augmented state distribution. Let
ptπ ∈ R|Ŝ| denote the vector with components ptπ (ŝ)                                          |Ŝ|×|Ŝ|
                                                          R = P′ (ŝt = ŝ|π), and let Pπt ∈ R t−1 denote
                                                  ′
the transition matrix with components Pπ (ŝ |ŝ) = P (ŝ |ŝ, a)π(a|ŝ)da; then pπ = Pπ pπ = Pπt µ̂
and
                                          XH
                                   d˙π =       (γPπ )t µ̂                                                  (36)
                                         t=0
                                       = (I − (γPπ )H+1 )(I − γPπ )−1 µ̂
                                       = (I − γPπ )−1 µ̂

Noticing that the finite MDP ends up at step H, thus (Pπ )H+1 should be set to zero matrix.

This formulation helps us easily obtain the following lemma.
Lemma 7. For any function f : Ŝ 7→ R and any policy π,
                               E [f (ŝ)] + E [γf (ŝ′ )] − E [f (ŝ)] = 0.                               (37)
                              ŝ∼µ̂          ŝ∼d˙π                 ŝ∼d˙π
                                              a∼π
                                             ŝ′ ∼P


Proof. Multiply both sides of (36) by (I − γPπ ) and take the inner product with the vector f ∈
R|Ŝ| .


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Combining Lemma 7 with (35), we obtain the following, for any function f and any policy π:
                        Jg (π) = E [f (ŝ)] + E [g(ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) + γf (ŝ′ ) − f (ŝ)]                                             (38)
                                       ŝ∼µ̂                    ŝ∼d˙π
                                                                 a∼π
                                                                ŝ′ ∼P

Lemma 8. For any function f 7→ R and any policies π ′ and π, define
                                     ′
                         .          π (a|ŝ)
             Lπ,f (π ′ ) = E                 − 1 (g(ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) + γf (ŝ′ ) − f (ŝ)) ,                                          (39)
                           ŝ∼d˙π   π(a|ŝ)
                                     a∼π
                                    ŝ′ ∼P
        .                                  ′          ′
and ϵπ′
     f = maxŝ |Ea∼π ′ ,ŝ′ ∼P [g(ŝ, a, ŝ ) + γf (ŝ ) − f (ŝ)]|. Then the following bounds hold:
                                                                                   ′        ′
                            Jg (π ′ ) − Jg (π) ≥ Lπ,f (π ′ ) − ϵπf                       d˙π − d˙π             ,                  (40)
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                   ′        ′
                            Jg (π ′ ) − Jg (π) ≤ Lπ,f (π ′ ) + ϵπf                       d˙π − d˙π             ,                  (41)
                                                                                                           1

where DT V is the total variational divergence. Furthermore, the bounds are tight(when π ′ = π, the
LHS and RHS are identically zero).
                                                               .
Proof. First, for notational convenience, let δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) = g(ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) + γf (ŝ′ ) − f (ŝ). By (38), we
obtain the identity
                       Jg (π ′ ) − Jg (π) = E ′ [δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )] − E [δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )]                                         (42)
                                                         ŝ∼d˙π                          ŝ∼d˙π
                                                          a∼π ′                           a∼π
                                                          ŝ′ ∼P                         ŝ′ ∼P

                                                                                                  ′
Now, we restrict our attention to the first term in (42). Let †δfπ ∈ R|Ŝ| denote the vector of
                      ′
components, where †δfπ (ŝ) = Ea∼π′ ,ŝ′ ∼P [δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )|ŝ]. Observe that
                                                D ′          ′
                                                               E
                        E ′ [δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )] = d˙π , †δfπ
                          ŝ∼d˙π
                           a∼π ′
                           ŝ′ ∼P
                                                           D          ′
                                                                        E D ′             ′
                                                                                            E
                                                          = d˙π , †δfπ + d˙π − d˙π , †δfπ

                                                                                      1 1
With the Hölder’s inequality; for any p, q ∈ [1, ∞] such that                           + = 1, we have
                                                                                      p q
 D          ′
              E   ′                          ′
                                                                                       D         ′
                                                                                                   E  ′                       ′
  d˙π , †δfπ + d˙π − d˙π              †δfπ           ≥        E ′ [δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )] ≥ d˙π , †δfπ − dπ − d˙π           †δfπ
                                 p               q       ŝ∼d˙π                                                    p               q
                                                          a∼π ′
                                                          ŝ′ ∼P
                                                                                                                                  (43)

                                                          ′                 ′
We choose p = 1 and q = ∞; With †δfπ     = ϵπf , and by the importance sampling identity, we
                                       ∞
have
                        D          ′
                                     E
                         d˙π , †δfπ = E [δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )]                              (44)
                                                              ŝ∼d˙π
                                                              a∼π ′
                                                              ŝ′ ∼P
                                                             π ′ (a|ŝ)

                                                     = E [                             δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )]
                                                      ŝ∼d˙π π(a|ŝ)
                                                               a∼π
                                                              ŝ′ ∼P

                             ′
After bringing (44), †δfπ              into (43), then substract E [δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )], the bounds are obtained.
                                 ∞                                              ŝ∼d˙π
                                                                                 a∼π
                                                                                ŝ′ ∼P
The lower bound leads to (40), and the upper bound leads to (41).


                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                             ′
Lemma 9. The divergence between discounted future state visitation distributions, ||d˙π − d˙π ||1 , is
bounded by an average divergence of the policies π ′ and π:
                                                          H
                                 ′                        X
                             ∥d˙π − d˙π ∥1 ≤ 2                  γ t+1 E [DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ]] ,                   (45)
                                                          t=0         ŝ∼d˙π

                             1P
where DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ] =       |π ′ (a|ŝ) − π(a|ŝ)|.
                             2 a

Proof. Firstly, we introduce an identity for the vector difference of the discounted future state
                                                                                     .                  .
visitation distributions on two different policies, π ′ and π. Define the matrices G = (I −γPπ )−1 , Ḡ =
            −1
(I − γPπ′ ) , and ∆ = Pπ′ − Pπ . Then:


                                 G−1 − Ḡ−1 = (I − γPπ ) − (I − γPπ′ )                                           (46)
                                            = γ∆,

left-multiplying by G and right-multiplying by Ḡ, we obtain


                                                      Ḡ − G = γ Ḡ∆G.                                           (47)

Thus, the following equality holds:

                                         ′
                                      d˙π − d˙π = (1 − γ) Ḡ − G µ̂

                                                                                                                 (48)
                                                          = γ(1 − γ)Ḡ∆Gµ̂
                                                          = γ Ḡ∆d˙π .

Using (48), we obtain

                                               ′
                                      ∥d˙π − d˙π ∥1 = γ∥Ḡ∆dπ ∥1                                                 (49)
                                                    ≤ γ∥Ḡ∥1 ∥∆d˙π ∥1 ,

where ||Ḡ||1 is bounded by:
                                                                       ∞
                                                                       X                         H
                                                                                                 X
                        ∥Ḡ∥1 = ∥(I − γPπ′ )−1 ∥1 ≤                            γ t ∥Pπt ′ ∥1 =         γt.       (50)
                                                                       t=0                       t=0

Next, we bound ∥∆d˙π1 ∥ as following:

                                      X X
                     ∥∆d˙π ∥1 =                           ∆(ŝ′ |ŝ)d˙π (ŝ)                                     (51)
                                       ŝ′           ŝ
                                      X
                                 ≤                 |∆(ŝ′ |ŝ)|d˙π (ŝ)
                                      ŝ,ŝ′

                                      X X
                                 =                        P (ŝ′ |ŝ, a) (π ′ (a|ŝ) − π(a|ŝ)) d˙π (ŝ)
                                      ŝ,ŝ′         a
                                       X
                                 ≤                  P (ŝ′ |ŝ, a)|π ′ (a|ŝ) − π(a|ŝ)|d˙π (ŝ)
                                      ŝ,a,ŝ′
                                      X
                                 =                 |π ′ (a|ŝ) − π(a|ŝ)|d˙π (ŝ)
                                       ŝ,a

                                 =    2 E [DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ]].
                                        ŝ∼d˙π



                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By taking (51) and (50) into (49), this lemma is proved.



The new policy improvement bound follows immediately.
                                                                                           .
Lemma 10. For any function f : Ŝ 7→ R and any policies π ′ and π, define δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) = g(ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) +
      ′
γf (ŝ ) − f (ŝ),
                                     ′ .
                                  ϵπf = max |Ea∼π′ ,ŝ′ ∼P [δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ )]|,
                                             ŝ
                                                   ′
                                      .           π (a|ŝ)
                         Lπ,f (π ′ ) = E                   − 1 δf (ŝ, a, ŝ′ ) , and
                                        ŝ∼d˙π    π(a|ŝ)
                                             a∼π
                                            ŝ′ ∼P
                                                   H
                     ±          .                 X            ′
                    Dπ,f (π ′ ) = Lπ,f (π ′ ) ± 2(   γ t+1 )ϵπf E [DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ]],
                                                           t=0                ŝ∼d˙π


where DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ] = 21 a |π ′ (a|ŝ) − π(a|ŝ)| is the total variational divergence between action
                              P
distributions at ŝ. The following bounds hold:
                                                                   −
                                +
                               Dπ,f (π ′ ) ≥ Jg (π ′ ) − Jg (π) ≥ Dπ,f (π ′ ).

Furthermore, the bounds are tight (when π ′ = π, all three expressions are identically zero)

                                                                            ′
Proof. Begin with the bounds from lemma 8 and bound the divergence DT V (d˙π ||d˙π ) by lemma 9.


D.2    S AFETY INVARIANCE IN EXPECTATION BETWEEN S-3PO POLICIES

Corollary 3 (SCPO Update Constraint Satisfaction). Suppose JD (πk ) ≤ 0 and πk , πk+1 are related
by (33), then D-return for πk+1 satisfies
                                                     ∀i, JD (πk+1 ) ≤ 0.



Proof. The choice of f = V̂Dπ , g = D in lemma 10 leads to following inequality:

                                                    "                      H
                                                                                                                 #
                                                                           X                   ′
              JˆD (π ) − JˆD (π) ≤ E
                     ′
                                                      ÂπD (ŝ, a) + 2(          γ   t+1
                                                                                           )ϵπD DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ]   .   (52)
                                           ŝ∼d˙π                          t=0
                                           a∼π ′

                         "                                        #
                             PH
where JˆD (π) = Eτ ∼π                  t

                              t=0 γ D ŝt , at , ŝt+1                , need to distinguish from JD (π). And V̂Dπ , ÂπD

are also the discounted version of VDπ and AπD . Note that according to Lemma 10 one can only get
this the inequality holds when γ ∈ (0, 1).
                                 h                PH            ′
                                                                               i
Then we can define F(γ) = E ÂπD (ŝ, a) + 2( t=0 γ t+1 )ϵπD DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ] − JˆD (π ′ )+ JˆD (π)
                              ŝ∼d˙π
                              a∼π ′
with the following condition holds:


                                       F(γ) ≥ 0, when γ ∈ (0, 1)                                                         (53)
                                       F(γ)’s domain of definition is R
                                       F(γ) is a polynomial function


                                                              26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Because F(γ) is a polynomial function and coefficients are all limited, thus lim F(γ) exists and
                                                                                               γ→1−
F(γ) is continuous at point (1, F(1)). So F(1) = lim− F(γ) ≥ 0, which equals to:
                                                              γ→1

                                         h                         ′
                                                                                      i
                 JD (π ′ ) − JD (π) ≤ E π AπD (ŝ, a) + 2(H + 1)ϵπD DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ] .
                                         ŝ∼d¯
                                         a∼π ′

               PH
where d¯π =      t=0 P (ŝt = ŝ|π). Thus, following the inequality (33), the Corollary 3 is proofed.


D.3       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

If st ∈ S̄ ∈ SSD , then JD (πt ) ≤ 0 and ϕ(st ) ≤ 0. According to Corollary 3, we know that if policy
πt is updated by solving (33), then we have JD (πt+1 ) ≤ 0 which means:
                                 E       [ϕ(st+1 )] = JD (πt+1 ) + ϕ(st ) ≤ 0                         (54)
                              τ ∼πt+1

Thus st+1 ∈ SSD in expectation. According to the proof of Appendix C.3, we know that st+1 ∈ S̄ ∈
SSD in expectation.


E     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

E.1       KL D IVERGENCE R ELATIONSHIP B ETWEEN dπk AND d¯πk

Lemma 11.       E [DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ]] < E [DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ]]
               ŝ∼dπ                       ŝ∼d¯π


Proof.
                                              X        H
                                                       X
                  E [DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ]] =       (1 − γ)   γ t P (ŝt = ŝ|π)DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ]
                 ŝ∼dπ
                                               ŝ               t=0
                                               H
                                              XX
                                          <               γ t P (ŝt = ŝ|π)DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ]
                                               ŝ   t=0
                                               H
                                              XX
                                          <               P (ŝt = ŝ|π)DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ]
                                               ŝ   t=0
                                          = E [DKL (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ]].
                                              ŝ∼d¯π


E.2       T RUST R EGION U PDATE P ERFORMANCE
                                             ′ .
Lemma 12. For any policies π ′ , π, with ϵπ = maxŝ |Ea∼π′ [Aπ (ŝ, a)]|, and define dπ = (1 −
   H
     γ t P (ŝt = ŝ|π) as the discounted augmented state distribution using π, then the following
   P
γ)
    t=0
bound holds:
                                                                       ′
                                                                  2γϵπ

                                           1
                    J (π ′ ) − J (π) >           E π Aπ (ŝ, a) −        DT V (π ′ ∥π)[ŝ]            (55)
                                         1 − γ ŝ∼d ′             1−γ
                                                    a∼π


Proof. The choice of f = Vπ , g = R in lemma 10 leads to following inequality:


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 ′ .
For any policies π ′ , π, with ϵπ = maxŝ |Ea∼π′ [Aπ (ŝ, a)]|, the following bound holds:
                                       "                   H
                                                                                           #
                                                          X             ′
                J (π ′ ) − J (π) ≥ E Aπ (ŝ, a) − 2(          γ t+1 )ϵπ DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ]
                                    ŝ∼d˙π                      t=0
                                    a∼π ′
                                                   "                  ′
                                                                                      #
                                     1                      2γϵπ
                                 >         E π Aπ (ŝ, a) −      DT V (π ′ ||π)[ŝ]
                                   1 − γ ŝ∼d ′             1−γ
                                             a∼π

At this point, the lemma 12 is proved.



E.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

Proof. If ISSA will constantly be triggered, the safeguard should be treated as a component of
the environment, which indicates the environment is non-stationary for policy π after safeguard is
disabled. According to Algorithm 1, we assume that ISSA will not be triggered after ksaf e updates,
meaning the environment is stationary for policy π with or without safeguard. Therefore, we can
infer S-3PO worst performance degradation after ksaf e updates following the trust region results of
finite-horizon MDPs. Utilizing Lemma 12 and the relationship between the total variation divergence
and the KL divergence, we have:
                                                         ′ r
                                                    2γϵπ

                ′              1            π                1                ′
            J (π ) − J (π) >         E A (ŝ, a) −             Eŝ∼dπ [DKL (π ∥π)[ŝ]] .        (56)
                             1 − γ ŝ∼dπ′           1−γ 2
                                      a∼π


In (33), the reward performance between two policies is associated with trust region, i.e.


                                πk+1 = argmax Eπ [Aπk (ŝ, a)]                                   (57)
                                             π∈Πθ      ŝ∼d k
                                                         a∼π
                                    s.t. Eŝ∼d¯πk [DKL (π∥πk )[ŝ]] ≤ δ.

Due to Lemma 11, if two policies are related with Equation (57), they are related with the following
optimization:
                                πk+1 = argmax Eπ [Aπk (ŝ, a)]                                   (58)
                                             π∈Πθ      ŝ∼d k
                                                         a∼π
                                    s.t. Eŝ∼dπk [DKL (π∥πk )[ŝ]] ≤ δ.

By (56) and (58), if πk , πk+1 are related by (33), then performance return for πk+1 satisfies
                                                          √
                                                            2δγϵπk+1
                                J (πk+1 ) − J (πk ) > −              .
                                                             1−γ


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     E XPEIMENT D ETAILS
F.1   E NVIRONMENT S ETTINGS

Goal Task     In the Goal task environments, the reward function is:
                                  r(xt ) = dgt−1 − dgt + 1[dgt < Rg ] ,
where dgt is the distance from the robot to its closest goal and Rg is the size (radius) of the goal.
When a goal is achieved, the goal location is randomly reset to someplace new while keeping the rest
of the layout the same. The test suites of our experiments are summarized in Table 1.

Hazard Constraint In the Hazard constraint environments, the cost function is:
                                      c(xt ) = max(0, Rh − dht ) ,
where dht is the distance to the closest hazard and Rh is the size (radius) of the hazard.

Pillar Constraint In the Pillar constraint environments, the cost ct = 1 if the robot contacts with
the pillar otherwise ct = 0.

Additional high dimensional link robot To scale our method to high dimensional link robots. We
additionally adopt Walker shown in 12 as a bipedal robot (A ⊆ R10 ) in our experiments.


                                            Figure 12: Walker



State Space The state space is composed of two parts. The internal state spaces describe the
state of the robots, which can be obtained from standard robot sensors (accelerometer, gyroscope,
magnetometer, velocimeter, joint position sensor, joint velocity sensor and touch sensor). The details
of the internal state spaces of the robots in our test suites are summarized in Table 2. The external
state spaces are describe the state of the environment observed by the robots, which can be obtained
from 2D lidar or 3D lidar (where each lidar sensor perceives objects of a single kind). The state
spaces of all the test suites are summarized in Table 3. Note that Vase and Gremlin are two other
constraints in Safety Gym Ray et al. (2019) and all the returns of vase lidar and gremlin lidar are zero
vectors (i.e., [0, 0, · · · , 0] ∈ R16 ) in our experiments since none of our test suites environments has
vases.

                         Table 1: The test suites environments of our experiments


                        Task Setting      Low dimension         High dimension
                                         Point Swimmer          Walker   Ant
                          Hazard-1        ✓        ✓              ✓       ✓
                          Hazard-4        ✓
                          Hazard-8        ✓
                           Pillar-1       ✓
                           Pillar-4       ✓
                           Pillar-8       ✓



Control Space For all the experiments, the control space of all robots are continuous, and linearly
scaled to [-1, +1].


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 2: The internal state space components of different test suites environments.


                  Internal State Space           Point     Swimmer       Walker       Ant
                   Accelerometer (R3 )            ✓           ✓            ✓          ✓
                     Gyroscope (R3 )              ✓           ✓            ✓          ✓
                   Magnetometer (R3 )             ✓           ✓            ✓          ✓
                     Velocimeter (R3 )            ✓           ✓            ✓          ✓
                Joint position sensor (Rn )      n=0        n=2          n = 10      n=8
                Joint velocity sensor (Rn )      n=0        n=2          n = 10      n=8
                    Touch sensor (Rn )           n=0        n=4          n=2         n=8



             Table 3: The external state space components of different test suites environments.


                        External State Space         Goal-Hazard       Goal-Pillar
                         Goal Compass (R3 )               ✓                ✓
                           Goal Lidar (R16 )              ✓                ✓
                         3D Goal Lidar (R60 )             ✗                ✗
                          Hazard Lidar (R16 )             ✓                ✗
                        3D Hazard Lidar (R60 )            ✗                ✗
                          Pillar Lidar (R16 )             ✗                ✓
                           Vase Lidar (R16 )              ✓                ✓
                         Gremlin Lidar (R16 )             ✓                ✓



F.2   P OLICY S ETTINGS

The hyper-parameters used in our experiments are listed in Table 4 as default.
Our experiments use separate multi-layer perception with tanh activations for the policy network,
value network and cost network. Each network consists of two hidden layers of size (64,64). All of
the networks are trained using Adam optimizer with learning rate of 0.01.
We apply an on-policy framework in our experiments. During each epoch the agent interact B times
with the environment and then perform a policy update based on the experience collected from the
current epoch. The maximum length of the trajectory is set to 1000 and the total epoch number N
is set to 200 as default. In our experiments the Walker was trained for 250 epochs due to the high
dimension.
The policy update step is based on the scheme of TRPO, which performs up to 100 steps of back-
tracking with a coefficient of 0.8 for line searching.
For all experiments, we use a discount factor of γ = 0.99, an advantage discount factor λ = 0.95,
and a KL-divergence step size of δKL = 0.02.
For experiments which consider cost constraints we adopt a target cost δc = 0.0 to pursue a zero-
violation policy.
Other unique hyper-parameters for each algorithms are hand-tuned to attain reasonable performance.
Each model is trained on a server with a 48-core Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4214 CPU @ 2.2.GHz,
Nvidia RTX A4000 GPU with 16GB memory, and Ubuntu 20.04.

F.3   M ETRICS C OMPARISON

In Tables 5 to 7, we report all the 9 results of our test suites by three metrics:

       • The average episode return Jr .


                                                     30
                                      Table 4: Important hyper-parameters of different algorithms in our experiments


     Policy Parameter                         TRPO         TRPO-ISSA            TRPO-Lagrangian                CPO       PCPO       SCPO      S-3PO
     Epochs                           N         200             200                   200                       200        200        200      200
     Steps per epoch                  B       30000           30000                 30000                     30000      30000      30000     30000
     Maximum length of trajectory     L        1000            1000                  1000                      1000       1000       1000
     Policy network hidden layers            (64, 64)        (64, 64)              (64, 64)                  (64, 64)   (64, 64)   (64, 64)   (64, 64)
     Discount factor                   γ       0.99            0.99                  0.99                      0.99       0.99       0.99       0.99
     Advantage discount factor         λ       0.97            0.97                  0.97                      0.97       0.97       0.97       0.97
     TRPO backtracking steps                    100             100                   100                       100         -         100       100
                                                                                                                                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     TRPO backtracking coefficient              0.8             0.8                   0.8                       0.8         -         0.8        0.8


31
     Target KL                       δKL       0.02            0.02                  0.02                      0.02       0.02       0.02       0.02
     Value network hidden layers             (64, 64)        (64, 64)              (64, 64)                  (64, 64)   (64, 64)   (64, 64)   (64, 64)
     Value network iteration                    80              80                    80                        80         80         80         80
     Value network optimizer                  Adam            Adam                  Adam                      Adam       Adam       Adam       Adam
     Value learning rate                      0.001           0.001                 0.001                     0.001      0.001      0.001      0.001
     Cost network hidden layers                  -               -                 (64, 64)                  (64, 64)   (64, 64)   (64, 64)   (64, 64)
     Cost network iteration                      -               -                     80                       80         80         80         80
     Cost network optimizer                      -               -                  Adam                      Adam       Adam       Adam       Adam
     Cost learning rate                          -               -                  0.001                     0.001      0.001      0.001      0.001
     Target Cost                      δc         -               -                    0.0                       0.0        0.0        0.0       0.0
     Lagrangian learning rate                    -               -                  0.005                        -          -          -          -
     Cost reduction                              -               -                      -                       0.0         -         0.0       0.0
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • The average episodic sum of costs Mc .
      • The average cost over the entirety of training ρc .

Both the evaluation performance and training performance are reported based on the above metrics.
Besides, we also report the ISSA triger times as ISSA performance of TRPO-ISSA and S-3PO. All
of the metrics were obtained from the final epoch after convergence. Each metric was averaged over
two random seed. The evaluation performance curves of all experiments are shown in Figures 13, 16
and 19, the training performance curves of all experiments are shown in Figures 14, 17 and 20 and
the ISSA performance curves of all experiments are shown in Figures 15, 18 and 21


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Table 5: Metrics of three Point_Hazard environments obtained from the final epoch.

                                           (a) Point_1Hazard
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.5738 0.5078 0.0082      2.5738 0.5078 0.0082              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.6313 0.5977 0.0058      2.6313 0.5977 0.0058              -
                CPO          2.4988 0.1713 0.0045      2.4988 0.1713 0.0045              -
               PCPO          2.4928 0.3765 0.0054      2.4928 0.3765 0.0054              -
               SCPO          2.5457 0.0326 0.0022      2.5457 0.0326 0.0022              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.5113 0.0000 0.0000      2.5981 0.0000 0.0000           0.2714
               S-3PO         2.4157 0.0000 0.0000      2.2878 0.0000 0.0000           0.0285
                                           (b) Point_4Hazard
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.6098 0.2619 0.0037      2.6098 0.2619 0.0037              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.5494 0.2108 0.0034      2.5494 0.2108 0.0034              -
                CPO          2.5924 0.1654 0.0024      2.5924 0.1654 0.0024              -
               PCPO          2.5575 0.1824 0.0025      2.5575 0.1824 0.0025              -
               SCPO          2.5535 0.0523 0.0009      2.5535 0.0523 0.0009              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.5014 0.0712 0.0000      2.5977 0.0135 0.0000           0.1781
               S-3PO         2.3868 0.0000 0.0000      2.3550 0.0000 0.0000           0.0117
                                           (c) Point_8Hazard
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.5535 0.5208 0.0074      2.5535 0.5208 0.0074              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.5851 0.5119 0.0064      2.5851 0.5119 0.0064              -
                CPO          2.6440 0.2944 0.0041      2.6440 0.2944 0.0041              -
               PCPO          2.6249 0.3843 0.0052      2.6249 0.3843 0.0052              -
               SCPO          2.5126 0.0703 0.0020      2.5126 0.0703 0.0020              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.5862 0.0865 0.0000      2.5800 0.0152 0.0000           0.3431
               S-3PO         2.4207 0.1710 0.0000      2.3323 0.0000 0.0000           0.0337


          Table 6: Metrics of three Pillar_Hazard environments obtained from the final epoch.

                                            (a) Point_1Pillar
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.6065 0.2414 0.0032      2.6065 0.2414 0.0032              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.5772 0.1218 0.0020      2.5772 0.1218 0.0020              -
                CPO          2.5464 0.2342 0.0028      2.5464 0.2342 0.0028              -
               PCPO          2.5857 0.2088 0.0025      2.5857 0.2088 0.0025              -
               SCPO          2.5928 0.0040 0.0003      2.5928 0.0040 0.0003              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.5985 0.0000 0.0000      2.5909 0.0020 0.0000           0.3169
               S-3PO         2.5551 0.0000 0.0000      2.5241 0.0000 0.0000           0.0060
                                            (b) Point_4Pillar
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.5671 0.4112 0.0063      2.5671 0.4112 0.0063              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.6040 0.2786 0.0050      2.6040 0.2786 0.0050              -
                CPO          2.5720 0.5523 0.0062      2.5720 0.5523 0.0062              -
               PCPO          2.5709 0.3240 0.0052      2.5709 0.3240 0.0052              -
               SCPO          2.5367 0.0064 0.0005      2.5367 0.0064 0.0005              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.5739 0.1198 0.0001      2.5881 0.0427 0.0001           0.2039
               S-3PO         2.2513 0.0114 0.0000      2.3459 0.0000 0.0000           0.0116
                                            (c) Point_8Pillar
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.6140 3.1552 0.0201      2.6140 3.1552 0.0201              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.6164 0.6632 0.0129      2.6164 0.6632 0.0129              -
                CPO          2.6440 0.5655 0.0166      2.6440 0.5655 0.0166              -
               PCPO          2.5704 6.6251 0.0219      2.5704 6.6251 0.0219              -
               SCPO          2.4162 0.2589 0.0024      2.4162 0.2589 0.0024              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.6203 0.6910 0.0009      2.5921 0.0709 0.0009           0.3517
               S-3PO         2.0325 0.0147 0.0002      2.3371 0.0000 0.0002           0.0231
                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Table 7: Metrics of three link robots environments obtained from the final epoch.

                                         (a) Swimmer_1Hazard
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.7049 0.3840 0.0076      2.7049 0.3840 0.0076              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.6154 0.3739 0.0060      2.6154 0.3739 0.0060              -
                CPO          2.5817 0.3052 0.0056      2.5817 0.3052 0.0056              -
               PCPO          2.5418 0.6243 0.0055      2.5418 0.6243 0.0055              -
               SCPO          2.6432 0.3919 0.0051      2.6432 0.3919 0.0051              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.5826 0.2595 0.0000      2.5955 0.0000 0.0000           0.1240
               S-3PO         2.6032 0.0313 0.0000      2.6239 0.0001 0.0000           0.0378
                                            (b) Ant_1Hazard
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.6390 0.3559 0.0074      2.6390 0.3559 0.0074              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.5866 0.2169 0.0044      2.5866 0.2169 0.0044              -
                CPO          2.6175 0.2737 0.0072      2.6175 0.2737 0.0072              -
               PCPO          2.6103 0.2289 0.0076      2.6103 0.2289 0.0076              -
               SCPO          2.6341 0.2384 0.0065      2.6341 0.2384 0.0065              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.6509 0.3831 0.0032      2.6318 0.3516 0.0032           0.0279
               S-3PO         2.2047 0.0000 0.0002      2.2031 0.0000 0.0002           0.0001
                                          (c) Walker_1Hazard
              Algorithm       Evaluation Performance     Training Performance    ISSA Performance
                               J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c     J¯r      M̄c      ρ̄c
               TRPO          2.5812 0.2395 0.0075      2.5812 0.2395 0.0075              -
           TRPO-Lagrangian   2.6227 0.1666 0.0041      2.6227 0.1666 0.0041              -
                CPO          2.6035 0.3068 0.0062      2.6035 0.3068 0.0062              -
               PCPO          2.5775 0.2414 0.0059      2.5775 0.2414 0.0059              -
               SCPO          2.6352 0.1423 0.0051      2.6352 0.1423 0.0051              -
             TRPO-ISSA       2.6419 0.3544 0.0037      2.5787 0.2060 0.0037           0.0316
               S-3PO         2.6117 0.3437 0.0025      2.6055 0.2665 0.0025           0.0319


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (a) Point_1Hazard                  (b) Point_4Hazard                    (c) Point_8Hazard

                            Figure 13: Evaluation performance of Point_Hazard


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (a) Point_1Hazard                 (b) Point_4Hazard                   (c) Point_8Hazard

                            Figure 14: Training performance of Point_Hazard


        (a) Point_1Hazard                 (b) Point_4Hazard                   (c) Point_8Hazard

                             Figure 15: ISSA performance of Point_Hazard


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (a) Point_1Pillar                   (b) Point_4Pillar                   (c) Point_8Pillar

                             Figure 16: Evaluation performance of Point_Pillar


                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (a) Point_1Pillar                  (b) Point_4Pillar                  (c) Point_8Pillar

                             Figure 17: Training performance of Point_Pillar


         (a) Point_1Pillar                  (b) Point_4Pillar                  (c) Point_8Pillar

                              Figure 18: ISSA performance of Point_Pillar


                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Swimmer_1Hazard                  (b) Ant_1Hazard                     (c) Walker_1Hazard

                            Figure 19: Evaluation performance of link robots


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Swimmer_1Hazard                 (b) Ant_1Hazard                    (c) Walker_1Hazard

                            Figure 20: Training performance of link robots


      (a) Swimmer_1Hazard                 (b) Ant_1Hazard                    (c) Walker_1Hazard

                             Figure 21: ISSA performance of link robots


                                                 40
