Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jump Your Steps: O PTIMIZING S AMPLING S CHEDULE
OF D ISCRETE D IFFUSION M ODELS

 Yonghyun Park∗ & Chieh-Hsin Lai                     Satoshi Hayakawa                  Yuhta Takida
 Sony AI                                             Sony Group Corporation            Sony AI
 Tokyo, Japan                                        Tokyo, Japan                      Tokyo, Japan
 enkeejunior1@snu.ac.kr

 Yuki Mitsufuji
 Sony AI, Sony Group Corporation
 New York, USA



                                               A BSTRACT

             Diffusion models have seen notable success in continuous domains, leading to
             the development of discrete diffusion models (DDMs) for discrete variables. De-
             spite recent advances, DDMs face the challenge of slow sampling speeds. While
             parallel sampling methods like τ -leaping accelerate this process, they introduce
             Compounding Decoding Error (CDE), where discrepancies arise between the true
             distribution and the approximation from parallel token generation, leading to de-
             graded sample quality. In this work, we present Jump Your Steps (JYS), a novel
             approach that optimizes the allocation of discrete sampling timesteps by minimiz-
             ing CDE without extra computational cost. More precisely, we derive a practical
             upper bound on CDE and propose an efficient algorithm for searching for the opti-
             mal sampling schedule. Extensive experiments across image, piano note, and text
             generation show that JYS significantly improves sampling quality, establishing it
             as a versatile framework for enhancing DDM performance for fast sampling. The
             code is available at https://github.com/sony/jys.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song et al., 2021b; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021a;
Karras et al., 2022) have achieved remarkable success in generation tasks within the continuous do-
main. However, certain modalities, such as text and piano note, inherently possess discrete features.
Recently, discrete diffusion models (DDMs) (Austin et al., 2021; Campbell et al., 2022; 2024; Gat
et al., 2024) have demonstrated performance comparable to state-of-the-art methods in various ar-
eas, including text (Lou et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024) and image (Chang et al., 2022; Gu et al.,
2022) generation. Nevertheless, like their continuous counterparts, DDMs encounter a significant
bottleneck in sampling speed due to their progressive refinement process.
In contrast to continuous-domain diffusion models, where sampling dynamics are driven by sample-
wise differential equations (Song et al., 2021b), allowing for the direct application of well-
established numerical methods to accelerate generation, enhancing speed in DDMs poses a sig-
nificant challenge. To address this, researchers have proposed fast and efficient samplers, including
notable methods such as the τ -leaping (Campbell et al., 2022; Lezama et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023)
and k-Gillespie algorithms (Zhao et al., 2024), which facilitate parallel sampling of multiple tokens
in a single step. However, this parallel but independent sampling introduces Compounding Decoding
Error (CDE) (Lezama et al., 2022), which arises from a mismatch between the training and infer-
ence distributions of intermediate latents during parallel sampling. Specifically, while each token
is generated according to its marginal distribution, the joint distribution deviates from the learned
distribution. To mitigate this issue, the predictor-corrector (PC) sampler (Campbell et al., 2022) has
been proposed. This sampler slightly perturbs the generated data to correct incorrectly generated
tokens. However, these methods have limitations, including impracticality under low computational
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at SONY AI.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


budgets (Campbell et al., 2022), the need for an additional corrector (Lezama et al., 2022), or re-
liance on specialized architectures and loss functions (Zhao et al., 2024).

                         Ground Truth Samples                                               Uniform Schedule                                              Jump Your Steps (Ours)
                              Sampling with infinitesimal steps                             Sampling with uniform timesteps                                   Sampling with refined timesteps
Sampling


                𝑇                      Step size → 0                   0   𝑇                                                         0                𝑇                                             0

                                Countdown dataset (Section 4.1)                               Use parallel sampling in 𝑡 ≈ 𝑇                                   Use parallel sampling in 𝑡 ≪ 𝑇
                                                                                                       𝑝𝑡|𝑡+Δ𝑡 (𝑦|𝑥)                                                            𝑝𝑡|𝑡+Δ𝑡 (𝑦|𝑥)
                          M      M       3      3      3      3        3                       M                       M                              M       M      3                          3
                          M      M       M      M      M      2        2                       M                       M                              M       M      M                          2
Example
            Dimensions


                                                                                                                                         Dimensions
                          M      M       M      M      M      M        1       Dimensions      M                       M                              M       M      M                          1
                          M      M       M      0      0      0        0                       M                       2                              M       M      M                          0
                                                                                                                               Errors!
                          M      6       6      6      6      6        6                       M                       6                              M       6      6                          6
                          M      M       M      M      5      5        5                       M                       M                              M       M      M                          5
                          𝑇       𝑡1     𝑡2      𝑡3     𝑡4        𝑡5   0                        𝑇                      𝑡2                                 𝑇    𝑡1     𝑡2                        0



Figure 1: (Top) Comparison of sampling trajectories: ground truth vs. parallel sampling using a
uniform schedule and the Jump Your Steps (JYS) schedule. (Bottom) Uniform schedule exhibits
compounding decoding errors during parallel sampling, while JYS reduces them by using fewer
steps in deterministic phases and reallocating skipped steps to other timesteps.

To reduce CDE and enable fast sampling in DDM fundamentally, we first introduce a rigorous
quantity to measure CDE (see Figure 1 Top, and Section 3.1) and propose a novel approach called
Jump Your Steps (JYS), which optimizes the allocation of discrete sampling timesteps {T   t1
. . .   tN −1   0}1 under a fixed total sampling budget N to minimize CDE. Our core idea is to
derive efficiently computable bounds for CDE (see Section 3.2 and Section 3.3) and strategically
select sampling timesteps by solving minimization problems to reduce these bounds (Section 3.4
and Section 3.5), theoretically ensuring a decrease in the gap between the ground truth distribution
and the approximated distribution through parallel sampling (see Figure 2).
Unlike previous methods such as the PC sampler, our approach requires no additional computa-
tional resources or modifications to the model architecture or loss function. We empirically validate
the effectiveness of our sampling schedule across various datasets, including synthetic sequential
data, CIFAR-10 (image), Lakh Pianoroll (piano note), and text modeling. Our approach acceler-
ates DDM sampling across models using different forward corruption transition kernels, such as
uniform, Gaussian, and absorbing transition matrices. Our comprehensive experiments cover both
unconditional and conditional generation tasks, consistently showing that optimizing the sampling
schedule significantly enhances sampling quality. These results indicate that our method serves as a
general framework for speeding up discrete diffusion model sampling.

2          BACKGROUND
2.1             C ONTINUOUS T IME F RAMEWORK FOR D ISCRETE D IFFUSION M ODELS .

DDMs define the generative process as the reverse of the data-corrupting forward process, expressed
as a Continuous Time Markov Chain (CTMC) on a finite state space S (Campbell et al., 2022). For
the data-corrupting process (Xt )t∈[0,T ] , the density evolution is described as:
                                                                  qt+dt|t (y | x) = δxy + Rt (x, y)dt + o(dt)                                                                                           (1)
Here, δxy is the Dirac delta function, Rt ∈ RS×S is the transition rate matrix of the forward
CTMC, with S = |S|, and dt > 0. Rate matrices ensure the marginal distribution qt (xt ) =
       1
           In this work, s  t denotes sampling across timesteps from s to t.


                                                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



R
  qt (xt |x0 )q0 (x0 )dx0 , where q0 = pdata and qT ≈ π, the stationary distribution of the forward
CTMC. Various transition matrices have been proposed, allowing π to follow a uniform or Gaussian
distribution, or converting samples into masked tokens.
For generation, we reverse the forward process, moving from the marginal qT back to pdata . This
time-reversal CTMC is also a CTMC (Campbell et al., 2022; 2024):

                             qt−dt|t (y | x) = δxy + R̃(x, y)dt + o(dt),                           (2)

where the backward transition rate R̃ is defined as:
                                       qt (y)           X qt (y | x0 )
                  R̃(x, y) = R(y, x)          = R(y, x)                 q0|t (x0 | x)
                                       qt (x)           x0
                                                           qt (x | x0 ) | {z }
                                       | {z }                      Denoising Parametrization
                                 Score Parametrization

The literature primarily falls into two parameterizations: Denoising parameterization (Campbell
et al., 2024; Austin et al., 2021; Campbell et al., 2022) approximates a parameterized denoising
model as pθ0|t (x0 |x) ≈ q0|t (x0 |x). Conversely, score parameterization (Lou et al., 2024; Meng
et al., 2022) estimates the ratio of the data distribution as sθt (y|x) = qt (y)/qt (x).

2.2   S AMPLING FROM THE BACKWARD CTMC

Gillespie’s Algorithm was proposed as a simulation algorithm for a given CTMC (Gillespie,
2007). Gillespie’s algorithm simulates the CTMC by calculating the rate matrix at each state tran-
sition. If the rate matrix of the CTMC depends only on the state, Gillespie’s algorithm serves as an
exact simulation method. However, since it allows for only one token transition each time the rate
matrix is calculated, it is computationally inefficient.

k-Gillespie’s Algorithm Instead of updating only one token for each rate matrix calculation, the k-
Gillespie’s algorithm (Zhao et al., 2024) updates k tokens in parallel. This reduces the computation
by a factor of 1/k compared to the original Gillespie algorithm.

τ -Leaping On the other hand, Campbell et al. (2022) proposes sampling through τ -leaping. Un-
like the k-Gillespie algorithm, which update k tokens in parallel, τ -leaping simultaneously updates
all tokens according to the given fixed rate matrix within the specified time interval [t, t + τ ). Re-
cently, Tweedie τ -leaping, which considers changes in the rate matrix according to the noise sched-
ule, has been proposed (Sun et al., 2023; Lou et al., 2024).


3     O PTIMIZING THE SAMPLING SCHEDULE OF DISCRETE DIFFUSION MODELS

In this section, we aim to optimize sampling schedule {T   t1   t2   . . .  tN −1   0} to minimize
the CDE introduced by parallel sampling. First, we define and analyze the CDE, examining its
relationship to both the sampling schedule (Section 3.1) and sampling quality (Section 3.2). In
Section 3.3, we derive an upper bound on the CDE, which serves as the objective for the sampling
schedule optimization. Finally, we introduce heuristic algorithms to make the optimization tractable
including hierarchical breakdown strategy (Section 3.4) and computational techniques (Section 3.5).
Figure 2 summarizes the relationships between the theoretical analyses and algorithms discussed in
this section.
Although this section focuses on samplers based on τ -leaping, all methods are also applicable to the
k-Gillespie algorithm. For extensions to k-Gillespie, please refer to Algorithm 1.

Notations To begin, we introduce some essential mathematical notation. X : a random variable,
x : its observation, P, Q : distributions, {T   t1   . . .   tN −1   0} : sampling schedule, and
Qa b ··· c : the distribution generated by the sampling schedule {a  b  · · ·  c}. For clarity, when
working with backward CTMCs, we slightly abuse notation and express intervals as [s, t] ≜ {u |
s ≥ u ≥ t}; the same applies to open and half-open intervals.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Theorem 3.1                           Eq. (10)
                                   PN −1                ti ti+1
      DKL (P0 ∥Qt00 t1 ··· 0 ) ≤       i=0 DKL (Pti+1 ∥Qti+1    ) ≤ DKL (Ppaths ∥Qtpaths
                                                                                    0 t1 ··· 0
                                                                                               )

                                                          Eqs. (3, 5)                                  Theorem 3.2

                                                                                     KLUBPT (P0 ∥Qt00 t1 ··· 0 )
                                       PN −1
                                           i=0   ECDE (ti   ti+1 )
                                                                                                       Algorithm 1, 2.

                                                                                     {T   t1   . . .  tN −1   0}

Figure 2: An illustration of the relationship between the KL divergence of the distribution, the
compounding error ECDE (defined in Section 3.1), and KLUB (defined in Section 3.3). The sampling
schedule {T   t1   . . .  tN −1   0} is optimized to minimize KLUB using the efficient algorithms
detailed in Section 3.4, and 3.5.


3.1    T IME -D EPENDENT NATURE OF C OMPOUNDING D ECODING E RRORS

We introduce a measure for the CDE, ECDE , which quantifies the discrepancy between the true
joint distribution and the distribution from parallel token generation. For illustration, we consider
a discrete process Xt = (Xt1 , Xt2 ) with sequence length 2, consisting of tokens Xt1 and Xt2 . The
general case is provided in Appendix B.1.
We propose measuring the CDE for a single parallel sampling step {s  t} start from xs by using the
KL divergence between the joint distribution PXt1 ,Xt2 |xs and the product of marginal distributions
PXt1 |xs ⊗ PXt2 |xs :

                ECDE (s   t|xs ) ≜ DKL ( PXt1 ,Xt2 |xs ∥                   PXt1 |xs ⊗ PXt2 |xs              ).           (3)
                                         | {z }                            |        {z       }
                                             True distribution    Approx. distribution from parallel sampling

We note that the defined CDE is equivalent to the conditional mutual information I(Xt1 ; Xt2 |xs ) of
tokens Xt1 , Xt2 :
                               ECDE (s   t|xs ) = I(Xt1 ; Xt2 |xs ).                              (4)

This expression links the compounding error to the mutual information between tokens; lower mu-
tual information reduces parallel sampling errors. For example, as shown in Figure 1 (Bottom),
as generation progresses, the uncertainty of each token decreases over time due to the tokens al-
ready generated, reducing mutual information and preventing CDE. In general, CDE depends on
the timesteps, and its behavior varies with the data distribution, corruption kernel (see Fig. 9 for
illustration), and DDM sampling methods. Motivated by this observation, we hypothesize that we
can reduce the CDEs during generation process by optimizing the sampling schedule.

3.2   R ELATION BETWEEN C OMPOUNDING D ECODING ERRORS AND GENERATION QUALITY

While the Eq. (3) allows us to estimate the CDE starting from a specific state xs , in practice, we are
interested in the average compounding error over all possible starting states at time s. To assess the
overall impact of the CDE when transitioning over the timesteps s   t, we consider the expected
value of ECDE (s   t|xs ) with respect to xs ∼ Ps . This leads us to consider:

                                 ECDE (s   t) ≜ Exs [ECDE (s   t|xs )] .                                                 (5)

Consider a sampling schedule {T = t0   t1   . . .   tN −1   0 = tN }, which will be specified
later. Our goal is to minimize the cumulative CDE that arises from each parallel sampling step
within the given schedule. If we ignore the accumulated error from the previous steps that affects
the consecutive steps, our objective is as follows (Appendix A.2):
                                                       N
                                                       X −1
                                        min                   ECDE (ti   ti+1 ).                                         (6)
                                   t1 ,t2 ,...,tN −1
                                                       i=0


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Interestingly, we find in the following theorem that cumulative CDEs over the sampling schedule
can upper bound the KL divergence between the true distribution at time t = 0, denoted P0 , and the
distribution QT t
               0
                 1 ··· 0
                         obtained from parallel sampling along the sampling schedule (see Appendix
B.1 for proof):
Theorem 3.1. We have the following bound on the KL divergence between P0 and QT t
                                                                              0
                                                                                  1 ··· 0
                                                                                          in
terms of cumulative CDEs:
                                                      N
                                                      X −1
                          DKL (P0 ∥QT t
                                    0
                                        1 ··· 0
                                                )≤           ECDE (ti   ti+1 ).                    (7)
                                                      i=0

This theorem suggests that effectively allocating the time schedule to minimize the CDEs can implic-
itly reduce the discrepancy between the true distribution and the approximate distribution obtained
from parallel sampling. Motivated by this, in the next section, we derive a tractable upper bound
    PN −1
for i=0 ECDE (ti   ti+1 ) that depends on the sampling schedule {T   t1   . . .  tN −1   0} to
facilitate its optimization.

3.3   E STIMATING THE C OMPOUNDING D ECODING E RROR U SING G IRSANOV ’ S T HEOREM

As shown in Eq. (3), computing ECDE (s   t|xs ) involves determining the KL divergence between
the true distribution and the approximated distribution from DDM’s parallel sampler, which is often
intractable. To address this, we treat the ground truth reverse process and the sampling process
from DDM’s parallel samplers (introduced in Section 2.2) as two CTMCs, starting from the same
initial distribution. By applying Girsanov’s theorem (Ding & Ning, 2021; Chen et al., 2023), we
derive a tractable formula to compare the KL divergence between the distributions of these stochastic
processes at any time interval [s, t]. We summarize this as the following general theorem applicable
to any two backward CTMCs with Rt1 and Rt2 as their respective transition rate matrices:
                     (
                                      1
                       CTMC 1 : qu−du|u     (y | x) = δxy + Rt1 (x, y)du + o(du),
                                      2
                       CTMC 2 : qu−du|u     (y | x) = δxy + Rt2 (x, y)du + o(du).
We defer its proof to Appendix B.2.
Theorem 3.2. (KL-Divergence Upper Bound, KLUB) Consider an interval [s, t] (s > t). If both
CTMCs start from the same initial distribution, πs = Ps = Qs , then we have:
                                                                                        
                                                                                1
                                                          X X                 R   (i, j)
         DKL (Pt ∥Qt ) ≤ DKL (Ppaths ∥Qpaths ) = EPpaths             Huij log u2        . (8)
                                                                              Ru (i, j)
                                                           i̸=j t<u≤s
                                                   |                {z                   }
                                                                   ≜ KLUBπs (Pt ∥Qt )


Here, Pt and Qt are the probability distributions at time t resulting from CTMC 1 and CTMC 2,
respectively. Ppaths and Qpaths denote the distributions over their path spaces (Xu )u∈[t,s] , gener-
ated by CTMC 1 and CTMC 2, respectively. The indicator function Huij is defined as Huij = 1 if a
transition from state i to j occurs at time u, and Huij = 0 otherwise.
We denote the rightmost term in Eq. (8) as the Kullback-Leibler Divergence Upper Bound (KLUB),
which quantifies the mismatch between distributions generated by different CTMCs based on their
rate matrices. Consider CTMC 1 as the ground truth reverse CTMC and CTMC 2 as the reverse
CTMC obtained via parallel sampling by substituting the forward transition kernel with the corre-
sponding reverse-in-time kernel. Thus, ECDE (s   t|xs ) can be expressed as the KL divergence
between the output distributions of the two CTMCs at time t, starting from the initial point xs . This
leads to the upper bound (Proof in Appendix B.3):
                                ECDE (s   t) ≤ KLUBPs (Pt ∥Qts t ),                                (9)
where Qts t is given by the process discretized at time s and t.     This expectation considers the
distribution of states at time s and offers a more comprehensive measure of the CDE over the interval
[s, t]. Moreover, from the additivity of KLUB, we can bound the sum of CDEs as
ECDE (s   t)+ECDE (t   u) ≤ KLUBPs (Pt ∥Qst t )+KLUBPt (Pu ∥Qtu u ) = KLUBPs (Pu ∥Qus t u ),
                                                                                       (10)


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which shows that the KLUB can be useful for comparing the quality of discretization of the interval
[s, u] with different break point t. We can easily extend this result for the sum of CDEs over the
entire sampling schedule {T = t0   t1   . . .  tN −1   0 = tN }.
                                       N
                                       X −1
            DKL (P0 ∥QT t
                      0
                          1 ··· 0
                                  )≤          ECDE (ti   ti+1 ) ≤ KLUBPT (P0 ∥QT t
                                                                               0
                                                                                  1 ··· 0
                                                                                          ),            (11)
                                        i=0
where inequality on the left-hand side comes from Theorem 3.1.
To summarize, optimizing the sampling schedule involves finding a set of timesteps {T   t1   . . .
tN −1   0} that minimizes the KLUB on the right-hand side. This approach approximately reduces
the cumulative CDE (middle) and provides an upper bound on the KL divergence between the true
distribution and the sampled distribution for the given schedule (left-hand side).

3.4   F EASIBLE C OMPUTATION WITH H IERARCHICAL B REAKDOWN S TRATEGY

Using the derived KLUB, we can formulate the timestep search as a minimization problem over
KLUB. Here, we employ a hierarchical breakdown strategy, dividing a coarser sampling schedule
into a finer one, as shown in Figure 3.4. Suppose our sampling schedule is given by {T   t  0}. Let
QT t
  0
      0
         represent the distribution generated by this schedule. Our goal is to find the optimal t that
minimizes cumulative CDE, i.e., ECDE (T   t) + ECDE (t   0). This is approximately achievable
by minimizing its KLUB upper bound:
                                   t1 = arg min KLUB(P0 ∥Q0T t 0 )                                      (12)
                                          t∈(T,0)

With the initial refined interval {T   tt   0}, we seek optimal timesteps t2 ∈ (T, t1 ) and t3 ∈ (t1 , 0)
by solving the following minimization problems:
           t2 ∈ arg min KLUB(Pt1 ∥QT t
                                   t1
                                       t1
                                          ) and            t3 ∈ arg min KLUB(P0 ∥Qt01 t 0 ).
                 t∈(T,t1 )                                       t∈(t1 ,0)


The first minimization problem targets match- NFE = 1          𝑇                        0
ing DKL (Pt1 ∥Qt1 ), while the second focuses on
matching DKL (P0 ∥Q0 ). This results in a further
refined sampling schedule {T   t2   t1   t3
                                                     NFE = 2   𝑇                        0
0}. By iterating this process, we continue split-                      𝑡2        𝑡3
ting each interval into smaller ones, optimizing NFE = 4       𝑇                        0
breakpoints using the KLUB criterion. After K
                                                            ⋯


                                                                                ⋯


iterations, this hierarchical strategy yields a sam- Figure 3: We optimize the sampling schedule
pling schedule with 2K NFEs (Number of Func- by refining it from coarse intervals to finer inter-
tion Evaluations), optimizing the schedule as the vals, using a hierarchical breakdown strategy.
number of steps increases.

3.5 F EASIBLE C OMPUTATION FOR KLUB
E STIMATION

Directly estimating KLUBPT (P0 ∥QT t  0
                                          0
                                            ) using Eq. (8) is impractical due to (1) the high cost of
sampling from Ppaths , and (2) the need for extensive Monte Carlo sampling for reliable estimates. To
address this issue, we propose two techniques that simplify the estimation process.

Technique 1: Maximizing KL Divergence from a Coarser Approximation Instead of minimiz-
                                                                         T t 0
ing the mismatch between the ground truth distribution Ppaths and Qpaths         , we choose to maximize
the discrepancy between Qpaths and a simpler, coarser approximation QT 0
                            T t 0
                                                                              paths . The key insight is that
maximizing this divergence, we can find the optimal sampling time t, which helps reduce the com-
pounding error relative to the true distribution. This relationship can be approximated as (Appendix
B.4):
                        T t 0
               DKL (Qpaths    ∥QT 0                       T 0                        T t 0
                                  paths ) ≈ DKL (Ppaths ∥Qpaths ) − DKL (Ppaths ∥Qpaths ),

Thus, by maximizing the divergence on the left-hand side, we effectively minimize the discrepancy
             T t 0
DKL (Ppaths Qpaths ) between the true distribution Ppaths and the optimized schedule QT t
                                                                                      paths .
                                                                                           0



                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Based on this, we can rewrite our optimization objective as follows (Proof in Appendix B.4):
                                                                                           
                                                                 X      R t (i, j) X
 t∗ = arg max KLUBQT (QT t  0
                                0
                                  ∥QT 0
                                     0 ) = arg max EQT     t 0     log                Huij  (13)
       t∈(T,0)                                t∈(T,0)    paths          RT (i, j)
                                                                      i̸=j                                 0<u≤t


Equation Eq. (13) offers a significant computational advantage over Eq. (8) by eliminating the need
to compute the rate matrix at every transition time. Note that, calculating the reverse rate matrix
involves neural network evaluations. Given a trajectory (Xu )u∈[T,0] , Eq. (8) requires computing the
rate matrix Ru for all transitions where Huij = 1. In contrast, Eq. (13) decouples the rate matrix
from the transition times u, requiring computations only at times T and t. Moreover, between times
T and t, the rate matrices for both QT t            T 0
                                        paths and Qpaths are equal to RT , eliminating the need for
                                             0

additional computations in this interval.

Technique 2: Applying the Law of Total Expectation Instead of directly compute the expecta-
tion over QT tpaths , we compute expectation of conditional expectation, using the law of total expec-
                   0

tation, i.e., E[X] = E[E[X|Y ]]:
                                                                                              
             X        R t (i, j) X                             X      R t (i, j) X
 EQT t 0         log               Huij  = EQT t EQt 0       log                  Huij Xt = i
    paths             RT (i, j)                 paths   paths        RT (i, j)
           i̸=j              0<u≤t                             i̸=j                                     0<u≤t


On the left side, to compute the expected value, we would need to sample the entire trajectory
(Xu )u∈[T,0] and then calculate the inner sum. On the right side, this process is broken down into
two steps: first, we sample a trajectory from XT to Xt , and then, given Xt , we sample from Xt to
X0 to compute the inner expectation. Our main insight is that the expected value in the second step
can be obtained in closed form.
The term 0<u≤t Huij counts the number of transitions from state i to state j in the interval [t, 0).
          P
        t 0
Since Qpaths uses a single rate matrix over this interval, for i ̸= j, the expected number of transitions
from i to j is approximately given by (Campbell et al., 2022, Sec. 4.3):
                                                      
                                            X
                                  EQt 0          Huij  ≈ Rt (i, j)∆t                               (14)
                                     paths
                                             0<u≤t

where ∆t represents the size of the time interval.
Using this result, we can simplify Equation Eq. (13) as follows (Derivation in Appendix B.5):
                                                                                      
                                                    X       Rt (Xt , j)
           KLUBQT Q0T t 0 QT 0

                                  0    ≈ EQT t        log              × Rt (Xt , j)∆t .    (15)
                                            paths           RT (Xt , j)
                                                     j̸=Xt


In Eq. (13), obtaining a reliable KLUB estimation requires
                                                                        KLUB(𝑄0𝑇→𝑡→0 ||𝑄0𝑇→0 )


sampling trajectories to capture transitions between vari-
ous states i and j, which is both inaccurate and sample-
inefficient—especially when dealing with large state spaces.
For instance, in text generation tasks where the state space can
be around 50,257, it’s practically impossible to estimate the
                                                                                                 0.9𝑇           𝑡   0.1𝑇
transition ratios between all pairs (i, j) through sampling alone.
In contrast, Eq. (15) allows us to compute this component in      Figure 4: The values of KLUB                             Diffusion timesteps
closed form, leading to more reliable and efficient calculations. with respect to t. Blue lines show
The full algorithm for KLUB computation, combining Tech-          estimated results from individual
niques 1 and 2, is provided in Appendix C.1.                      (Xt )t∈[T,0] , while the red line is
Now, we can maximize Eq. (15) using a standard optimization       the average.
algorithm. Before selecting the algorithm, we conduct a pre-
liminary check to observe how the KLUB value changes with
respect to t (Figure 4). Interestingly, it exhibits a unimodal shape. Since we are working with a


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FID (10k)


             Number of Function Evaluations                 Uniform                                 Jump your steps (Ours)


Figure 6: (Left) Performance comparisons on CIFAR-10. (Right) Samples generated using the
uniform   and JYS schedules, both with NFE 64.
     CIFAR10


single variable t in the unimodal optimization landscape, we use the golden section search (Press,
2007), a well-known one-dimensional search algorithm, to find the value of t that maximizes KLUB.
This method has the advantage of not relying on hyperparameters like learning rate, which can sig-
nificantly affect performance.

4           E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate the Jump Your Steps (JYS) sampling


                                                                                        Error (%)
schedule across various datasets and models. We compare the JYS
schedule with the uniform sampling schedule, which sets all inter-
vals to the same size. Except for the Countdown dataset, we use
open-sourced pretrained models for our experiments. It is important
to note that the Gillespie algorithm is only applicable to an absorbing
transition matrix, as uniform or Gaussian transition kernels do not
                                                                             Number of Function Evaluations
have a fixed number of transitions. For further experimental details
and additional qualitative results, please refer to the Appendix D and Figure 5:          Performance
E.6.                                                                    comparisons on Countdown.

4.1         T HE C OUNT D OWN DATASET

Following Zhao et al. (2024), to evaluate our sampling schedule performance, we created a synthetic
sequence dataset with a strong position-wise correlation structure. Each sample consists of 256
tokens, and each token has a value between 0 and 31. Each data sequence X 0:255 is generated
according to the following rules:
                                                X 0 ∼ Uniform{1, . . . , S},
                                                                                if X d ̸= 0

                                                        δ d
                                        X d+1
                                              | X ∼ X −1
                                                  d
                                                        Uniform{1, . . . , S}   if X d = 0

We trained a SEDD (Lou et al., 2024) with an absorb transition matrix on this generated data. We
measure the model performance by the proportion of generated samples that violated the rule, i.e.,
failed to count downwards from the previous token. The results are shown in Figure 5. We observe
that the JYS schedule has fewer errors compared to the uniform schedule for the same NFE.

4.2         CIFAR-10

We demonstrate our sampling schedule in the image domain. For this experiment, we use a pre-
trained model from Campbell et al. (2022), which employs a gaussian transition matrix and denois-
ing parameterization. Each data sample is a flattened image with a length of 3 × 32 × 32, composed
of tokens with values ranging from 0 to 255.
Figure 6 (left) shows the FID score using 50k samples with the number of function evaluations
(NFE) from 32 to 256. We observe that, for all NFEs, the JYS schedule yields a better FID score


                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                     SEDD small                      SEDD medium



 Hellinger distance (↓)


                                                                Generative Perplexity (↓)
                              Number of Function Evaluations                                Number of Function Evaluations   Number of Function Evaluations


Figure 7: Performance comparisons                              Figure 8: Performance comparisons on text generation. Gen-
on piano note generation.                                      erative perplexity is measured by using GPT-2-large.


at the same NFE compared to the uniform schedule. Figure 6 (right) shows randomly generated
unconditional CIFAR-10 samples with NFE = 64. The uniform schedule produces blurry images,
whereas the images generated using the JYS schedule exhibit clearer colors and shapes of objects.

4.3                       P IANO NOTE

We test our method on conditional piano note generation using the Lakh pianoroll dataset (Raffel,
2016; Dong et al., 2018). For this experiment, we employ a pretrained model from Campbell et al.
(2022), which uses a uniform transition matrix and denoising parameterization. Each data sequence
contains 256 timesteps (16 per bar), and we measure performance by conditioning on two bars to
generate the remaining 14 bars, following the setup in Campbell et al. (2022).
We evaluate how different the generated results were when using a smaller NFE (from 2 to 64),
compare to samples generated with an NFE of 512. Specifically, we calculate the Hellinger distance
between the note distributions in the generated samples. The results are presented in Figure 7.
Given the same NFE, we observe that samples generated using our method were more similar to
those generated with a high NFE.

4.4                       T EXT MODELING

Finally, we validate our method on text generation. For this experiment, we use a pretrained model
from Lou et al. (2024), which employs an absorbing transition matrix and score-based parame-
terization. We use two model sizes, SEDD-small and SEDD-medium, in the experiments; both
models use the GPT-2 tokenizer and were trained on OpenWebText. The JYS schedule, optimized
on SEDD-small, is also used for the experiments with SEDD-medium.
Following Lou et al. (2024), we measure the generative perplexity of sampled sequences (using a
GPT-2 large for evaluation). We generated 1,024 samples and each sample constructed with se-
quences of 1,024 tokens. We simulate 16 to 256 NFE for generation. Figure 8 shows the results,
demonstrating better perplexity at the same NFE.

4.5                       C HARACTERISTICS OF J UMP -YOUR -S TEP S AMPLING SCHEDULE

In Section 3.1, we hypothesized that in regions where the conditional mutual information is low,
the CDE would also be small, allowing steps to be skipped with minimal performance degradation.
Here, we aim to verify if the JYS operates as expected according to this hypothesis.
Figure 9 shows the JYS sampling schedules optimized for various transition matrices. First, in the
absorb case (Left), as discussed in Figure 1 (Bottom), we observe that large intervals are concen-
trated toward the latter part of the process. This occurs because the previously generated tokens
help reduce the uncertainty of other tokens. In contrast, in the uniform case (Middle), large intervals
appear at the beginning. This can be understood as a result of Xt following a uniform distribu-
tion, making the tokens independent, leading to lower mutual information for larger t. Lastly, for


                                                                                             9
    Ground Truth Samples
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (NFE=1024)
    Jump Your Steps
                           (NFE=64)


  JYS
schedule
                                            (a) Countdown – Absorb   (b) Piano – Uniform   (c) CIFAR10 – Gaussian

Figure 9: Sampling trajectories for different dataset-transition matrix combinations. (Top) Trajec-
tories using the JYS schedule. (Bottom) Optimized sampling schedule with JYS.


the Gaussian transition (Right), large intervals appear initially and then increase again over time.
This pattern suggests that, initially, tokens behave independently like in the uniform case, but af-
ter a certain timestep, the effect of resolving uncertainty, similar to the absorb case, becomes more
significant as more tokens are generated.

5                                       R ELATED W ORK
Efficient Sampling for Continuous Diffusion Models After the seminal work by Song et al.
(2021b), which interpreted diffusion models as a Stochastic or Ordinary Differential Equations
(SDE/ODE), various SDE (Jolicoeur-Martineau et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023) and ODE solvers (Song
et al., 2021a; Lu et al., 2022; Zhang & Chen, 2023; Dockhorn et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Zheng
et al., 2023) have been proposed to improve sampling speed.
The work most closely related to ours is “Align Your Step” (Sabour et al., 2024) and AdaptiveSched-
ules (Chen et al.), which focuses on sampling schedule optimization in continuous diffusion models.
In contrast, our approach targets DDMs, where we derive the KLUB for CTMCs to optimize the
sampling schedule. We also propose a computationally efficient algorithm for KLUB computation
and optimization.

Discrete Diffusion Models Several approaches have been developed for training DDMs, including
denoising parameterization (Austin et al., 2021; Campbell et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2022; Gat et al.,
2024; Campbell et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Sahoo et al., 2024) and score parameterization (Sun
et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2022; Lou et al., 2024). Types of DDMs that do not fall into these two
categories are also being continuously proposed (Hoogeboom et al., 2021b;a; Santos et al., 2023).
Recently, SEDD has outperformed GPT-2 in text modeling, gaining traction as an alternative to
autoregressive models (Deschenaux & Gulcehre, 2024).
In terms of sampling, two main directions have emerged. The first focuses on efficient sampling,
with τ -leaping for CTMC and methods like analytic sampling (Sun et al., 2023), Tweedie sampling
(Lou et al., 2024), and k-Gillespie (Zhao et al., 2024) improving accuracy. The second aims to
reduce compounding error via corrector steps, such as random correctors (Campbell et al., 2022),
separate corrector training (Lezama et al., 2022), or enabling the model to act as an informed cor-
rector (Zhao et al., 2024). These methods complement the sampling schedule optimization explored
in this paper and can be used together for further improvements. Recently, as a concurrent work,
DNDM (Chen et al., 2024) proposed accelerated sampling through a non-Markovian framework that
uses token transition times sampled from a beta distribution.

6                                       C ONCLUSIONS
We present Jump Your Steps, a principled method designed to optimize the sampling schedule and
minimize these numerical errors without incurring additional computational costs during inference.
Unlike existing approaches that rely on extra computational efforts, such as predictor-corrector
methods, our technique operates independently and efficiently. Through extensive evaluations on
synthetic and real-world datasets—including monophonic piano, image, and text generation—we
demonstrate that our method consistently enhances performance across different transition kernels
in DDMs and effectively complements various samplers.



                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B IBLIOGRAPHY

Jacob Austin, Daniel D Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne Van Den Berg. Structured
  denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:17981–17993, 2021.
Andrew Campbell, Joe Benton, Valentin De Bortoli, Thomas Rainforth, George Deligiannidis, and
  Arnaud Doucet. A continuous time framework for discrete denoising models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:28266–28279, 2022.
Andrew Campbell, Jason Yim, Regina Barzilay, Tom Rainforth, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generative
  flows on discrete state-spaces: Enabling multimodal flows with applications to protein co-design.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T Freeman. Maskgit: Masked generative
  image transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 11315–11325, 2022.
Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru R Zhang. Sampling is as easy
   as learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Yuzhu Chen, Fengxiang He, Shi Fu, Xinmei Tian, and Dacheng Tao. Adaptive time-stepping sched-
  ules for diffusion models. In The 40th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
Zixiang Chen, Huizhuo Yuan, Yongqian Li, Yiwen Kou, Junkai Zhang, and Quanquan Gu. Fast
  sampling via discrete non-markov diffusion models with predetermined transition time. In The
  Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons, second
  edition, 2006.
Justin Deschenaux and Caglar Gulcehre. Promises, outlooks and challenges of diffusion language
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11473, 2024.
Kailin Ding and Ning Ning. Markov chain approximation and measure change for time-
  inhomogeneous stochastic processes. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 392:125732, 2021.
Tim Dockhorn, Arash Vahdat, and Karsten Kreis. Genie: Higher-order denoising diffusion solvers.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:30150–30166, 2022.
Hao-Wen Dong, Wen-Yi Hsiao, Li-Chia Yang, and Yi-Hsuan Yang. Musegan: Multi-track se-
  quential generative adversarial networks for symbolic music generation and accompaniment. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
  high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Itai Gat, Tal Remez, Neta Shaul, Felix Kreuk, Ricky TQ Chen, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and
   Yaron Lipman. Discrete flow matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15595, 2024.
Daniel T Gillespie. Stochastic simulation of chemical kinetics. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 58(1):
  35–55, 2007.
Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and
  Baining Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10696–10706, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Emiel Hoogeboom, Alexey A Gritsenko, Jasmijn Bastings, Ben Poole, Rianne van den Berg, and
  Tim Salimans. Autoregressive diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02037, 2021a.

Emiel Hoogeboom, Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Patrick Forré, and Max Welling. Argmax flows
  and multinomial diffusion: Learning categorical distributions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:12454–12465, 2021b.

Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, Ke Li, Rémi Piché-Taillefer, Tal Kachman, and Ioannis Mitliagkas.
  Gotta go fast when generating data with score-based models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14080,
  2021.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26565–26577,
  2022.

Jose Lezama, Tim Salimans, Lu Jiang, Huiwen Chang, Jonathan Ho, and Irfan Essa. Discrete
  predictor-corrector diffusion models for image synthesis. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2022.

Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on
  manifolds. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Aaron Lou, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Discrete diffusion language modeling by estimating
  the ratios of the data distribution. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast
  ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:5775–5787, 2022.

Chenlin Meng, Kristy Choi, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Concrete score matching: General-
  ized score matching for discrete data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  34532–34545, 2022.

William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.

William H Press. Numerical recipes 3rd edition: The art of scientific computing. Cambridge uni-
 versity press, 2007.

Colin Raffel. Learning-based methods for comparing sequences, with applications to audio-to-midi
  alignment and matching. Columbia University, 2016.

Amirmojtaba Sabour, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. Align your steps: Optimizing sampling
 schedules in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14507, 2024.

Subham Sekhar Sahoo, Marianne Arriola, Yair Schiff, Aaron Gokaslan, Edgar Marroquin, Justin T
  Chiu, Alexander Rush, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. Simple and effective masked diffusion language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07524, 2024.

Javier E Santos, Zachary R Fox, Nicholas Lubbers, and Yen Ting Lin. Blackout diffusion: generative
  diffusion models in discrete-state spaces. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9034–9059. PMLR, 2023.

Jiaxin Shi, Kehang Han, Zhe Wang, Arnaud Doucet, and Michalis K Titsias. Simplified and gener-
   alized masked diffusion for discrete data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04329, 2024.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.
Haoran Sun, Lijun Yu, Bo Dai, Dale Schuurmans, and Hanjun Dai. Score-based continuous-time
  discrete diffusion models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Yilun Xu, Mingyang Deng, Xiang Cheng, Yonglong Tian, Ziming Liu, and Tommi Jaakkola. Restart
  sampling for improving generative processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 36:76806–76838, 2023.
Qinsheng Zhang and Yongxin Chen. Fast sampling of diffusion models with exponential integrator.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Yixiu Zhao, Jiaxin Shi, Lester Mackey, and Scott Linderman. Informed correctors for discrete
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21243, 2024.
Kaiwen Zheng, Cheng Lu, Jianfei Chen, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver-v3: Improved diffusion ode
  solver with empirical model statistics. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
  55502–55542, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
      A Discussions                                                                                 14
        A.1 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
        A.2 Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14

      B Theoretical Details                                                                         15
        B.1 Proof of Theorem 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
        B.2 Proof of Theorem 3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
        B.3 Proof of Eq. (9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
        B.4 Technique 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
        B.5 Technique 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21

      C Algorithm                                                                                   21
        C.1 KLUB computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
        C.2 Jump your steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22
        C.3 k-Gillespie Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22

      D Experiment Details                                                                          22

      E Additional Results                                                                          23
        E.1 Efficiency of the JYS Algorithm in Sampling Schedule Optimization . . . . . . .         23
        E.2 Error Bars and Standard Deviations for Quantitative Metrics . . . . . . . . . . .       24
        E.3 Performance Improvements Achieved by JYS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          25
        E.4 Comparison with Heuristic Sampling Schedules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          25
        E.5 JYS Sampling Schedules for NFE ̸= 2K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          25
        E.6 Qualitative results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26



A     D ISCUSSIONS
A.1   L IMITATIONS

Although the JYS sampling schedule is a method that can improve sampling quality in a plug-and-
play manner for general DDMs, there are still problems that need to be solved. The first drawback
is that, due to the nature of the hierarchical breakdown strategy, we can only optimize sampling
schedules where NFE = 2K , so flexibility is reduced. While we propose a method to select an
appropriate subset of the sampling schedule when the number of function evaluations (NFE) is not
equal to 2K , optimizing the sampling schedule for arbitrary NFE using a principled approach is an
interesting direction for future study.
Another theoretical limitation that needs to be addressed is that technique 2 uses the single-state
transition assumption (Eq. 14)). This assumption is completely valid for the absorb transition kernel
but does not apply to other transition kernels. This could potentially make the sampling schedule
optimization suboptimal. Addressing this issue is interesting future work.

A.2   D ISCUSSIONS

What does it mean to ignore the accumulated error from the previous steps? The ”accumu-
lated error from the previous steps that affects consecutive steps” occurs when a generated xt does
not belong to the distribution q(xt ), i.e., generated dataset mismatched with the training dataset. We
refer to this error as exposure bias [1]. While exposure bias is indeed an interesting problem to ad-
dress in generative model sampling, our work focuses specifically on resolving the CDE caused by


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


parallel decoding. Therefore, we chose to set aside exposure bias in this study. To improve clarity,
we have added a discussion of this point to Section X of the revised paper.

Optimization using gradient descent As we mentioned in the main text, we perform optimization
using the golden-section search algorithm. In preliminary experiments, we also tried the gradient
descent algorithm but encountered two issues. The first was that gradient estimation was very noisy,
and the second was that it was too sensitive to hyperparameters, i.e., the learning rate. Particularly,
the second drawback made it impractical to use because we had to perform hyperparameter search
optimization every time we optimized each step.

Is there an alternative optimization algorithm to the hierarchical breakdown? As part of
our preliminary experiments, we explored an alternative strategy—hierarchical merging—where
smaller, fragmented sampling schedules are combined into a coarse sampling schedule. However,
our experimental results indicated that this approach often gets stuck in local optima and fails to de-
liver significant performance improvements. We will include this discussion in the revised version
of the paper.

B     T HEORETICAL D ETAILS
B.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

Although we treated the two-dimensional case where we have Xt = (Xt1 , Xt2 ) in the main body,
we consider the general d-dimensional case with Xt = (Xt1 , . . . , Xtd ). In that case, the definition of
ECDE is given by
                       ECDE (s → t|xs ) ≜ DKL (Pxt |xs ∥PXt1 |xs ⊗ · · · ⊗ PXtd |xs ).                    (16)

In general, for a discrete probability distribution Pprior (·) over the space S and a conditional distri-
bution (or denoiser) Pcond (·|·) over the same space, i,e, Pcond : S × S → R, let us just write the
resulting distribution as follows:
                                                              X
                   Pcond Pprior ≜ Ex∼Pprior [Pcond (·|x)] =       Pcond (·|x)Pprior (x).
                                                                   x∈S

Then, if we define Pti+1 |ti (·|xti ) ≜ PXti+1 |xti and Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ) ≜ PXt1 |xs ⊗ · · · ⊗ PXtd |xs fol-
lowing equation 16, we can denote the target distributions in the theorem as follows:
           P0 = PtN |tN −1 · · · Pt1 |t0 Pt0 ,       Q0 ≜ Q0T t1 ··· 0 = QtN |tN −1 · · · Qt1 |t0 Pt0 .
For simplicity, let us also define the mid-time distributions as
           Pti ≜ Pti |ti−1 · · · Pt1 |t0 Pt0 ,   Qti ≜ Qti |ti−1 · · · Qt1 |t0 Pt0 ,      Qt0 ≜ Pt0 .

In the proof of the theorem, we use the following well-known lemma:
Lemma B.1. For discrete finite sets X , Y and the joint probability distributions PX,Y and QX,Y on
X × Y, we have

          DKL (PX,Y ∥QX,Y ) = DKL (PX ∥QX ) + Ex∼PX DKL (PY |X (·|x)∥QY |X (·|x)) ,
where PX , QX and PY |X , QY |X respectively denote the marginal and conditional distributions.

Proof. We can just compute as
                      X                         PY |X (y|x)PX (x)
 DKL (PX,Y ∥QX,Y ) =      PY |X (y|x)PX (x) log
                      y,x
                                                Q Y |X (y|x)QX (x)

                            X                              PX (x) X                           PY |X (y|x)
                        =         PY |X (y|x)PX (x) log           +     PY |X (y|x)PX (x) log
                            y,x
                                                           QX (x)   y,x
                                                                                              QY |X (y|x)
                                                 X
                        = DKL (PX ∥QX ) +             PX (x)DKL (PY |X (·|x)∥QY |X (·|x)),
                                                 x
which leads to the stated equation.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now we can proceed to the proof of the theorem.

Proof of Theorem 3.1. Let us now consider the case where s = ti−1 and t = ti for some i > 0
specifically. Let
                     Pt,s (y, x) ≜ Pt|s (y|x)Ps (x),               Qt,s (y, x) ≜ Qt|s (y|x)Qs (x)
to denote joint distributions on S × S. Then, since Pt = Pt|s Ps and Qt = Qt|s Qs are marginal
distributions of Pt,s and Qt,s , we have (from Lemma B.1) the following:
                   DKL (Pt ∥Qt ) ≤ DKL (Pt,s ∥Qt,s )
                                 = DKL (Ps ∥Qs ) + Ex∼Ps [DKL (Pt|s (·|x)∥Qt|s (·|x))]
                                      = DKL (Ps ∥Qs ) + Exs ∼Ps [ECDE (s → t|xs )]
                                      = DKL (Ps ∥Qs ) + ECDE (s → t).                                                           (17)
From Lemma B.1, equality holds if and only if DKL (Pt|s ∥Qt|s ) = 0.
By iteratively using equation 17, we obtain
        DKL (P0 ∥Q0 ) = DKL (PtN ∥QtN )
                      ≤ DKL (PtN −1 ∥QtN −1 ) + ECDE (tN −1 → tN )
                          ≤ DKL (PtN −2 ∥QtN −2 ) + ECDE (tN −2 → tN −1 ) + ECDE (tN −1 → tN )
                          ..
                           .
                                                      N
                                                      X −1
                          ≤ DKL (Pt0 ∥Qt0 ) +                ECDE (ti → ti+1 ).
                                                       i=0

Since we set Pt0 = Qt0 = π, where π is terminal distribution, we have completed the proof.
Furthermore, equality holds if and only if DKL (Pti |ti+1 ∥Qti |ti+1 ) = 0 for all t ∈ {0, · · · , N − 1}.


B.1.1    C OMPARISON : N EGATIVE ELBO VS S UM OF CDE S
Let us just denote by Pt0 ,...,ti the joint distribution of the variables (xt0 , . . . , xti ) generated based on
Pt0 and Ptj+1 |tj ’s. Similarly define Qt0 ,...,ti . We can also see the sum of CDEs as the KL divergence
between discrete path measures. Indeed, by using Lemma B.1 with decomposing (xt0 , . . . , xti+1 )
into (xt0 , . . . , xi ) and xti+1 , we have
    DKL (Pt0 ,...,ti+1 ∥Qt0 ,...,ti+1 )
     = DKL (Pt0 ,...,ti ∥Qt0 ,...,ti )

       + Ext0 ,...,xti ∼Pt0 ,...,ti DKL (Pti+1 |t0 ,...,ti (·|xt0 , . . . , xti )∥Qti+1 |t0 ,...,ti (·|xt0 , . . . , xti ))

     = DKL (Pt0 ,...,ti ∥Qt0 ,...,ti ) + Exti ∼Pti DKL (Pti+1 |ti (·|xti )∥Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ))
where the second equality comes from the Markov property of the defined processes. By iteratively
using this, we have
               DKL (Pt0 ,...,tN ∥Qt0 ,...,tN )
                                            N
                                            X −1

                = DKL (Pt0 ∥Qt0 ) +                Exti ∼Pti DKL (Pti+1 |ti (·|xti )∥Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ))                        (18)
                                            i=0
                                            N
                                            X −1
                = DKL (Pt0 ∥Qt0 ) +                ECDE (ti → ti+1 ).
                                            i=0

Now, notice that it is quite similar to the usual negative ELBO loss (e.g., LDT in Campbell et al.
(2022, page 3)) to compare the P (target) and Q (approximation) in training diffusion models. By
replacing Pti+1 |ti (·|xti ) with Pti+1 |ti ,0 (·|xti , x0 ) by conditioning on x0 ∼ P0 = PtN , we mostly
recover the negative ELBO.


                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let us proceed more formally. The negative ELBO we consider (Campbell et al., 2022; Sohl-
Dickstein et al., 2015) can be written as:

                                   LNELBO (P, Q) = Ex0 ∼P0 [LxNELBO
                                                               0
                                                                    (P, Q)],

where

   LxNELBO (P, Q) = DKL (Pt0 |tN (·|x)∥Qt0 ) + ExtN −1 ∼PtN −1 |tN (·|x) [− log QtN |tN −1 (x|xtN −1 )]
                             N
                             X −2
                         +          Exti ∼Pti |tN (·|x) [DKL (Pti+1 |ti ,tN (·|xti , x)∥Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ))].
                             i=0

Note that the negative ELBO and our summation of CDEs (equation 18) are both trying
to upper-bound the target KL divergence DKL (P0 ∥Q0 ). In the following, we shall prove
DKL (Pt0 ,...,tN ∥Qt0 ,...,tN ) ≤ LNELBO (P, Q) to see our bound actually gives a tighter approximation
of DKL (P0 ∥Q0 ) than the negative ELBO computed at timesteps {T   t1   t2   . . .  tN −1   0}.
Since PtN |tN −1 ,tN (·|xtN −1 , x) is the delta distribution at x, we can formally rewrite a term in
LxNELBO as − log QtN |tN −1 (x|xtN −1 ) = DKL (PtN |tN −1 ,tN (·|xtN −1 , x)∥QtN |tN −1 (·|xtN −1 )) and
so obtain

     LxNELBO (P, Q) = DKL (Pt0 |tN (·|x)∥Qt0 )
                                 N
                                 X −1
                             +          Exti ∼Pti |tN (·|x) [DKL (Pti+1 |ti ,tN (·|xti , x)∥Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ))].   (19)
                                 i=0

By using equation 18 and equation 19, we prove DKL (Pt0 ,...,tN ∥Qt0 ,...,tN ) ≤ LNELBO (P, Q) =
Ex0 ∼P0 [LxNELBO
            0
                 (P, Q)] in a term-by-term manner. We shall heavily use the convexity of KL diver-
gence (Cover & Thomas, 2006, Theorem 2.7.2) in the following form:

                     DKL (Ex∼π [PY |X (·|x)]∥QY ) ≤ Ex∼π [DKL (PY |X (·|x)∥QY )],                                   (20)

where PY |X is a conditional distribution and π is any reference probability distribution.

First term. We can prove

                             DKL (Pt0 ∥Qt0 ) ≤ Ex∼PtN [DKL (Pt0 |tN (·|x)∥Qt0 )]                                    (21)

first. Since we have Ex∼PtN [Pt0 |tN (·|x)] = Pt0 , it directly follows from the convexity (equation 20).

Summation term. For each term in the summation, we can also prove the following:

                Exti ∼Pti [DKL (Pti+1 |ti (·|xti )∥Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ))]
                 ≤ Ex∼PtN Exti ∼Pti |tN (·|x) [DKL (Pti+1 |ti ,tN (·|xti , x)∥Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ))].                 (22)

Indeed, we can replace Ex∼PtN Exti ∼Pti |tN (·|x) with Exti ∼Pti Ex∼PtN |ti (·|xti ) and it thus suffices to
prove

DKL (Pti+1 |ti (·|xti )∥Qti+1 |ti (·|xti )) ≤ Ex∼PtN |ti (·|xti ) [DKL (Pti+1 |ti ,tN (·|xti , x)∥Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ))]

for each xti . Since Ex∼PtN |ti (·|xti ) [Pti+1 |ti ,tN (·|xti , x)] = Pti+1 |ti (·|xti ), this again follows from
the convexity.
By combining equation 21 and equation 22, we obtain DKL (Pt0 ,...,tN ∥Qt0 ,...,tN ) ≤ LNELBO (P, Q),
which means the CDE-based upper bound is at most as loose as the commonly used negative
ELBO bound. We can also come to this conclusion directly applying the convexity after show-
ing LNELBO (P, Q) = Ex∼P0 [DKL (Pt0 ,...,tN −1 ,tN |tN ∥Qt0 ,...,tN )], which is also written in Campbell
et al. (2022, page 3), but we chose the above term-by-term derivation since it would give additional
intuitions.


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

Although we state the theorem for a backward CTMC from time s to time t (t < s) and bound
the KL-divergence at time t, here we will just consider the forward CTMC from time 0 to time T
and bound the KL-divergence at time T for simplicity. After this change of the time direction and
interval, the formal statement and proof of Theorem 3.2 is given in Theroem B.4.
To derive the KL-divergence upper bound (KLUB) for continuous-time Markov chains (CTMCs),
                                     dP
we first adopt the change of measure dQpaths
                                        paths
                                              for CTMCs from Section 3 of Ding & Ning (2021).
                                                                                  h             i
                                                                                       dP
Next, we compute and organize the equation for the DKL (Ppaths |Qpaths ) = EPpaths log dQpaths
                                                                                          paths
                                                                                                  .

We consider the following two forward CTMCs over [0, T ]:
                   (
                                  1
                     CTMC 1 : qu+du|u  (y | x) = δxy + Rt1 (x, y)du + o(du),
                     CTMC 2 : qu+du|u (y | x) = δxy + Rt2 (x, y)du + o(du).
                                  2


Here, Rt1 and Rt2 represent the rate matrices of each CTMC, with a finite state space S =
{x1 , · · · , xN }, and du > 0.
We introduce some notations. Define the functions Hti , Htij as follows:
                              Hti := δ(Xt − xi ),       Htij := Htj Ht−
                                                                     i
                                                                        ,
where δ(·) denotes the Dirac delta function, and t− is the left limit of t. By definition, Htij = 1
indicates a transition from xi to xj at time t. The CTMC (Xt )t∈[0,T ] is defined as a function from
the sample space Ω to the path space C ≜ [0, T ] × S, i.e., X : Ω → C.
We define two probability measures over the path space:

      • Ppaths , under which (Xt1 )t∈[0,T ] has the law of CTMC 1.
      • Qpaths , under which (Xt2 )t∈[0,T ] has the law of CTMC 2.

First, we adopt the change of measure for CTMCs from Ding & Ning (2021).
Proposition B.2. (Ding & Ning (2021), Eq. 3.2) Consider a family of bounded real-valued pro-
cesses {κt (i, j)}i,j∈{1,··· ,N } , such that κt (i, j) > −1 and κii (t) = 0. Define (ηt )0≤t≤T as
                                                                            
                                              Y            XN
                               ηt = e−Lt             1 +      κu (i, j)Huij  ,
                                       0<u≤T            i,j=1
              R t PN
where Lt = 0 i,j=1 κu (i, j)Ru1 (i, j)Hui du. This result implies the existence of a probability
measure Q defined by
                                          dQ
                                              = ηt .                                       (23)
                                           dP
The following result allows us to define κt (i, j) for two CTMCs.
Proposition B.3. (Ding & Ning (2021), Eq. 3.4) For the probability measure Q defined in Eq.(23),
if (Xt1 )t∈[0,T ] is a CTMC under P with rate matrix R1 and (Xt2 )t∈[0,T ] is a CTMC under Q with
rate matrix R2 , then R2 satisfies
                                                 X
                                     2
                                   Rii (t) = −       Rt2 (i, j),
                                                 j̸=i

                                 Rt2 (i, j) = (1 + κt (i, j))Rt1 (i, j).

From Proposition A.2, defining κt (i, j) = Rt2 (i, j)/Rt1 (i, j) − 1 (as in Proposition A.1), we can
compute the change of measure between the two CTMC-defined measures Ppaths and Qpaths as
dPpaths
dQpaths .

Now, we are ready to derive the KLUB for CTMCs:


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem B.4. (KL-divergence Upper bound, KLUB) Consider the following two forward CTMCs:
                (
                              1
                  CTMC 1 : qu+du|u  (y | x) = δxy + Rt1 (x, y)du + o(du),
                              2
                  CTMC 2 : qu+du|u (y | x) = δxy + Rt2 (x, y)du + o(du).
Here, Rt1 and Rt2 represent the rate matrices of each CTMC over [0, T ], with a finite state space
S = {x1 , · · · , xN }. Let PT and QT be the resulting probability distributions at the time T of the
outputs of CTMC 1 and 2, respectively. Then we have:
                                                                         
                                                  X      Ru1 (i, j) 
                         DKL (PT ∥QT ) ≤ EPpaths     log           .
                                                 
                                                   ij
                                                          Ru2 (i, j) 
                                                       Hu =1
                                                       0<u≤T
where, Ppaths refers to the distribution over path space (Xt )t∈[0,T ] ∈ [0, T ] × S generated by
running CTMC 1, and Huij = 1 represent the transition of state from xi to xj at time u.

Proof. This result is derived by combining Proposition A.1 and A.2 and rearranging the resulting
expression.


                                     dPpaths
DKL (Ppaths ∥Qpaths ) = EPpaths log                                                      (24a)
                                     dQpaths
                      = EPpaths log ηt−1

                                                                                         (24b)
                                                                                                  
                                  Z t XN                                   Y      N
                                                                                  X
                      = EPpaths           κu (i, j)Ru1 (i, j)Hui du − log   (1 +   κu (i, j)Huij )
                                     0 i,j=1                                 0<u≤T      i,j=1
                                                                                            (24c)
                                                                                                            
                                      N
                                  Z t X                                   X
                                        (Ru2 (i, j) − Ru1 (i, j))Hui du +   (log Ru1 (i, j) − log Ru2 (i, j))
                                                                                                            
                       = EPpaths 
                                                                                                            
                                     0 i,j=1                                    ij
                                                                              Hu   =1
                                                                              0<u≤T
                                                                                                 (24d)
                                                                        
                                  X        1                2
                                                                       
                       = EPpaths 
                                    (log Ru  (i, j) − log Ru  (i, j)) .
                                                                                                (24e)
                                     ij
                                   Hu   =1
                                   0<u≤T

Step (18c) follows from Proposition A.1, while step (18d) is derived by substituting κt (i, j) =
Rt2 (i,j)
Rt1 (i,j)
          − 1 as defined in Proposition A.2. Additionally, step (18e) utilizes the property of the rate
matrix, where j Rt1 (i, j) = 0 for any t and i.
                P

Finally, we denote the distributions generated by CTMC 1 and CTMC 2 at time T as PT and
QT , respectively. Since PT and QT are the marginal distributions of Ppaths and Qpaths at
time T , by the data processing inequality, the KL-divergence DKL (PT ∥QT ) is upper-bounded by
DKL (Ppaths ∥Qpaths ), concluding the proof.
The equality holds if and only if limdt→0 DKL (Pt−dt|t ∥Qt−dt|t ) = 0, for all t ∈ (0, T ]. To derive
equality condition, we decompose Ppaths and use Lemma B.1 to get a bound.

         DKL (Ppaths ∥Qpaths ) = DKL (PT ∥QT ) + Ex∼PT (x) DKL (P0:T −dt|T ∥Q0:T −dt|T )         (25)

                               = DKL (PT ∥QT ) + Ex∼PT (x) DKL (PT −dt|T ∥QT −dt|T )             (26)

                                 + Ex∼PT −dt (x) DKL (P0:T −2dt|T −dt ∥Q0:T −2dt|T −dt )         (27)
                                                   T
                                                   X
                             = DKL (PT ∥QT ) +            Ex∼Pt (x) DKL (Pt−dt|t ∥Qt−dt|t )       (28)
                                                   t=dt


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


It is important to note that the KLUB derived here for CTMCs does not fully capture the case of
discrete diffusion models, where the reverse rate matrix depends on the state. Nonetheless, we
believe the metric derived here provides a useful proxy for estimating the error introduced when
using τ -leaping to sample in discrete diffusion models. Finding KLUB for state-dependent CTMCs
would be an interesting direction for future work.


B.3   P ROOF OF E Q . (9)

Let X i refers to the i-th dimension of X. Define Pti+1 |ti (·|xti ) ≜ PXti+1 |xti and Qti+1 |ti (·|xti ) ≜
PXt1 |xs ⊗ · · · ⊗ PXtd |xs We can now derive the following relationship:


       ECDE (s   t | xs ) ≜ DKL Pt|s Qt|s ≤ DKL P[s,t]|s Q[s,t]|s = KLUBxs (Pt ∥Qt ).

where KLUBxs represents comparing two continuous-time Markov chains (CTMCs), both starting
at the initial point xs .
Now we are ready to prove the result:

                      ECDE (s   t) ≜ EXs ∼Ps [ECDE (s   t | Xs )]
                                   ≤ EXs ∼Ps KLUBXs (Pt ∥Qts t )

                                                                                    
                                                       X      Ru1 (i, j) 
                                     = EXs ∼Ps EP t|s
                                                           log            
                                                                  2 (i, j) 
                                                      
                                                         ij
                                                                Ru
                                                           Hu =1
                                                           0<u≤T
                                                                      
                                                X     R1 (i, j) 
                                     = EPpaths     log u2        
                                               
                                                 ij
                                                       R u (i, j) 
                                                  Hu =1
                                                  0<u≤T

                                     = KLUBPs (Pt ∥Qts t ).


B.4   T ECHNIQUE 1

The approximation is made as follows:
                                                                           "          T t 0
                                                                                              #
                                                                                     Qpath
              DKL (Ppath ∥QT 0                   T t 0
                           path ) − DKL (Ppath ∥Qpath ) = EPpath               log                    (29a)
                                                                                     QT 0
                                                                                      path
                                                                                "                 #
                                                                                       QT t 0
                                                                                        path
                                                              ≈ EQf orward log                        (29b)
                                                                    path                QT 0
                                                                                          path
                                                                           "           T t 0
                                                                                             #
                                                                                      Qpath
                                                              ≈ EQT t 0 log                           (29c)
                                                                    path              QT 0
                                                                                       path
                                                                      T t 0
                                                              = DKL (Qpath  ∥QT 0
                                                                              path )                  (29d)



Equation equation 29a assumes that Ppath ≈ Qfpath
                                                orward
                                                       where Qfpath
                                                                orward
                                                                        refers to the distribution
                                                                                 →t→0
made by forward CTMC. In equation equation 29b, we assume that Qpath ≈ QTpath          . It is im-
portant to note that we can use equation 29a as a formula for KLUB computation, as introduced
in Algorithm 1. However, the results of JYS sampling schedule optimization show little difference
between the two.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Compared to coarser sampling, KLUB computation can be organized as follows:
                                                                        
                                             T             T t 0
                                      XX                 R        (i, j)
  KLUB QT t        QT 0                         Huij log uT 0

            0
               0
                     0    = EQT t 0                                                            (30a)
                               paths
                                       i̸=j u=0
                                                         R  u    (i, j)
                                                                                                
                                             t                              T
                                      XX                 R t (i, j)     XX             RT (i, j)

                          = EQT t 0            Huij log             +         Huij log    
                               paths
                                            u=0
                                                         RT  (i, j)        u=t       RT (i, j)
                                             i̸=j                                 i̸=j
                                                                                                        (30b)
                                                                  
                                                           t
                                          X     R t (i, j) X
                               = EQT t 0   log              H ij .                                    (30c)
                                   paths        RT (i, j) u=0 u
                                             i̸=j


In Eq. (30b), we utilized the fact that under τ -leaping, RuT t 0 (i, j) = RT (i, j) for u ∈ [t, T ] and
RuT t 0 (i, j) = Rt (i, j) for u ∈ [0, t]. In Eq. (30c), the rate matrices are constant over intervals,
allowing us to pull log RRTt (i,j)
                             (i,j) outside the summation.


B.5   T ECHNIQUE 2
                               hP           i
                                 t     ij
Consider the meaning of E         u=0 Hu     ; it calculates the average probability of a transition from
i to j occurring between time 0 and t. If we knew ∂u p(xu = j, xu− = i), this could be found by
Rt
 0 u
    ∂ p(xu = j, xu− = i) du. However, we do not have access to ∂u p(xu = j, xu− = i).
Fortunately, we do know the conditional transition rate ∂u p(xu = j | xu− = i) = Rt (i, j). Let’s
assume that there are maximally single transition of state in each dimension during the time interval,
which is the assumption behind using τ -leaping algorithm for DDMs (Campbell et al., 2022). Using
this, we can rewrite Eq. (30c):

                                                                               
          X     Rt (i, j) X                           X     Rt (i, j) X
 EQT t 0   log             Huij  = EQT t EQt 0      log             Huij Xt = i
   paths        RT (i, j)              paths   paths        RT (i, j)
            i̸=j               t<u≤T                                       i̸=j            t<u≤T
                                                                                                        (31a)
                                                                                                   
                                                                X          Rt (Xt , j)
                                                ≈ EQT t             log               × Rt (Xt , j)∆t (31b)
                                                    paths                  RT (Xt , j)
                                                            Xt ̸=j

Equation Eq. (31a) applies the Law of Total Expectation, and in Eq. (31b), we utilize the equation:
                                   " t               #
                                     X
                                            ij
                             EQt 0       Hu Xt = i ≈ Rt (i, j)∆t,
                                  paths
                                          u=0

where ∆t = t − 0 = t. The approximation becomes exact when there are only one transition in each
dimension during single interval, and this assumption is true for absorb transition matrix.

C     A LGORITHM
In this section, we present the main algorithm for Jump your steps (JYS).

C.1   KLUB COMPUTATION

Please refer to Algorithm 1.
In the case of k-Gillespie, computing KLUB using Algorithm 1 requires the start timestep s, the
end timestep u, and the breakdown timestep t. However, in k-Gillespie, the schedule is determined
not by timesteps but by the number of generated tokens. Specifically, the start number of generated


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tokens ks , the end number of generated tokens ku , and the breakdown number of generated tokens
kt are provided as inputs. Once the corresponding timestep t for a given number of generated tokens
k (i.e., p(t|k)) is determined, Algorithm 1 can be used to compute KLUB(Qks →kt →ks ∥Qks →ku ).
Note that the noise schedule determines the probability pt of each token being masked at time t,
enabling us to compute the probability of k tokens are unmasked at time t. Let pt denote the
probability that a token will be unmasked at time t. Now, imagine that we implement the forward
process qs|0 . First, we sample a value between 0 and 1 from a uniform distribution for each token;
Second, tokens with values greater than pt are masked. The reverse process p(t|k) can be derived
similarly: assign a random value between 0 and 1 to each token and find the value of t such that
exactly k tokens have values greater than pt . This approach allows us to effectively sample p(t|k).

                       Algorithm 1: Computation of KLUB(Qs t u ∥Qs u )
Require:
    θ: Diffusion model parameters
    s, t, u: Timesteps, with s > t > u
    pdata : Data distribution
    N : Number of Monte Carlo samples
Ensure:
    KLUB: Computed KLUB value
 1: Initialize KLUBu ← 0 and KLUBd ← 0
 2: for iteration = 1 to N do
 3:      Sample X0 ∼ pdata                                     ▷ Sample from data distribution
 4:      Sample Xs ∼ qs|0 (Xs | X0 )                                   ▷ Forward process to s
                         θ
 5:      Sample Xt ∼ pt|s (Xt | Xs )            ▷ If we use Eq. (29a), Xt ∼ qt|0 (Xt | X0 ).
 6:      Set ∆t ← s − t
                                                     Rθ (X ,j)
         Update KLUBu ← KLUBu + j ∆tRtθ (Xt , j) log Rθt (Xts ,j)
                                       P
 7:                                                                                 ▷ Eq. (15)
                                                      T
 8:      Increment KLUBd ← KLUBd + 1
 9: end for
10: Compute KLUB ← KLUBu /KLUBd                                           ▷ Final KLUB value
11: return KLUB


C.2   J UMP YOUR STEPS

Please refer to Algorithm 2.

C.3   k-G ILLESPIE A LGORITHM

To aid readers’ understanding, we include the k-Gillespie algorithm (Zhao et al., 2024). Please
refer to Algorithm C.3. The algorithm is structured as follows: first, the backward rate matrix is
calculated. Then, the holding time for k transitions is computed to update t, and k transitions are
performed sequentially.

D     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
Golden Section The golden section search was stopped if the difference between the newly opti-
mized t and the previous t was smaller than T /2048. The maximum number of iterations was set to
32, but usually, the iterations were completed within 8 steps.

CountDown We use SEDD (Lou et al., 2024) for loss function and the DiT (Peebles & Xie, 2023)
as a model architecture, the noise schedule followed the log-linear scheme proposed in the SEDD
paper. KLUB computation was done with num samples = 2048, and one golden section search
took approximately 4 seconds.

CIFAR10 The pretrained model provided by CTMC (Campbell et al., 2022) was used. For CI-
FAR10, with num samples = 1024, one golden section search took about 30 seconds.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Algorithm 2: Jump Your Steps
Require:
    2K : Number of function evaluations
    T, 0: Maximum and minimum timesteps
Ensure:
    K ≥ 1: Number of iterations
 1: Initialize Timesteps ← (T, 0)
 2: for k = 1 to K do
 3:     Initialize Timesteps∗ ← ()
 4:     for each pair (s, u) in Timesteps[: −1] and Timesteps[1 :] do
 5:          Compute t ← GoldenSection (t, KLUB(Qs→t→u ∥Qs→u ))
 6:          Update Timesteps∗ ← Timesteps∗ + (t)
 7:     end for
 8:     Initialize Timesteps∗∗ ← ()
 9:     for each pair (ti , tj ) in Timesteps[: −1] and Timesteps∗ [1 :] do
10:          Update Timesteps∗∗ ← Timesteps∗∗ + (ti , tj )
11:     end for
12:     Update Timesteps ← Timesteps∗∗
13: end for
14: return Timesteps


                     Algorithm 3: k-Gillespie’s Algorithm with Corrector Steps
Require:
    θ: Diffusion model parameters
    k: number of token generated in a single step
    L: sequence length
 1: Initialize time t ← 1
 2: Initialize sample x ← MASKL
 3: for i = 1 to L do
                                  l      θ     l
 4:     Compute backward rate rP  i = R̂i (x, Gi (x))
                              l          l
 5:     Calculate total rate r = i̸=l ri
 6:     Sample holding time τ l ∼ Exp(rl )
 7:     for k = 1 to K do                                             ▷ Make multiple state transitions
 8:          Get dimension of transition l∗ = SORTED(τ l )[k]
                            ∗          ∗           ∗        ∗             ∗
 9:          Update state xl ← Cat(rl ) where rl = r1l∗ (r1l , . . . , rSl )
10:     end for                 ∗
11:     Update time t ← t − τ l
12:     if t ≤ tmin then
13:          break
14:     end if
15: end for
16: Find most likely values for the ungenerated dimensions x ← arg maxx0 pθt (x0 | x)
17: return x



Monophonic Music The pretrained model provided by CTMC (Campbell et al., 2022) was used.
KLUB computation was performed with 2048 samples, and one golden section search took about
20 seconds.

Text The pretrained model provided by SEDD (Lou et al., 2024) was used. With num samples =
256, one golden section search took 120 seconds.

E     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

E.1   E FFICIENCY OF THE JYS A LGORITHM IN S AMPLING S CHEDULE O PTIMIZATION


                                                   23
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     JYS FID (10K) / Uniform FID (10K)


                                                                                                                                                                          Optimization time (seconds)
                                                                                  JYS PPL / Uniform PPL
                                          Number of Function Evaluations                                    Number of Function Evaluations                                                               Number of Function Evaluations                     Number of Function Evaluations
                                              (a) CIFAR-10
                                           NFE=256  / 1024 -> 1hour 30min                                       (b) Text generation                                                                            (a) CIFAR-10                                     (b) Text generation



   Figure 10: The effect of the number of Monte Figure 11:     We measured the wall-clock
   Carlo samples on the performance of the JYS time required for optimizing the JYS sampling
   schedule.                                    schedule in a practical setup using a single
                                                24GB NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.


                                                                                                                                                    Generative Perplexity (↓)
                                                                                                                                 𝜏-leaping-Euler                                                                                          𝜏-leaping-Euler
                                                                  FID (10K, ↓)


                                                                                 Number of Function Evaluations                                                                                         Number of Function Evaluations
                                                                                                          (a) CIFAR-10                                                                                       (b) Text generation

 Figure 12: Error bars or standard deviations for the quantitative metrics are shown, with the max-
 imum and minimum values represented as shaded regions and the mean value indicated by a solid
Uniform ; max - min = 0.52 / JYS ; max - min = 0.23
 line.
Uniform ; max - min = 0.54 / JYS ; max - min = 0.75
 To inspect the practical utility of our algorithm, we investigate the optimization time to get JYS
 schedule. When optimizing the sampling schedule, there is a trade-off: increasing the number
 of Monte Carlo samples for KLUB estimation improves the reliability of the estimation but also
 increases computational demands. Our goal is to use the minimum number of samples necessary
 while maintaining reliable performance.
 We conducted experiments on CIFAR-10 and a text generation task to evaluate this trade-off (see
 Figure 10). Our findings show that reducing the number of Monte Carlo samples to as few as 16 does
 not result in a significant performance drop. We hypothesize that the sampling schedule optimization
 is robust with fewer samples because the KLUB, which our optimization aims to minimize, does not
 vary greatly between the sample trajectories (see Figure 4).
 Based on these results, we measured the time required for the JYS sampling schedule optimization
 on a practical setup using a single 24GB NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU (Figure 11). Note that with more
 GPUs, the Monte Carlo sampling could be parallelized, further reducing the time. For a sampling
 schedule with NFE=64, the optimization took only 45 seconds in CIFAR-10 and 5 minutes on the
 text generation model (SEDD-small). In contrast, AYS required approximately 6 GPU hours for
 NFE=50 on CIFAR-10 and 32 GPU hours for ImageNet 256×256 with RTX6000 GPUs (Sabour
 et al., 2024).
 Importantly, this time cost applies only to the initial sampling schedule optimization; once opti-
 mized, there is no additional inference cost.

 E.2                                     E RROR BARS AND S TANDARD D EVIATIONS FOR Q UANTITATIVE M ETRICS

 In Figure 12, we report the minimum, maximum, and mean values from experiments conducted with
 three random seeds on CIFAR-10 and the text generation task. The results show minimal differences
 across the three seeds, demonstrating the robustness of our metrics to random seed variations. This


                                                                                                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Performance Improvement ratio
             (JYS / Model size)


                                                                              FID (10K, ↓)
                                       Number of Function Evaluations                        Number of Function Evaluations

      Figure 13:  Relative performance gains                                 Figure 14: Performance comparisons on
      from JYS compared to model size scaling.                               CIFAR-10.



robustness likely stems from generating a sufficiently large number of samples (10K for FID and
1,024 for generative perplexity) before performing the measurements, thereby reducing variability.
For CIFAR-10, the average difference between the maximum and minimum FID (10K) values is
0.37, while for text generation, the average difference in perplexity (PPL) values is 0.65—both
negligibly small.

E.3   P ERFORMANCE I MPROVEMENTS ACHIEVED BY JYS

To demonstrate the impact of JYS, we compared its performance gains to those achieved by in-
creasing the model size. In Figure 13, we show the reduction in generative perplexity (PPL) when
transitioning from a uniform to a JYS sampling schedule for each NFE, alongside the reduction ob-
served when scaling the model from SEDD-small to SEDD-medium. This comparison highlights the
proportion of performance improvement attributable to JYS relative to that achieved by increasing
the model size.

E.4   C OMPARISON WITH H EURISTIC S AMPLING S CHEDULES

To provide a more comprehensive evaluation, we conducted additional experiments comparing our
approach with heuristic sampling schedules beyond the uniform baseline. Specifically, we tested a
sampling schedule matching the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of LogSNR-Cosine and heuristic sched-
ules inspired by the timestep sampling from (Esser et al., 2024), which allocate more sampling steps
toward the middle (Sigmoid) and both ends (Logit). As shown in Figure 14, these heuristic schedules
consistently underperformed compared to the JYS schedule, which achieved the best performance
across all NFE values on both CIFAR-10 and text generation tasks. This underscores the challenges
of improving sampling schedules solely through heuristic methods.

E.5   JYS S AMPLING S CHEDULES FOR NFE ̸= 2K

In this subsection, we introduce a method for applying the JYS sampling schedule when the number
of function evaluations (NFE) is not a power of two (2K ). Our proposed approach involves selecting
an appropriate subset from an optimized sampling schedule. We will explain this with a concrete
example for easier understanding. For instance, if we aim to perform sampling with NFE = 48, we
first optimize the JYS schedule for NFE = 64 = 26 . The next step is identifying a suitable subset
from this schedule.
To select 48 steps from the NFE = 64 schedule, we proceed as follows: (1) all time points corre-
sponding to NFE = 32 = 25 are included, and (2) among the additional time points introduced by
JYS NFE = 64, we filter based on their KLUB values. Specifically, we add t2i in descending order
determined by KLUB(Qt2i−1 t2i t2i+1 ∥Qt2i−1 t2i+1 ). This ensures to include t such that most ef-


                                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             FID (10K, ↓)
              Uniform (NFE=64)                                      Jump Your Steps (NFE=40)
                                            Number of Function Evaluations

                 Figure 15: Quantitative performance comparisons on CIFAR-10.


              Uniform (NFE=128)                                     Jump Your Steps (NFE=96)


              Uniform (NFE=256)                                    Jump Your Steps (NFE=112)


Figure 16: Qualitative performance comparisons on CIFAR-10. For the JYS schedule, the NFE
was selected as the minimum NFE that achieves the same or lower FID compared to uniform.


fective in reducing our optimization target, the compounding decoding error (CDE), in the sampling
schedule.
Figure 15 illustrates the results of CIFAR-10 image generation experiments using the JYS sampling
schedule constructed by the above method. Notably, even when NFE is not a power of two, the
JYS sampling schedule achieves comparable performance to the uniform baseline with only half the
NFE. Figure 16 qualitatively compares the generation results using JYS sampling schedules with
NFE equal to or lower than NFE = 128, 256. As can be seen from the figure, even when using a
lower NFE, JYS produces generation results of the same quality level.

E.6   Q UALITATIVE RESULTS

In this subsection, we present qualitative comparison between Jump Your Steps and Uniform sam-
pling schedule under various NFEs.

Toy 2D datasets Figures 17, 18, and 19 display generated samples under various NFE and sam-
pling schedules. Each models are trained with the uniform transition kernel. All results were gen-
erated using the Euler τ -leaping sampler. It is evident that JYS produces higher-quality samples
compared to the uniform sampling schedule.

CIFAR10 Figure 20 shows generated images with various NFE and sampling schedule. All results
are generated using Euler τ -leaping sampler.


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Uniform


  JYS
                                                                                Ground Truth


            NFE = 2            NFE = 4           NFE = 8          NFE = 16


                           Figure 17: Toy 2D dataset results - Moons.


Uniform


  JYS
                                                                                Ground Truth


            NFE = 2            NFE = 4           NFE = 8          NFE = 16


                           Figure 18: Toy 2D dataset results - Circles.


Uniform


 JYS
                                                                                Ground Truth


            NFE = 2            NFE = 4           NFE = 8          NFE = 16


                      Figure 19: Toy 2D dataset results - Gaussian Mixture.


Text Figure 21, 22, 23, 24 show generated text samples with various NFE and sampling schedule.
All results are generated using Euler τ -leaping sampler.


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  NFE = 32


  NFE = 64


 NFE = 128


 NFE = 256


                                                     Uniform                                                                Jump your steps (Ours)

                                                             Figure 20: CIFAR10 results.
', while playing for Vevian, a Habs minor when he was sent to to Providence, Nova Scotia.\n\nThere were signs, while seated in the stands, of a self awareness between
Giiroz and Vevian, who were son who raised him how the three could possibly stand in front of Habs’s jersey to help ease his mind.\n\n“Isn’t an insular thing, " Giiroz said.
"They’re your teammates, and they love helping you."\n\nAdvertisement\n\nJosh willre B. Rogers mentioned Dustin Quick\'s name up on Bruins jerseys. The team plays
Wednesday night, Feb. 4, in Bel Air N.J. J. M. Stringer/AP\n\n“I don’t think anybody’d be mad at anybody to resell them like that," Giiroz said. "Of things."\n\nThe aren’t
talking of Team No. 3. Currently the team\'s name is A6, the Gi five nickname, but already there’s been enough sales to name more than 100 players, in addition to using
the team\'s name in games.\n\n“It’s really important and I’ve got a lot of people who don’t like us at all, but some people may not and all I am saying is that we are selling        NFE = 64, Uniform
them our jerseys, these jerseys can look different, there’s a lot more trust than people would like it to have, ” Giiroz said.\n\n“I don’t speak for the guys that even have
them, but the will doesn’t have to feel for them as the ego does," Granoff said."Just don’t ever concern or complain.”\n\nAdvertisement\n\n“I was walking around town,
they can’t be named U27 and A34 and what could I say? Two years ago they mentioned about them that they were the Bruins No. 3," he told NewHockey’s Plex
Myers.\n\nIt appeared first on Jarusthir\'s jersey when his car, recently registered seven times, was stolen in 2012.\n\nThe forwardian Johnson said he\'s one of the six in the
No. 3 team, "because I can’t get my name. I am one of the game. It was sold and the decision they made is theirs."<|endoftext|>Health is number one during pregnancy in
America, with a lack of complications, such as heart disease, heart problems and health or mental problems. Finally, the Health Institutes is slowly diluting itself in its own
way: Last year, the health care debate in the country was challenging yet electrified Liberal leaders. (Still, anyone who doubts that public health care will be at hand could
easily claim that it fails to deliver no matter how hard you work.)\n\nThe big guns on health care when it comes to health America’s health crisis have been the dismantling
of some traditional government programs.\n\nThe Health and Human Health Service is drawing up a starting line here in Washington this week for a 180-page health
reform proposal. The White House is still drafting its latest draft law, which will have its first version by the end of the year.\n\nThe economist is in charge of the
department of health care and troubled Medicaid Services, which plans to eliminate up to 750,000 employees next year — accusing health insurance buyers of taking
profits away from communities. Mr. Price, a former GOP congressman in the House, said this interview that he would work on expanding exclusive hospital care for sick
patients, citing concerns over either public or professional spending on drug use.\n\nMs. A. also contends that there is a surge in medical care and highlights challenges
such as rising insurance premiums, growing market sizes and shrinking health benefit programs in key markets such as hospitals, universities, schools and
hospitals.\n\n(Fix: Watch the full video to calls out on uninsured’s rise on gov)\n\nIn an e-mail, Mrs. C Perry countered that any new overhaul of pay would typically
“seriously affect our workforce and its cost and administrative efficiency.”\n\nThat\'s because strong health care programs have bolstered smart young people as an
alternative to older adults — thanks, in part, to pressures such by Democrats and the Congress to share savings on top-stealing causes.\n\nFirst, first and foremost, the
health, today’s economy — health care, which is being replicated heavily, sees a rise of information technology workers who are fluent in certain kinds of work — peaked
in 1996. That number of health employees reached 1.2 million in 2010. The current number is smaller than most of the working-age workforce, by registered
age.\n\nAmerica\'s young people\n\nAlso, the Federal government restricts healthcare delivery to certain low-income people so that they can not be forced into the
insurance market. Two-thirds'


                           Figure 21: Generated samples using uniform schedule (NFE = 64).
' organization used it for a marketing campaign, some of them. The office was sent to to Providence, arcana. Overall, the organization generated $12 million in revenue for
2015 and $8 million in tax revenue spending.\n\nGreg Cohn, who was one who first knew how the organization came to Boston, came back in Toronto and now visits
Boston to help players.\n\n"That man hates me," he said. "This organization, the player, they come from special circumstances and often in the world, and they love helping
you."\n\nHe assured us they will be found. But when I heard their name, I had to wonder if they would work to build the organization, and bring those guys out of the
shadows themselves and bring a little Pete Noles to the Boston scene.\n\n“I don’t know if we are containing the cream, but that was exactly what I thought when asked to
speak when that organization went to Toronto,” said Eric Krodyns, the team\'s director. AIM then asked Cohn why he was still in Boston. He declined to comment on the                 NFE = 64, JYS
name and structure of that office.\n\nOnce the team began the reporters to Boston,, the staff had problems raising the idea of calling into those reporters, he explained. He
said he chuckled after listening to many plays at Soarin’s. “But I am the man that we are identifying with."\n\n\nOne can completely swear he wouldn’t. The Royals are
destined for nothing like the White Sox, and they are be heading back to The kid’s dreams only if teams are willing to bless that and turn them into something that will
allow them to totally get there. Wow, not easy, does it?\n\n"Just don’t ever let the scouts use their names on the field, don’t let them leave town, let their not show in a lot of
games. A candid scout is what I’ve heard a million times, but that’s a very serious thing," he told New America Baseball’s Scott Davis. “[It is a] catalyst for either, for a
split second, a six or seven people that just might be there. That organization has given us a chance to get back into the rotation in the spring. Our team has showed us a
really, really great game.”\n\nAs of how to live out this season of the Mets? This is pretty chime. The real road is to make the World Series. They really surprise other teams
as always. Sources from their three league report told Yahoo Sports last month the Mets’ schedule is now second in its baseball calendar. Last year they’re not in the 11th,
yet using baseball calendar.\n\nStill, anyone that should be awarded a win Sunday night at home could easily not make it over weekend, no matter how hard they
work.\n\nBut Larry Anthony, CEO of Major League Baseball Baseball of America said it’s hard not to understand why some teams could not easily win during the regular
season.\n\n"We should stop losing, here in Toronto, three days a week. That can\'t be in for half."\n\nGet the latest in USA our Page View Map for first looks at the
European and American leagues.\n\nLead image RICA / taken under a Creative Commons.<|endoftext|>Toronto’s craft sector will gross up about 2.92 percent this year as
foreign-owned buyers are taking starts away from U.S. regional chains, a Toronto bank in a new study said Friday.\n\nThere compounding is an undersupply of new
restaurants, as new restaurants next expect to take hold next year. By then, Service Canada already is set to double as a U.S.-based market — now the fastest-topping craft
market — and about 29 restaurants in Canadian craft markets will be added this year, going by 6.48 percent to 14.51 percent, CIBC economist with HBC’s CIBC Corp.
said.\n\nThe eOBA study led by CNAB Brendon Barley said new restaurants typically “seriously drain our workforce and demoralise the restaurant industry.”\n\nThat\'s
last fall\'s report from 2009 to March when more than 700 restaurants are currently insupplied, in part because of pressures such as an internet industry struggling to place
value on top-staple craft.\n\n“First and foremost, based to Statistics Canada’s data — which has tracked which industries are investing heavily, including the rise of cheap
Canadian workers, new Canadians, major property market reforms — there are just over 150 craft restaurants across the continental U.S. in 2010. The craft sector is
Canadian in most descriptive terms,” Barley noted.\n\n“That\'s where people are most prepared to work and businesses are being forced to try to adapt themselves," he
said.\n\nOne of the other ramifications is a poor Canadian pace'


                   Figure 22: Generated samples using Jump Your Steps schedule (NFE = 64).


                                                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


'. I still like it as though. But now\'s the right time for me to say yes. And the right time for to say yes, the right time to say yes is to have a good time for me to finish this
question."\n\nDonald said, Trump emerged from meeting his father in a private school, took parting shots at one of the few people who he has a connection with. He\'s so
strong, and he\'s one of the strongest people he\'s seen.\n\nIt\'s like Donald Trump is over it\n\n"It\'s been a 100 percent experience," Trump told CNN after he shot him,
"and it\'s not all, I think, it\'s just me. But I feel like I made me feel like something. I made me feel like something. But I\'d never felt this way, I\'d never ever need to go.
But almost fading away, right now he\'s feeling something special."\n\nThis is my father\n\nTrump calls Trump one of the heen talks he\'s ever seen. "Then he did some
words like, and he asked me a question, "and then he said, "I don\'t need to you, just shoot me." I said, I\'ve talked to at least one man, I can\'t wait to do that."                  NFE = 256, Uiform
Trump\n\nAre we going to want to be his father to play on?\n\nTypically in interviews, Trump says you have to ask, and they won\'t change anything. But he says he does
want to be his father in the world. Even if he\'s depressed by what\'s happening, he says there is more from him. He added, "I really want to get myself out there and be the
best person in the world, so go out there."\n\nBut is what want? Trump, says, "I don\'t have to worry much about myself anymore, but I just want to make my day
better."\n\nEveryone\'s going to hate him, Donald Trump\n\n"I am a great moment when people say I hate," he said. "I also know him, the world has a saying called,
\'Here\'s my son,\' and I\'m gonna like it. But also, I\'m really really proud of what he does. He brings so much. His life to me that makes him me. A hero to the world. But
all the conversation going through, it\'s almost like I find out who his father really is. But then I go just don\'t he. Just have that son, and be a different dad. That is going to
happen eventually.\n\nTrump says change, "sometimes it just takes time, and then sometimes it does, but I think he\'ll be different, and he will be the new leader. I hope he
will be my mentor. And eventually, I may just be his replacement," Trump added.\n\nHe\'s going to have a Republican convention here, anyway\n\nNobody will tell you
how big an impact that Donald Trump made in Cincinnati because he had because of the first Republican convention in America. "I said to all of the white people, much of
all of the white people, I was like, \'You don\'t know enough about these people.\' I, to mention all that, tried to sound like a little too obvious and too politician," he said on
CNN.\n\nTrump denies that kind of thing. "You should come across it."<|endoftext|>The Donald Trump will meet in January on Russia\n\nPresident Donald Trump leaves
the House on Friday January 20, 2017.\n\nWASHINGTON, DC (WASHINGTON, Jan 20, 2017) —He has never been a man, but a partisan, both ways of looking on the
scale of controversies in 2016 and 2016.\n\nWhile Mr. Trump touted his vision on such issues, he retired from last year’s presidential election, even after he was earlier this
year fired by members of the FBI and James Comey sent a letter in which he recommended Clinton not a presidential nominee.\n\nThen last month, Trump denounced the
timing of his letter, say it was an obstruction only as it was not newsworthy.\n\nEven as he met with the FBI, Donald Trump rejected the apology to the media.
(Reuters)\n\nMr. Comey, the man who led the Russia probe, said on Meet With The Press that he met with frontrunner, Hillary Clinton 2016, because it was the best way to
make concessions.\n\n“I thought she would just something to me because she saw the favoritism of me, and she did so little for Clinton. That’s not the deal,” Trump said of
him last week.\n\nMeanwhile, Mr. Comey is not a Democrat. “You know, this is going to be a great transition,” Mr Mr. Comey’s statement said, and it informed the
president that he will next meet on Russia.\n\n“It’s winding up a very long time, very long,” Mr. Comey said. “And'


                          Figure 23: Generated samples using uniform schedule (NFE = 256).


'Story highlights Bush and Clinton as though they have more things to do\n\nBut Obama finally leads\n\nSome 47 percent of voters say they split the popular vote in
November if the United States president wins the White House\n\nAccording to the latest Fox News poll, Americans everywhere from about 28 to 55 believe they would
know if the other 48% of the U.S. has been president\n\nIt\'s clear why voters, on the one hand, believe that it\'s the most difficult years, why they believe Obama is
president.\n\nObama has not spoken for as many months and says he cares deeply about him. More recently, he says months turned to me to nothing.\n\n"You\'ve got to
wait until or until next month knows what\'s all going on?" he says.\n\n"I\'m staying here in 14 more years," Obama replies. "I don\'t think right now that\'s the way to
go."\n\nBack to 2008\n\nBy the vast majority of the vote, Obama\'s up 44 percent. His support in the U.S. is about 16.2 percent, less than three points recorded by the                 NFE = 256, JYS
Presidents George W. Bush and , though his leads has already climbed to about 50 points. That\'s one of those numbers that was crucial to Obama in Virginia.\n\nIf Obama
is now leading Clinton in an effort to capitalize on the last presidential victory in November, Democrats won\'t have a victory, and they won\'t have anything official at
all.\n\nThere are four notable candidates in the White House, and let\'s just ask what the real candidates might be. Former President. W. Bush? We really know what he is:
He said Obama was one of the candidates in the debate. The candidates were named.\n\nBut former President. W. Bush, "Especially with presidential politics, doing this is
impossible." Former U.S. Gen. George E. Bush Obama maintained his clear lead in this debate. (Getty)\n\n"I think we have probably just come close to winning," he said.
"I also know that many the people have a hand-to-hand and some of the number of other candidates is rising. But also, I guess I don\'t know what Bush would think of me,
and I don\'t know what that would say, and we have to try on. But all the issues going through a president that I think I will overcome are really, really tough. But then I still
just don\'t think anyone really knows who he is."\n\nCritics of the status quo question the Obama presidency. How the circumstance will change: "Actually, I think
Washington will change the way it might get but I think people are suffering from poverty and lot of problems and I don\'t think this country will be so successful. I think
other countries may not be taking care," said Dale Schleulich, past president of the Republican factions here, Texas and Wisconsin. (AP)\n\nThe southern states are key
elections in a broader political strategy because they are not part of North America.\n\nPresident U.S. Obama won the support of several of the eastern states, including
states in Ohio and Pennsylvania.\n\nSack has been raking in inroads in California, although he recently secured a majority in Wisconsin.\n\nOregon also is outshot in the
U.S. presidential primary.\n\nThe political battle across America is tight. (The Texas debate is still on.)\n\nThe Ohio showdown: Ohio\n\nThere are polls indicating that
Obama believes Republicans won\'t lose again four times next year, with maybe none voting the other way. However, he might take in a majority of the western states,
leading up to Ohio in 2016.\n\nWhere the mirror may look\n\nSixty-six percent of Democrats say they\'re leaning in this election, according to Gallup.\n\nDemocrats have
meanwhile been consistent on trade and national policy, incorporating racially polarized Republican policies.\n\nIn Vietnam this fall.\n\nJapan and South Korea benefit
from a new U.S. relationship with Asian rivals, as China explores its role.\n\nJapan qualifies as trade ties with China, where there\'s rising the ante to the conflict.
(Reuters)\n\nN.J. Gov. Chris Christie takes over the federal government this June. The state is in for a tough task as president-elect, and political experts expect he\'ll make
an upset bid if Republicans win.\n\nVoters across the U.S. overwhelmingly favor him- for president and liberal candidate Bernie Sanders of New York, won by a landslide.
Sanders has secured nearly 60% of Democratic primary voters.\n\nPresident George W. Bush isn\'t a good Cabinet secretary either, even further this year though Clinton
has a great lead in the U.S. Senate -- which made him the party\'s leader in the race. A Gallup poll of the 2012 race earlier this year showed he is struggling to keep up with
his rivals.\n\nGenerally, a mere 47% say the least say in some'


                  Figure 24: Generated samples using Jump Your Steps schedule (NFE = 256).


                                                                                        29
