Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G ENERALIZATION AND
D ISTRIBUTED L EARNING OF GF LOW N ETS
 Tiago da Silva                                               Amauri Souza
 Getulio Vargas Foundation                                    Federal Institute of Ceará
 tiago.henrique@fgv.br                                        amauriholanda@ifce.edu.br

 Omar Rivasplata                                                   Vikas Garg
 University of Manchester                                          YaiYai Ltd and Aalto University
 omar.rivasplata@manchester.ac.uk                                  vgarg@csail.mit.edu

 Samuel Kaski                                              Diego Mesquita
 Aalto University, University of Manchester                Getulio Vargas Foundation
 samuel.kaski@aalto.fi                                     diego.mesquita@fgv.br



                                            A BSTRACT
         Conventional wisdom attributes the success of Generative Flow Networks
         (GFlowNets) to their ability to exploit the compositional structure of the sam-
         ple space for learning generalizable flow functions (Bengio et al., 2021). Despite
         the abundance of empirical evidence, formalizing this belief with verifiable non-
         vacuous statistical guarantees has remained elusive. We address this issue with the
         first data-dependent generalization bounds for GFlowNets. We also elucidate the
         negative impact of the state space size on the generalization performance of these
         models via Azuma-Hoeffding-type oracle PAC-Bayesian inequalities. We lever-
         age our theoretical insights to design a novel distributed learning algorithm for
         GFlowNets, which we call Subgraph Asynchronous Learning (SAL). In a nutshell,
         SAL utilizes a divide-and-conquer strategy: multiple GFlowNets are trained in
         parallel on smaller subnetworks of the flow network, and then aggregated with an
         additional GFlowNet that allocates appropriate flow to each subnetwork. Our ex-
         periments with synthetic and real-world problems demonstrate the benefits of SAL
         over centralized training in terms of mode coverage and distribution matching.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Generalization is a long-standing problem in the machine learning literature, asking whether a
learning algorithm can reliably make predictions beyond the data it was trained on (Valiant, 1984;
Vapnik, 2000; Catoni, 2007; Alquier & Guedj, 2017; Dziugaite et al., 2021; Lotfi et al., 2024a). In
an age of rapid deployment of AI models to end-users, there has been an emerging interest in the
design of theoretically robust algorithms, with remarkable results for GANs (Mbacke et al., 2023),
diffusion models (Li et al., 2024), transformers (Lotfi et al., 2024a;b), and graph neural networks (Ju
et al., 2023; Tang & Liu, 2023). In this pursuit for developing models with proven generalizability,
a rich set of tools has been created (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 2015; Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David,
2014), with McAllester (1998; 1999)’s PAC-Bayesian theorems often providing the tightest
statistical guarantees (Pérez-Ortiz et al., 2021; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; 2018; Lotfi et al., 2024b;a).
Notably, however, there is no one-size-fits-all solution for understanding generalization: the diverse
nature of data and learning algorithms demands a distinctly unique approach to each problem.
In the realm of probabilistic methods, for example, it has been widely hypothesized that the outstand-
ing performance of Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets, Bengio et al., 2021; 2023; Lahlou at
al., 2023), which have demonstrated exceptional results in problems such as design of biological
sequences (Jain et al., 2022; Malkin et al., 2022) and combinatorial optimization (Zhang et al.,
2023a;b), to name a few, emerges from their potential to exploit the compositional structure of the
underlying state space to learn a generalizable flow assignment function in a flow network by only


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


observing a fraction of the network’s nodes (Bengio et al., 2021; Nica et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023;
Atanackovic & Bengio, 2024; Krichel et al., 2024). Nonetheless, in spite of the wealth of empirical
evidence indicating that generalization occurs in GFlowNet learning (Nica et al., 2022; Atanackovic
& Bengio, 2024), no work so far has provided non-vacuous high-probability empirical bounds on
the population risk of GFlowNets, which might serve as statistical certificates for generalization.
Given the described scenario, in this paper we develop the first non-vacuous generalization bounds
for GFlowNets in the literature in Section 5. In doing so, the core questions we want to address
in this work are when GFlowNets (provably) generalize and which factors potentially contribute
to diminish their generalization performance. To kickstart our analysis, we present in Section 4 an
example in which a GFlowNet catastrophically fails to generalize even after learning a compatible
flow assignment for over 90% of the flow network. This example demonstrates that, to properly
understand the generalization of GFlowNets, we must consider not only the extension of the
observed flow network but also the specific parts that have been encountered during training, a
fact that is also implicit in popular techniques such as the replay buffer (Vemgal et al., 2023) and
local search (Kim et al., 2024b). From a technical perspective, this implies that the development
of meaningful statistical guarantees for GFlowNets must be based not on data-agnostic theoretical
results, but on data-dependent priors, in the fashion of Dziugaite & Roy (2018); Dziugaite et al.
(2021); Pérez-Ortiz et al. (2021). This observation guides the establishment of the non-vacuous
high-probability bounds for the population risk of GFlowNets in Section 5.1 and distinguishes our
approach from other investigations of GFlowNets generalization (Krichel et al., 2024).
The empirical results in Section 5.1, however, do not provide a fine understanding of which charac-
teristics of the flow network tend to hinder the generalization of GFlowNets. What effect do larger
trajectory lengths, for instance, have on the provable learnability of generalizable flow assignments?
Intuitively, generalization is harder in larger state spaces as, borrowing the terminology from the
reinforcement learning (RL) literature (Bengio et al., 2021), the visited portion of an environment
by an agent constrained by a fixed time budget decreases with increasing environment’s size and,
therefore, the agent would have to rely on increasingly sparse information for learning from larger
trajectories. In Section 5.2, we formalize this intuition through the lens of PAC-Bayesian bounds,
revealing the increasing difficulty in obtaining tight statistical certificates for larger state spaces. To
achieve this, our technical contributions are two-fold: First, an oracle concentration inequality for
the forward Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the learned and targeted flow assignments
(Theorem 5.2) inspired by Malkin et al. (2023)’s interpretation of GFlowNets as variational
inference. Second, an Azuma-Hoeffding-type inequality (Seldin et al., 2012b) for independently
sampled martingales representing the extent to which the learned flow assignment violates the
detailed balance condition (Bengio et al., 2023) in the observed trajectories (Theorem 5.4).
Motivated by these results, we pose the following question: what can we do to mitigate the issues
raised by an inadequate coverage of the state space, as illustrated in Section 4, and larger trajec-
tory sizes, as analyzed in Section 5? As we show in Section 6, the answer lies in breaking up the
flow network into multi-source subnetworks grouped together by a small root network (Figure 3).
In this new paradigm, finding a compatible flow assignment becomes a two-stage process. Firstly,
a different GFlowNet is trained on each subnetwork in a distributed fashion. Secondly, an addi-
tional GFlowNet trained on the root network learns to assign the correct amount of flow to each
subnetwork, as estimated in the previous step. The resulting algorithm, which we call Subgraph
Asynchronous Learning (SAL), has several advantages over the standard approach (Section 6.2). In
particular, each GFlowNet within this framework needs to solve a problem that is relatively simpler
than that of a unique, centralized model. Similarly, the asynchronous nature of the algorithm im-
plies that we are able to visit a considerably larger fraction of the original flow network within a
fixed time window and, therefore, that we get a significantly better coverage of the state space. As a
consequence of this, we are also able to drastically improve the discovery of high-value states within
the flow network, which is a metric of great interest in the GFlowNet literature (Bengio et al., 2021;
Shen et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a; Pan et al., 2023a; Jang et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024b).
In summary, our contributions are:

  1. We construct a family of examples in which a GFlowNet does not generalize even after learn-
     ing a compatible flow assignment on arbitrarily large fractions of the flow network (Section 4);

  2. We provide the first non-vacuous generalization bounds for GFlowNets (Section 5.1);

                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    3. We derive oracle PAC-Bayesian inequalities for the population risk of GFlowNets, emphasiz-
       ing the impact of the flow network’s topology on generalization performance (Section 5.2);
    4. We design the first distributed algorithm for learning GFlowNets with network-level paral-
       lelization, and evaluate its performance in common benchmarks in the literature (Section 6);

The first part of the paper establishes the notation and terminology to be used throughout the paper
and reviews relevant results in the GFlowNet and PAC-Bayes literature, alongside an overview of our
main contributions (Sections 2 and 3). The second part provides a formal treatment of GFlowNets
from the viewpoint of the PAC-Bayesian theory (Section 5). The third and final part outlines the
foundations of SAL and conducts an empirical evaluation of the algorithm in common benchmark
problems (Section 6). We defer the proofs and details of the experiments to the supplement.

2     P RELIMINARIES

Notations and terminology. Let G = (V, E) by a directed acyclic graph (DAG). A forward policy
over G is a Markov transition kernel pF : V × V → [0, 1] supported on G’s edges, i.e., such that
pF (v, ·) is a distribution over {u : (v, u) ∈ E}, for each vertex v. We interchangeably use pF (·|v)
and pF (v, ·) for representing pF . A backward policy pB over G is a forward policy on the transpose
graph G⊤ = (V, E ⊤ ) with E ⊤ = {(u, v) : (v, u) ∈ E}. The uniform policy assigns the same prob-
ability mass to a state’s children, i.e., pU (s′ |s) = 1{s′ ∈Ch(s)}/|Ch(s)| with Ch(s) = {s′ : (s, s′ ) ∈ E}.
We say that G is pointed if there are nodes so and sf , respectively called initial (source) and final
(sink) nodes, s.t. so (resp. sf ) is the only node without incoming (resp. outgoing) edges and, for each
s ∈ V , there is a trajectory (directed path) between so and sf containing s. In this case, a trajectory
τ in G is complete if it starts at so and finishes at sf , which we denote by τ : soQ⇝ sf . Clearly, a for-
ward policy induces a distribution over trajectories starting at s via pF (τ |s) = (s′ ,s′′ )∈τ pF (s′′ |s′ );
when τ is unambiguously complete, we will often omit so from this notation. Lastly, for probability
measures P and Q on the same space, we let KL(P ||Q), χ2 (P ||Q) and TV (P, Q) respectively
denote their Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, χ2 divergence, and total variation distance.
GFlowNets. We represent a GFlowNet (Bengio et al., 2021; 2023; Lahlou at al., 2023) G as a tuple
(S, X , G, A, T , pF , pB , R, F ) consisting of a set of states S, a set of terminal states X ⊆ S, a
pointed DAG G = (S, E), which is called a state graph, an action mapping A : S → 2A associating
each state s with an abstract action space A(s) ⊆ A that is isomorphic to the children of s in G,
a transition function T : ∪s∈S ({s} × A(s)) → S defining how a state s is affected by an action
a ∈ A(s), forward pF and backward pB policies on G, a reward function R : X → R+ attributing
a positive value to each terminal state, and a flow function F : S → R+ such that F |X = R.
Importantly, only the elements of X are connected to the sink node sf of G. When there is no risk of
ambiguity, we will simply write G = (pF , pB , FP    ). The objective of a GFlowNet is to find a pF s.t.
the marginal distribution pT (x) := pF (x|so ) = τ : so ⇝x pF (τ ) over X matches R up to a normal-
izing factor (Bengio et al., 2021). In Appendix A, we illustrate how this abstract representation can
be instantiated to accommodate three frequently considered use-cases (Malkin et al., 2022; 2023).
Learning GFlowNets. In this context, S, X , G, A, T , and R are problem-dependent, while pF , pB ,
and F are unknowns that should be estimated. Remarkably, however, pB is often fixed as uniform
(Shen et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a), an assumption that we make throghout
the paper, albeit most of our theoretical results and all our methods can be extended to the case of
learnable pB . Under these circumstances, many learning objectives have been proposed for learning
pF and F . Two popular choices, which we adopt here, are the trajectory balance (TB, LTB (pF , F ),
Malkin et al., 2022) and detailed balance (DB, LDB (pF , F ), Bengio et al., 2023) losses,
            "                                                                                
                                    2 #                                         ′
                                                                                            2
                                                                          pF (s |s)F (s) 

                    F (so )pF (τ )                         1   X
        E       log                        and      E                log         ′     ′
                                                                                                , (1)
      τ ∼pE         R(x)pB (τ |x)                 τ ∼pE |τ |
                                                                ′
                                                                          p B (s|s )F (s )
                                                                 (s,s )∈τ

in which |τ | represents τ ’s length, x is τ ’s (unique) terminal state, and pE is an exploratory policy.
Intuitively, pE has the role of the data-generating distribution in a standard supervised learning
context and is often defined as pE = (ϵ)pU + (1 − ϵ)pF , an ϵ-greedy version of pF , with pU
denoting an uniform policy; although more sophisticated techniques have been developed (Kim
et al., 2024b; Rector-Brooks et al., 2023; Vemgal et al., 2023). In Appendix A we provide a more


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


thorough overview of GFlowNet learning, including the subtrajectory balance loss (SubTB, Madan
et al., 2022) and divergence-based objectives (Malkin et al., 2023; Lahlou at al., 2023).
Generalization bounds for neural networks. The field of statistical learning theory (Vapnik, 1998;
2000) seeks to develop statistical certificates for the generalization of a learned model by providing
high-probability upper bounds on the population error of an estimator as a function of the observed
empirical risk. In the context of GFlowNets, we ask whether an empirically measured imbalance
based on the observed trajectories, such as the losses in Equation 1 or other locally computed
metrics (see Sections 4 and 5), are appropriate surrogates for the GFlowNet’s overall distributional
accuracy. In particular, we are interested in inductive statistical guarantees, namely, those based
on the training set (as opposed to the transductive setting, in which a test set is used). To this end,
the PAC-Bayes framework of McAllester (1998; 1999; 2013) often provides the tighest bounds
(Pérez-Ortiz et al., 2021; Lotfi et al., 2024b;a; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017). In a nutshell, consider data
X = {Xi }m  i=1 drawn from some data distribution, a significance level δ, an empirical loss L̂(θ, X)
and a population loss L(θ) = EX [L̂(θ, X)] associated to the model’s parameters θ. Given a ‘prior’
(independent of X) distribution Q over θ, a PAC-Bayes bound typically assumes the form

                           Eθ∼P [L(θ)] ≤ Eθ∼P [L̂(θ, X)] + ϕ(δ, P, Q, m).                            (2)
The inequality holds with probability 1 − δ over draws of X, simultaneously for all ‘posterior’
distributions P over θ; and ϕ is a term penalizing the model’s complexity (McAllester, 1999). We
direct the reader to Alquier (2024) for a comprehensive introduction to PAC-Bayesian analysis. For
bounded L, the right-hand side of Equation 2 is termed vacuous if it is larger than an upper bound
of L. Although McAllester’s original works posited that the data were independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) and that the risk function was uniformly bounded (McAllester, 1998; 1999),
recent advances relaxed these assumptions by deriving generalization bounds for non-i.i.d. data
(Seldin et al., 2012b; Barnes et al., 2022), with applications to multi-armed bandits and RL (Fard &
Pineau, 2010; Beygelzimer et al., 2011; Tasdighi et al., 2024), and for unbounded losses limited by
high-probability bounds (Alquier & Guedj, 2017; Haddouche & Guedj, 2023; Casado et al., 2024;
Mbacke et al., 2023). To the best of our knowledge, however, this is the first work promoting the
development of PAC-Bayesian bounds for understanding the generalization of GFlowNets.

3   OVERVIEW OF OUR RESULTS

Before delving into the details of our work in Sections 4, 5, 6 (and further details in the appendices
in the supplement), we provide below a brief discussion around our technical results under the light
of the formalism presented in Section 2, alongside the main ideas they were built upon.
Non-vacuous generalization bounds for GFlowNets. The learning objectives in Equation 1, due
to the unboundedness of the logarithm, cannot be directly incorporated into standard PAC-Bayesian
theorems (McAllester, 2013), which assume that the risk function has at least bounded exponential
moments (Casado et al., 2024; Rodrı́guez-Gálvez et al., 2024a;b). To circumvent this issue, our
empirical analysis in Section 5.1 adopts the recently proposed FCS metric (Silva et al., 2024) as the
risk functional measuring the accuracy of a trained GFlowNet, which may be written as
                    LFCS (pF ) = E(τ1 ,x1 ),...,(τB ,xB ) [TV (pxT1:B , Rx1:B )] ∈ [0, 1],           (3)
where pxT1:B and Rx1:B are the respective restrictions of pT and R to the B-sized multiset
{{x1 , . . . , xB }} ⊆ X of terminal states, and TV is the total variation distance. However, in spite of
easily computable, LFCS is not an appropriate learning objective for GFlowNets due to the potential
numerical instability of the non-log-domain. Instead, we minimize LTB as a surrogate objective
for LFCS during training and evaluate the generalization bound on LFCS in the inductive fashion
mentioned in Section 2. Importantly, Figure 2 shows that the resulting bounds are remarkably tight.
Oracle generalization bounds for GFlowNets. As a complement, we also establish non-empirical
high-probability upper bounds on the population risk of GFlowNets by assuming that a potentially
intractable quantity bounds the corresponding loss function. In Section 5.2, we follow this rationale
and demonstrate that there always is an α > 0 for which the set of policy networks of the form
αpU + (1 − α)pF contains the solution to the flow assignment problem. Armed with such a fam-
ily of models, which guarantee log probabilities uniformly bounded away from zero, we consider

                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the reverse KL divergence risk (Malkin et al., 2023) to avoid explicitly bounding the flow func-
tion F . Although informative, the resulting Theorem 5.2 only considers the trajectories—and not
transitions—as data points. As the number of observed transitions is significantly larger than that of
trajectories, we enrich our results by constructing a martingale difference sequence based on the DB
loss and adapting Azuma’s inequality (Azuma, 1967; Seldin et al., 2012b) to the context of indepen-
dent martingales to derive a transition-level generalization bound for GFlowNets. Both approaches,
which are respectively encapsulated in Theorems 5.2 and 5.4, show that the population risk can be
bounded with high-probability as, apart from technical nuances,

                                                                 log tm
                             Eθ∼P [L(θ)] ≲ Eθ∼P [L̂(θ)] + O                                        (4)
                                                                   nα

in which L̂ is an empirical measure of risk, tm is the maximum trajectory length of the state graph,
and n is the number of observed data points: either trajectories (Theorem 5.2, α = 0.5) or transitions
(Theorem 5.4, α = 1). From an analytical perspective, these results suggest that learning provable
generalizable flow assignments is increasingly harder for state spaces having longer trajectories.

4    W HEN DO GF LOW N ETS NOT GENERALIZE ?

To start our discussion on the generalization of GFlowNets, we introduce simple, but non-trivial,
examples in which a GFlowNet does not learn a generalizable policy network even after minimizing
the loss on an arbitrarily large portion of the state space, raising the questions of when do GFlowNets
generalize and how to measure such generalization, which we investigate in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.
A non-generalizable data distribution. To concretize our arguments, we recall the task of set
generation for GFlowNets (Pan et al., 2023a;b; Bengio et al., 2023; Jang et al., 2024). Each state
corresponds to a subset of a set W = {1, . . . , W } for a given W ; the generative process starts
at an empty set so = ∅ and iterativey adds elements from W to so until a prescribed size T is
achieved. For our purposes, we fix a function u : W → [0, 1], representing the log-utility         of each
w ∈ A(so ) := W and define the reward R associated to S as R(S) = 1{#S=T } exp{ w∈s u(w)}.
                                                                                             P
Also, let pE be a forward policy s.t. pE (·|s) is supported on A(s) \ {1} := W \ ({1} ∪ s) for every
s, i.e., the support of the marginal pE,T of pE on X is the set X ′ of subsets of {2, . . . , W }. We next
show that X ′ covers an arbitrarily large portion of X for specific choices of T and W .
Lemma 4.1. For each ξ ∈ (0, 1), there exist T and W such that |X ′ | ≥ ξ|X |.

The (straightforward) proof of Lemma 4.1 can be found in                  81.25% visited          90.62% visited

Appendix D. Obviously, we cannot hope that a GFlowNet              0.75                                  -greedy

trained by minimizing an empirical risk defined on trajec-         0.50
                                                                                                        p E


tories sampled from pE would generalize to unseen states,
                                                                           L1


as no information regarding u(1) would be available during         0.25

training. To empirically validate our reasoning, we show in        0.00
Figure 1 that a GFlowNet trained on samples from pE fails to            0             200000 0
                                                                                   Training epoch
                                                                                                              200000

learn the right distribution, whereas a standard ϵ-greedy strat-
egy succeeds. It is remarkable, however, that a GFlowNet Figure 1: Convergence speed when
is unable to successfuly sample from the target distribution actions are masked (blue) or not (or-
even after minimizing the empirical risk on samples covering ange) for different state space sizes.
over 90% of the state space. From a statistical viewpoint, this
behavior can be explained via a change of measure inequality: preference over states is not properly
captured by the sampling distribution (pE ). We formalize this intuition in the proposition below.
Proposition 4.2 (Generalization depends on the sampling distribution). Let (pF , pB , R) be a
GFlowNet and pE,T be (any) distribution over X . Also, recall π(x) represents the normalized target
and pT the learned marginal. Define qE,T as an uniform PMF on X , i.e., qE,T (x) = 1/|X |. Then,
                 v                                 "             "
                 u                                                                      2 ##
                 u                                                          pF (τ )
                          2
   TV (pT , π) ≲ (1 + χ (qE,T ||pE,T ))Ex∼pE,T Eτ ∼pB (τ |x)
                 t                                                   log                     , (5)
                                                                         π(x)pB (τ |x)

in which χ2 (P ||Q) represents the χ2 divergence between P and Q.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We interpret Equation 5 in the following way: If the sampling policy (pE,T ) greatly deviates
from the uniform (qE,T ), then a small empirical risk does not necessarily ensure an accurate
distributional approximation. In contrast, Equation 5 does not entail that the uniform distribution
is the optimal choice for sampling trajectories, as it does not address the algorithmic difficulty
of minimizing the empirical risk via SGD. Illustratively, we show in Table 1 in Appendix B the
values of χ2 (qE,T ||pE,T ) when pE,T is far away from qE,T and of χ2 (qE,T ||pϵ,T ) for the ϵ-greedy
policy considered in Figure 1. On a fundamental level, these examples underline the importance of
taking into account the data distribution for understanding generalization performance. Section 5
elaborates on this problem through the lens of PAC-Bayes bounds, albeit with data-dependent priors
(Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; 2018; Dziugaite et al., 2021; Pérez-Ortiz et al., 2021).

5     PAC-BAYESIAN GENERALIZATION BOUNDS FOR GF LOW N ETS
Towards the objective of understanding GFlowNet generalization, we construct high-probability
upper bounds on different risk functions. In Section 5.1, we build upon McAllester’s empirical
bound and Dziugaite’s data-dependent priors to derive the first non-vacuous generalization bounds
for GFlowNets. Then, to gain a clearer understanding of the factors hindering the generalizability of
these models, we provide both trajectory- and transition-level oracle bounds in Section 5.2 by draw-
ing upon the martingale-based PAC-Bayesian theory for non-i.i.d. data (Beygelzimer et al., 2011).

5.1   N ON - VACUOUS EMPIRICAL GENERALIZATION BOUNDS

GFlowNet learning as supervised learning. To rigorously address the generalization of
GFlowNets, we firstly frame the training of these models as a supervised learning problem
(Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014; Atanackovic & Bengio, 2024). For this, we assume that
a set of independently sampled complete trajectories, Tn = {τ1 , . . . , τn }, is drawn from a fixed
distribution and that each trajectory τi is annotated with a noise-free target, yi = pB (τi |xi )R(xi ),
with xi representing τi ’s unique terminal state. Importantly, the only supervision during training
comes from the reward function; we do not make assumptions on the distribution over Tn . In
this context, minimizing LTB corresponds to finding the least-squares solution to the equation
log Z + log pF (τ ) = log pB (τ |x)R(x) in pF . Importantly, this setting differs from conventional
GFlowNet training algorithms, for which the sampling policy depends on the trajectories observed
so far, that is, the trajectories are not independently sampled. Nonetheless, the question of whether
GFlowNets generalize remains relevant even under our relatively simplified conditions, which may
be seen as a single-iteration of an ϵ-greedy strategy (Krichel et al., 2024).
A bounded risk functional for GFlowNets. As mentioned, PAC-Bayesian theory originally
relied on the assumption of bounded risk functions (McAllester, 1998). Despite recent advances in
extending the theory to unbounded losses (Casado et al., 2024; Rodrı́guez-Gálvez et al., 2024a;b;
Haddouche & Guedj, 2023), most generalization bounds still depend on technical and hard-to-verify
conditions, e.g., on exponential moments. For this reason, we use the FCS metric as a measure of
risk (Silva et al., 2024); see Appendix B for an unbiased estimator L̂FCS (pF , Tn ) of LFCS (pF ).
Data-dependent priors for PAC-Bayes. For this, we first recall the techniques originally developed
by Dziugaite & Roy (2017; 2018); Dziugaite et al. (2021) in a striking series of papers for probing
the generalization of overparameterized neural networks in the supervised learning context. To start
with, we state below Dziugaite et al. (2021)’s empirical PAC-Bayes bound, which combines results
from McAllester (2013), Rivasplata et al. (2019), and Boucheron et al. (2013). For completeness,
we also provide a self-contained proof of Proposition 5.1 in Appendix D in the supplement.
Proposition 5.1 (Empirical PAC-Bayesian bounds). For any distribution ζ on parameters θ of pF ,
let LFCS (ζ) = Eθ∼ζ [LFCS (R, pT )] and define L̂FCS (ζ, Tn ) similarly. Also, let α ∈ (0, 1) and let P
be a distribution on θ learned on an uniformly random ⌊(1 − α)n⌋-sized subset T1−α of Tn . Then,
                                                 (      q
              LFCS (P ) ≤ L̂FCS (P, T1−α ) + min p η η(η + 2L̂FCS (P, T1−α )),
                                                   η  +                                             (6)
                                                      2,
                                                                               √
with probability at least 1 − δ over T1−α , in which η := KL(P ||Q)+log
                                                                              2    ⌊(1−α)n⌋/δ
                                                                   ⌊(1−α)n⌋                     and Q is a
distribution that does not depend on T1−α but may depend on Tα := Tn \ Tα .


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When the prior distribution Q is naively chosen (e.g., as a standard Gaussian dis-
tribution), the KL divergence in Equation 6 often dominates the right-hand side
of the equation and results in vacuous bounds, i.e., LFCS (P ) ≤ a 0.8
for some a > 1. To address this issue, the influential work of         Risk (LF CS )
Dziugaite & Roy (2017) proposed the use of a data-dependent Q      0.6 Bound
learned by minimizing the empirical risk functional on a fraction
α of the data and, after learning P by minimizing Equation 6,


                                                                             FCS
                                                                   0.4
evaluating the generalization bound on the remaining (1 − α)
portion of the data, as presented in Proposition 5.1.              0.2
Empirical results. We follow a similar approach to derive the                0.0
first non-vacuous generalization bounds for GFlowNets in the                       Sets Bags Seq. SIX6
literature. For this, we disjointly partition the dataset Tn with
n = 3 · 104 into sets Tα and T1−α with α = 0.6. We learn an Figure 2: Non-vacuous gener-
isotropic Gaussian prior Q on Tα and then a diagonal Gaussian alization bounds for the FCS
posterior P on Tα ∪ T1−α by minimizing the bound in Equation 6. risk functional in Eq. 10.
Finally, the bound is evaluated on T1−α to obtain the statistical certificate (Pérez-Ortiz et al., 2021).
Results in Figure 2 for the tasks of set generation (Pan et al., 2023a; Bengio et al., 2023), bag
generation (Shen et al., 2023; Jang et al., 2024), sequence design (Malkin et al., 2022; 2023; Madan
et al., 2022) with additive rewards, and SIX6 (Jain et al., 2022; Malkin et al., 2022; Shen et al.,
2023) highlight the non-vacuousness of Equation 6 and the generalizability of the trained models.
Please refer to Section 6 and to Appendix B for a detailed description of the experimental setup.
Appendix A describes the design of the GFlowNet for each of these generative tasks.

5.2   O RACLE GENERALIZATION BOUNDS

Although the previous section’s empirical results certify the generalization of the learned policy
network to novel trajectories, they do not necessarily shed light on which characteristics of the
generative task are hindering the model’s generalization capability. In the remaining of this section,
we thus derive generalization bounds that, despite not being directly computable, provide a finer
understanding of which factors play a role when the goal is to learn a generalizable policy. In
particular, we observe that larger trajectories and peakier target distributions tend to make general-
ization harder when a fixed sampling budget is available. In Section 6, we will see how a distributed
algorithm may alleviate these issues (Yagli et al., 2020; Barnes et al., 2022; Sefidgaran et al., 2022).
Trajectory-level bounds. We start by deriving generalization bounds for GFlowNets when the
trajectories are independently sampled (see Section 5.1) and the risk functional is the KL divergence
between the forward and backward policies, i.e., KL(pB ||pF ), in which pB (τ ) ∝ pB (τ |x)R(x).
This choice is motivated by Malkin et al. (2023)’s interpretation of GFlowNets as a hierarchical
variational inference algorithms and by the ability of KL(pB ||pF ) to focus the model on high-
probability regions of the target, which is a desirable trait of GFlowNets. Remarkably, we show
in Lemma B.1 that KL(pB ||pF ) can be bounded by sensibly reparameterizing pF as a mixture
policy. Then, as shown in Theorem 5.2 below, this reparametrization enables developing oracle
generalization bounds in the fashion of the tight results we derived in Section 5.1.
Theorem 5.2. Let G = (pF , pB , F ) be a GFlowNet with policy network pF parameterized as in
Lemma B.1. Also, let Q be a probability distribution over the parameters θ of pF . Denote H[pB ] =
−Eτ ∼pB [log pB (τ )] for pB ’s entropy and MT = maxτ (|τ | log(α−1 maxs∈τ |Ch(s)|)). Then,
                                                           
                                        1  X       p  (τ
                                                    B i  )
      Eθ∼P [KL(π||pT )] ≤ Eθ∼P                log            + (−H[pB ] + MT ) η(P, Q, n),     (7)
                                       m           pF (τi )
                                           1≤i≤m

                                                         √
                                       q
                                           KL(P ||Q)+log 2   n/δ
in which we recall that η(P, Q, n) =                n              and π(x) ∝ R(x) is the target.

A few remarks on the excess risk upper bound of Theorem 5.2. Firstly, the assumption that
trajectories are sampled according to pB (τ ) ∝ pB (τ |x)R(x) is consistent with popular strategies
for learning GFlowNets that focus on sampling trajectories leading to high-reward states more often
than those leading to low-reward states, e.g., using a replay buffer (Deleu et al., 2022). Secondly, in
alignment with well-established practical knowledge, the result in Equation 7 shows it is harder to


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


achieve tighter generalization bounds when the target distribution is spiky with a small entropy term
H[pB ], and when the generative task is composed of longer trajectories or larger action spaces.
Transition-level bounds. For many applications, the number of observed complete trajectories
when training GFlowNets can be orders of magnitude smaller than the number of collected
state transitions. In this context, one may obtain significantly tighter generalization bounds by
interpreting the transitions, and not the complete trajectories, as data samples (Lotfi et al., 2024a;b).
Indeed, it is assumed that GFlowNets’ outstanding potential emerges from its capacity to exploit the
compositional structure of the space characterized by the state graph (Bengio et al., 2021; Nica et al.,
2022; Shen et al., 2023; Atanackovic & Bengio, 2024). To incorporate this structure into our theo-
retical bounds, we shift our focus to the design of Azuma-Hoeffding-type concentration inequalities
(Azuma, 1967; McDiarmid, 1998; Boucheron et al., 2013) applied to the stochastic process induced
by the Markov Decision Process (MDP) governing the data-generating process. For this, we start
defining a martingale difference sequence based on the DB loss (Bengio et al., 2023, Example 5).
Definition 5.3 (A martingale difference sequence for the DB loss). Recall the detailed balance loss
LDB (s, s′ ) = (log F (s)pF (s′ |s) − log F (s′ )pB (s|s′ ))2 . For a fixed sampling policy pE , we let
                M (Si , S<i ) = LDB (Si , Si−1 ) − Esi ∼pE (·|Si−1 ) [LDB (si , Si−1 )|Si−1 ] ,         (8)
where S<i = {S1 , . . . , Si−1 }. Also, we define the natural filtration Ft = σ(S1 , . . . , St ) generated
by the first t states of the Markov process {Si }i≥1 . Clearly, each M (Si , S<i ) is Fi -measurable and
ESi [M (Si , S<i )|F<i ] = 0, i.e., {M (Si , S<i )}i≥1 is a martingale difference sequence.
From this definition, it is immediate that Mt := 1≤i≤t M (Si , S<i ) is a martingale w.r.t. the filtra-
                                                    P

tion {Ft }t≥1 . We defer to Appendix B the discussion regarding its properties and the assumptions
imposed on it for proving Theorem 5.4 below. Additionally, we define
                 1 X                                                1 X 1 X                       (j)  (j)
L(θ) = E                    E [LDB (Si , Si−1 )|Si−1 ] and L̂(θ) =                      LDB (Si , Si−1 )
         τ ∼pE |τ |                                                 n         tj
                  1≤i≤|τ |                                            1≤j≤n      1≤i≤tj

as the population and empirical DB-based risk functionals for GFlowNets. Under these conditions,
Theorem 5.4 complements Theorem 5.2 with a generalization bound based on the DB loss.
Theorem 5.4 (Transition-level generalization bounds for GFlowNets). Let Mt (θ) be the martingale
arising from Definition 5.3, with θ representing the parameters of the forward policy. Also, let Q be a
distribution on θ. Assume that LDB (Si , Si−1 ) ≤ U uniformly on (Si , Si−1 ) and that Mtm (θ)2 ≤ K,
in which tm is the maximum trajectory length. Similarly, define λ ≤ 1/2U and β ∈ (0, 1), and let P
be a data-dependent posterior distribution on θ. Then, with probability at least 1 − δ over the set of
                                  (j)       (j)
independent martingales {So , S1 , . . . , Stj }1≤j≤n such that So = so almost surely,

                         1         h     i                            2      log tm      λK
         Eθ∼P [L(θ)] ≤ Eθ∼P L̂(θ) + αT,n KL(P ||Q) + log                  +          +γ       ,
                         β                                            δ       βT λ       βT

in which T is the number of observed transitions, αT,n = 2β(1−β)nU
                                                                        + βT1 λ , and γ = e − 2.

Similarly to Theorem 5.2, Theorem 5.4 implies that obtaining tighter generalization guarantees is
harder for larger state spaces with longer trajectories when the sampling process is limited by a
maximum number of observable transitions (or states) T , which is an often imposed constraint for
comparing the sample-efficiency of different learning objectives for GFlowNets in the literature
(Pan et al., 2023b;a; Madan et al., 2022; Malkin et al., 2022; 2023). In the next section, we show how
these issues can be addressed via a distributed learning scheme with network-level parallelization.

6    D IVIDE AND C ONQUER : D ISTRIBUTED L EARNING OF GF LOW N ETS
In light of the above analysis, the diverse exploration of state graphs (Section 4) with smaller
trajectory sizes (Section 5) is beneficial for the successful training of GFlowNets. In what follows,
we show how these features can be efficiently implemented by recasting the GFlowNet training as
an embarrassingly parallel divide-and-conquer algorithm, which we call subgraph asynchronous
learning (SAL). This is, to the best of our knowledge, the first method enabling the distributed
learning of GFlowNets with network-level parallelization. We remark that previous work on the
topic (da Silva et al., 2024) promoted only the partitioning of the reward function for parallel
Bayesian inference and that, in stark contrast to SAL, each client learned from the same state graph.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         Algorithm 1 Subgraph Asynchronous Learning
                                                                          Sm
                                                          1: S = So ∪ j=1 Sj ▷ Fixed-horizon partition
                                                          2: Ij = Sj ∩ So for j ∈ {1, . . . , m}
                                                          3: ▷ Local training
                                                          4: parfor j ∈ {1, . . . , m} do
                                                          5:      ▷ Minimize LjATB in Sj with SGD
                                                          6:      (pjF , Fj ) = arg minpF ,F LjATB (pF , F )
                                                          7: end parfor
Figure 3: A fixed-horizon DAG partition with                                            Pm
                                                          8: Ro : x 7→ 1{x∈X } R(x)+ j=1 1{x∈Ij } Fj (x)
three leaves (S1 , S2 , S3 ) and one root (So ).          9: (poF , Fo ) = arg minpF ,F LTB (pF , F, Ro )
For inference, the sampling policy is chosen                                                     j
                                                         10: return {(poF , Fo )} ∪ 1≤j≤m {(pF , Fj )}
                                                                                     S
based on the current state.

6.1   S UBGRAPH A SYNCHRONOUS L EARNING

Overview. There are two ingredients making up SAL: a fixed-horizon partition (FHP) and an assign-
ment function (AF). In short, a FHP defines the state graph split explicitly, while an AF indirectly
encodes it by assigning states to partitions. Here, we formally define the former concept. We intro-
duce the idea of an AF and provide a comprehensive theoretical analysis of SAL in Appendix B.4.
Convergence guarantees. We introduce the notion of a FHP of a pointed DAG below. In the flow
network perspective, such a partition can be viewed as a collection of possibly overlapping multi-
source subnetworks, termed leaves, which are grouped together by a single-source network, referred
to as root. We use the term fixed-horizon due to the fixed distance of the subnetworks’ sources to so .
Also, note that a FHP is only a partition in the set-theoretical sense when the state graph is a tree.
                                                                            S
Definition 6.1 (Fixed-horizon DAG partition). We say that S = So ∪            1≤j≤m   Sj   is a FHP of
the state space S, with leaves {Sj }m
                                    j=1 and root So , when it satisfies the conditions below:
  1. (Disjointness of sources) so ∈ So and the sets {Ij := So ∩ Sj }m
                                                                    j=1 are pairwise disjoint.

  2. (Completeness) If s ∈ Sj for a j ≥ 1, then all descendants of s are in Sj .
  3. (Regularity) If d denotes the shortest-path distance, d(so , Ij ) = d(so , Ii ) for all i, j.
Under Definition 6.1, we let Xj = Sj ∩ X be the set of terminal states reachable from Ij . For
conciseness, we denote {Sj }m  j=0 = FHP(S, m) when {Sj }j=0 is a FHP of S with m components.
                                                              m

We then illustrate a FHP of a tree in which m = 3 and the Ij , represented by the doubly-stroked
circles, are singletons for the blue and green leaves in Figure 3. We are now ready to define SAL.
                                                                                       j j
Definition 6.2 (SAL). Let {Sj }m    j=0 = FHP(S, m). For each 1 ≤ j ≤ m, let Gj = (pF , pB , Fj ) be
                    j
a GFlowNet and pE be any forward policy over the Sj -induced subgraph of the state graph. Finally,
let qj be any distribution with full support on Ij . Then, define
                                                                               !2 
                                                                        j
                                                                 Fj (s)pF (τ |s) 
                    LjATB (pjF , Fj ) = Es∼qj Eτ ∼pj (·|s)  log                     ,           (9)
                                                   E
                                                                 R(x)pjB (τ |x)

in which x represents τ ’s terminal state, as the amortized trajectory balance    (ATB) objective.
                                                                                 Sm           Sm For
the root, let poE be a policy in So and Go = (poF , poB , Ro ). For each x ∈ (X \ j=1 Xj ) ∪ ( j=1 Ij ),
let Ro (x) = Rj (x) if x ∈ Ij for some j and Ro (x) = R(x) otherwise. In this context, SAL
follows a two-step procedure: first, m models are trained in parallel by minimizing Equation 9;
then, a global model is estimated by optimizing the TB loss with reward Ro , which we denote by
LT B (pF , F, Ro ) for a GFlowNet (pF , pB , F ). We summarize this approach in Algorithm 1.

Clearly, any flow-based learning objectives (e.g., SubTB (Madan et al., 2022), Munchausen DQN
(Tiapkin et al., 2024), GAFlowNets (Pan et al., 2023b)), parametrizations (e.g., forward-looking
(Pan et al., 2023a), LED (Jang et al., 2024), temperature-scaled (Kim et al., 2024a)), and off-
policy sampling strategies (e.g., replay buffer (Vemgal et al., 2023) and local search (Kim et al.,
2024b)) could be employed for estimating both the root and leaf GFlowNets in Definition 6.2. In


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Centralized             SAL                  Target
                                                                                                                          103.58
                                                                                            100

                                                                                             80


                                                                        Training time (s)
                                                                                             60   52.56   51.86
                                                                                                                  44.14
                                                                                             40

                                                                                             20

                                                                                              0
                                                                                                  Cln 1   Cln 2   SAL     Cent.
                                                                                                              Model


Figure 4: SAL leads to faster mode discovery and more accurate approximations given a fixed
training time budget (right-most plot). Results for a centralized GFlowNet, for our algorithm (SAL),
and the target reproduced from Malkin et al. (2022, Section 5.1) are shown from left to right. Run-
ning time for SAL equals the running time of the longest client plus that of the aggregation phase.

Appendix C, we demonstrate the soundness of SAL and conduct an extensive theoretical analysis
on the character of the local distributions and error propagation within this framework. Similarly,
Appendix E.1 discusses these issues from an empirical viewpoint.
Recursive SAL. As defined in Definition 6.2 and shown in Figure 3, SAL has a single layer:
each leaf is directly connected to the root in the underlying FHP. Nonetheless, there is no obstacle
preventing us from building SAL upon a multi-layered partition of the state graph, as illustrated
in Figure 11 in the supplement. For this, we must first define a hierarchy of partitions. Then, we
recursively learn a flow assignment for each partition by starting at the lowest levels of this hierarchy
and moving upwards, in the fashion of backward-induction algorithms. Each learning step is based
on minimizing the amortized trajectory balance loss in Equation 9 via SGD. We demonstrate the
correctness of the resulting algorithm, termed Recursive SAL, in Proposition C.6, which follows
from Theorem C.1 and an inductive argument. Although we do not provide an empirical assessment
of Recursive SAL in this work, Appendix C.3 considers its potential implications.

6.2   E MPIRICAL ILLUSTRATION

Experimental setup. We evaluate the performance of SAL in six different generative tasks encom-
passing both synthetic and real-world problems (Appendix C.1). In Appendix C, we extensively dis-
cuss how to implicitly define a FHP via an assignment function, which allows for an efficient imple-
mentation of SAL. Also, please refer to Appendix B for a detailed account of the experimental setup.
Results. As expected, Figure 4 above, and Figures 7, 9, 10, and 13 in the supplement, show that
SAL drastically speeds up the discovery of high-value states for all considered generative problems
under varying computational constraints. Complementarily, Figure 6 and Table 2 in Appendix C.2
underline that our distributed algorithm achieves more accurate distributional approximations than
its centralized counterpart. We discuss these promising results in more detail in Appendix C.2.


7     C ONCLUSIONS

Discussion. We developed the first PAC-Bayesian bounds and non-vacuous statistical guarantees
for the generalization of GFlowNets in the literature. Additionally, our theoretical results provided
deeper insights into the negative effect of the trajectory length on the proven learnability of a
generalizable policy. Inspired by these conclusions, our distributed algorithm SAL, which is also
the first of its kind, exhibited promising performance in both synthetic and real-world problems.
Future works and limitations. We discuss the limitations of our work at large in Appendix E. In
particular, we acknowledge that a deeper theoretical understanding of advanced sampling techniques
is still required. From a practitioner’s perspective, we believe that SAL can greatly improve the
performance of GFlowNets in specialized domains, e.g., NLP (Hu et al., 2024) and drug discovery
(Bengio et al., 2021), which are beyond the scope of our work. Finally, it has not escaped our atten-
tion that SAL is related to Mankowitz et al. (2016)’s Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Partitions (ASAP)
framework for learning temporally extended actions in MDPs and may find fruitful applications in
multi-task RL by interpreting each leaf (resp. root) GFlowNet as an intra- (resp. inter-) skill policy.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Fundação Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do
Rio de Janeiro FAPERJ (SEI-260003/000709/2023), the São Paulo Research Foundation FAPESP
(2023/00815-6), and the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı́fico e Tecnológico CNPq
(404336/2023-0). We acknowledge the UKRI EPSRC grant EP/Y028783/1.
We acknowledge the Aalto Science-IT Project from Computer Science IT and the FGV TIC for
providing computational resources.

R EFERENCES
Pierre Alquier. User-friendly introduction to PAC-Bayes bounds. Foundations and Trends® in
  Machine Learning, 17(2):174–303, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.11216.
Pierre Alquier and Benjamin Guedj. Simpler PAC-Bayesian bounds for hostile data. Machine
  Learning, 107(5):887–902, December 2017. ISSN 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/s10994-017-5690-0.
  URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10994-017-5690-0.
Pierre Alquier, Xiaoyin Li, and Olivier Wintenberger. Prediction of time series by statistical learn-
  ing: general losses and fast rates, 2012. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1211.1847.
Lazar Atanackovic and Emmanuel Bengio. Investigating Generalization Behaviours of Generative
  Flow Networks. ICML 2024 Workshop on Structured Probabilistic Inference & Generative Mod-
  eling, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05309.
Kazuoki Azuma. Weighted sums of certain dependent random variables. Tohoku Mathematical
  Journal, Second Series, 19(3):357–367, 1967.
Akshay Balsubramani. PAC-Bayes Iterated Logarithm Bounds for Martingale Mixtures. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1506.06573, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.06573.
Leighton Pate Barnes, Alex Dytso, and Harold Vincent Poor. Improved Information-Theoretic Gen-
  eralization Bounds for Distributed, Federated, and Iterative Learning. Entropy, 24(9):1178, Au-
  gust 2022. ISSN 1099-4300. doi: 10.3390/e24091178. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
  3390/e24091178.
Luis A Barrera, Anastasia Vedenko, Jesse V Kurland, Julia M Rogers, Stephen S Gisselbrecht,
  Elizabeth J Rossin, Jaie Woodard, Luca Mariani, Kian Hong Kock, Sachi Inukai, et al. Survey
  of variation in human transcription factors reveals prevalent DNA binding changes. Science, 351
  (6280):1450–1454, 2016.
Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow
  Network based Generative Models for Non-Iterative Diverse Candidate Generation. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yoshua Bengio and Nikolay Malkin. Machine learning and information theory concepts towards an
  AI Mathematician. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 61(3):457–469, 2024.
Yoshua Bengio, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Edward J. Hu, Mo Tiwari, and Emmanuel Bengio.
  GFlowNet Foundations. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 2023.
Alina Beygelzimer, John Langford, Lihong Li, Lev Reyzin, and Robert E. Schapire. Contextual
  Bandit Algorithms with Supervised Learning Guarantees. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 19–26. PMLR, 2011. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1002.4058.
Felix Biggs and Benjamin Guedj. On Margins and Derandomisation in PAC-Bayes. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3709–3731. PMLR, 2022. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v151/biggs22a.html.
Felix Biggs and Benjamin Guedj. Tighter PAC-Bayes generalisation bounds by leveraging example
  difficulty. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 8165–8182.
  PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v206/biggs23a.html.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stéphane Boucheron, Gábor Lugosi, and Pascal Massart. Concentration inequalities: A nonasymp-
   totic theory of independence. Oxford University Press, 2013.
Ioar Casado, Luis A Ortega, Aritz Pérez, and Andres R Masegosa. PAC-Bayes-Chernoff bounds for
  unbounded losses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Olivier Catoni. PAC-Bayesian Supervised Classification: The Thermodynamics of Statistical Learn-
  ing. Institute of Mathematical Statistics, LECTURE NOTES–MONOGRAPH SERIES, 56, 2007.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/0712.0248.
Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru Zhang. Sampling is as easy as
   learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Yihang Chen and Lukas Mauch. Order-Preserving GFlowNets. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.00386.
David Cohn, Les Atlas, and Richard Ladner. Improving generalization with active learning. Ma-
  chine Learning, 15:201–221, 1994. URL https://link.springer.com/article/10.
  1007/bf00993277.
Tiago da Silva, Eliezer Silva, Adèle Ribeiro, António Góis, Dominik Heider, Samuel Kaski, and
  Diego Mesquita. Human-in-the-Loop Causal Discovery under Latent Confounding using Ances-
  tral GFlowNets. arXiv preprint, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.12032.
Tiago da Silva, Luiz Max Carvalho, Amauri Souza, Samuel Kaski, and Diego Mesquita. Embar-
  rassingly Parallel GFlowNets, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03288.
Tristan Deleu and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Flow Networks: a Markov Chain Perspective. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.01422, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.01422.
Tristan Deleu, António Góis, Chris Chinenye Emezue, Mansi Rankawat, Simon Lacoste-Julien,
  Stefan Bauer, and Yoshua Bengio. Bayesian Structure Learning with Generative Flow Networks.
  In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2022.
Tristan Deleu, Mizu Nishikawa-Toomey, Jithendaraa Subramanian, Nikolay Malkin, Laurent Char-
  lin, and Yoshua Bengio. Joint Bayesian Inference of Graphical Structure and Parameters with a
  Single Generative Flow Network. In Advances in Neural Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Tristan Deleu, Padideh Nouri, Nikolay Malkin, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Discrete Proba-
  bilistic Inference as Control in Multi-path Environments, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2402.10309.
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient Finetun-
  ing of Quantized LLMs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp.
  10088–10115, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14314.
Yilun Du and Leslie Kaelbling. Compositional Generative Modeling: A Single Model is Not All
  You Need, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01103.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. Computing nonvacuous generalization bounds for
  deep (stochastic) neural networks with many more parameters than training data. In Uncertainty
  in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2017.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. Data-dependent PAC-Bayes priors via differential
  privacy. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, 2018.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Kyle Hsu, Waseem Gharbieh, Gabriel Arpino, and Daniel M. Roy. On
  the role of data in PAC-Bayes bounds. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 604–612.
  PMLR, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10929.
M. Fard and Joelle Pineau. PAC-Bayesian Model Selection for Reinforcement Learning. In J. Laf-
 ferty, C. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, and A. Culotta (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
 mation Processing Systems, volume 23. Curran Associates, Inc., 2010.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ronald Aylmer Fisher and Frank Yates. Statistical tables for biological, agricultural and medical
  research. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1963.

Yarin Gal, Riashat Islam, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Deep Bayesian Active Learning with Image
  Data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1183–1192. PMLR, 2017.

Timur Garipov, Sebastiaan De Peuter, Ge Yang, Vikas Garg, Samuel Kaski, and Tommi S. Jaakkola.
  Compositional Sculpting of Iterative Generative Processes. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.

Pascal Germain, Francis Bach, Alexandre Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. PAC-Bayesian The-
  ory Meets Bayesian Inference. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.08636.

Benjamin Guedj. A Primer on PAC-Bayesian Learning. In Proceedings of the French Mathematical
  Society, volume 33, pp. 391–414. Société Mathématique de France, 2019. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/1901.05353.

Maxime Haddouche and Benjamin Guedj. Online PAC-Bayes Learning. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.00024.

Maxime Haddouche and Benjamin Guedj. PAC-Bayes generalisation bounds for heavy-tailed losses
 through supermartingales. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.

Maxime Haddouche, Paul Viallard, Umut Simsekli, and Benjamin Guedj. A PAC-Bayesian Link
 Between Generalisation and Flat Minima. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2402.08508.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Flat minima. Neural computation, 9(1):1–42, 1997.

Matthew Holland. PAC-Bayes under potentially heavy tails. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.07900.

Emiel Hoogeboom, Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Patrick Forré, and Max Welling. Argmax Flows:
  Learning Categorical Distributions with Normalizing Flows. In Third Symposium on Advances in
  Approximate Bayesian Inference, 2021.

Edward J Hu, Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Katie E Everett, Alexandros Graikos, and Yoshua Ben-
  gio. GFlowNet-EM for learning compositional latent variable models. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.

Edward J. Hu, Moksh Jain, Eric Elmoznino, Younesse Kaddar, and et al. Amortizing intractable
  inference in large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04363.

Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Bonaventure F. P.
 Dossou, Chanakya Ajit Ekbote, Jie Fu, Tianyu Zhang, Michael Kilgour, Dinghuai Zhang, Lena
 Simine, Payel Das, and Yoshua Bengio. Biological Sequence Design with GFlowNets. In Inter-
 national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

Moksh Jain, Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Yoshua Ben-
 gio, Santiago Miret, and Emmanuel Bengio. Multi-Objective GFlowNets. In International Con-
 ference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.

Hyosoon Jang, Minsu Kim, and Sungsoo Ahn. Learning Energy Decompositions for Partial In-
  ference in GFlowNets. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=P15CHILQlg.

Marco Jiralerspong, Bilun Sun, Danilo Vucetic, Tianyu Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, Gauthier Gidel,
 and Nikolay Malkin. Expected flow networks in stochastic environments and two-player zero-
 sum games. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2310.02779.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Haotian Ju, Dongyue Li, Aneesh Sharma, and Hongyang R Zhang. Generalization in graph neural
  networks: Improved PAC-Bayesian bounds on graph diffusion. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6314–6341. PMLR, 2023.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On Large-Batch Training for Deep Learning: Generalization Gap and Sharp Minima,
  2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04836.
Minsu Kim, Joohwan Ko, Taeyoung Yun, Dinghuai Zhang, Ling Pan, Woochang Kim, Jinkyoo Park,
 Emmanuel Bengio, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning to Scale Logits for Temperature-Conditional
 GFlowNets, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02823.
Minsu Kim, Taeyoung Yun, Emmanuel Bengio, Dinghuai Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, Sungsoo Ahn, and
 Jinkyoo Park. Local Search GFlowNets, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
 02710.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
  6980.
Anas Krichel, Nikolay Malkin, Salem Lahlou, and Yoshua Bengio. On Generalization for Generative
  Flow Networks, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03105.
Salem Lahlou at al. A Theory of Continuous Generative Flow Networks. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v202/lahlou23a.html.
Elaine Lau, Nikhil Murali Vemgal, Doina Precup, and Emmanuel Bengio. DGFN: Double Genera-
  tive Flow Networks. In NeurIPS 2023 Generative AI and Biology (GenBio) Workshop, 2023.
Puheng Li, Zhong Li, Huishuai Zhang, and Jiang Bian. On the generalization properties of diffusion
  models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, 2024.
Jens Liebehenschel. Ranking and unranking of lexicographically ordered words: An average-case
  analysis. Journal of Automata, Languages and Combinatorics, 2(4):227–268, 1997.
Dianbo Liu et al. GFlowOut: Dropout with Generative Flow Networks. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
  liu23r.html.
Ben London, Bert Huang, Ben Taskar, and Lise Getoor. PAC-Bayesian Collective Stability. In
  Samuel Kaski and Jukka Corander (eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 33 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 585–594, Reykjavik, Iceland, 22–25 Apr 2014. PMLR.
Sanae Lotfi, Marc Finzi, Yilun Kuang, Tim G. J. Rudner, Micah Goldblum, and Andrew Gordon
  Wilson. Non-Vacuous Generalization Bounds for Large Language Models. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 32801–32818. PMLR, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2312.17173.
Sanae Lotfi, Yilun Kuang, Brandon Amos, Micah Goldblum, Marc Finzi, and Andrew Gordon
  Wilson. Unlocking Tokens as Data Points for Generalization Bounds on Larger Language Models.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 9229–9256, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18158.
Jianzhu Ma, Jian Peng, Sheng Wang, and Jinbo Xu. Estimating the Partition Function of Graphi-
   cal Models Using Langevin Importance Sampling. In Carlos M. Carvalho and Pradeep Raviku-
   mar (eds.), Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 433–441. PMLR, 2013. URL http:
   //proceedings.mlr.press/v31/ma13a.pdf.
Kanika Madan, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Maksym Korablyov, Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, An-
  drei Cristian Nica, Tom Bosc, Yoshua Bengio, and Nikolay Malkin. Learning GFlowNets from
  partial episodes for improved convergence and stability. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/madan23a.html.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eran Malach. Auto-Regressive Next-Token Predictors are Universal Learners. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 34417–34431. PMLR, 2024.
Shreshth A. Malik, Salem Lahlou, Andrew Jesson, Moksh Jain, Nikolay Malkin, Tristan Deleu,
  Yoshua Bengio, and Yarin Gal. BatchGFN: Generative Flow Networks for Batch Active Learning,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15058.
Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Chen Sun, and Yoshua Bengio. Trajectory bal-
  ance: Improved credit assignment in GFlowNets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Nikolay Malkin, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Xu Ji, Edward Hu, Katie Everett, Dinghuai Zhang,
  and Yoshua Bengio. GFlowNets and variational inference. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Daniel J. Mankowitz, Timothy A. Mann, and Shie Mannor. Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Parti-
  tions (ASAP). In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1602.03351.
Andreas Maurer. A Note on the PAC Bayesian Theorem. arXiv preprint cs/0411099, 2004. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0411099.
Sokhna Diarra Mbacke, Florence Clerc, and Pascal Germain. PAC-Bayesian Generalization Bounds
  for Adversarial Generative Models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  24271–24290. PMLR, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.08942.
David McAllester.    A PAC-Bayesian Tutorial with A Dropout Bound.                arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1307.2118, 2013. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.2118.
David A McAllester. Some PAC-Bayesian theorems. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual confer-
  ence on Computational Learning Theory, pp. 230–234, 1998.
David A McAllester. PAC-Bayesian model averaging. In Proceedings of the twelfth annual confer-
  ence on Computational Learning Theory, pp. 164–170, 1999.
Colin McDiarmid. Concentration. In Probabilistic Methods for Algorithmic Discrete Mathematics,
  pp. 195–248. Springer, 1998.
Kohei Miyaguchi. PAC-Bayesian Transportation Bound. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13435, 2019.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.13435.
Wendy Myrvold and Frank Ruskey. Ranking and unranking permutations in linear time. Information
 Processing Letters, 79(6):281–284, 2001.
Andrei Cristian Nica, Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Cheng-Hao Liu, Maksym Korablyov,
  Michael M Bronstein, and Yoshua Bengio. Evaluating generalization in GFlowNets for molecule
  design. ICLR2022 Machine Learning for Drug Discovery workshop, 2022.
Ling Pan, Nikolay Malkin, Dinghuai Zhang, and Yoshua Bengio. Better Training of GFlowNets
  with Local Credit and Incomplete Trajectories. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2023a.
Ling Pan, Dinghuai Zhang, Aaron Courville, Longbo Huang, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Aug-
  mented Flow Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023b.
Mohit Pandey, Gopeshh Subbaraj, and Emmanuel Bengio. GFlowNet Pretraining with Inexpensive
 Rewards. NeurIPS 2024 Workshop AIDrugX, 2024.
Marı́a Pérez-Ortiz, Omar Rivasplata, John Shawe-Taylor, and Csaba Szepesvári. Tighter risk cer-
 tificates for neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(227):1–40, 2021. URL
 http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-879.html.
Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Kanika Madan, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Cheng-Hao Liu, Sarath
   Chandar, Nikolay Malkin, and Yoshua Bengio. Thompson sampling for improved exploration in
   GFlowNets, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.17693.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Omar Rivasplata, Vikram M Tankasali, and Csaba Szepesvari. PAC-Bayes with backprop. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1908.07380, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.07380.

Omar Rivasplata, Ilja Kuzborskij, Csaba Szepesvari, and John Shawe-Taylor. PAC-Bayes Analysis
 Beyond the Usual Bounds. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.13057.

Borja Rodrı́guez-Gálvez, Omar Rivasplata, Ragnar Thobaben, and Mikael Skoglund. A note on
  generalization bounds for losses with finite moments. In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on
  Information Theory (ISIT), pp. 2676–2681. IEEE, 2024a.

Borja Rodrı́guez-Gálvez, Ragnar Thobaben, and Mikael Skoglund. More PAC-Bayes bounds: From
  bounded losses, to losses with general tail behaviors, to anytime validity. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 25(110):1–43, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.12214.

Julien Roy, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Christopher Pal, and Emmanuel Bengio. Goal-conditioned
  GFlowNets for controllable multi-objective molecular design. ICML 2023 Workshop Deploy-
  ableGenerativeAI, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04620.

Otmane Sakhi, Pierre Alquier, and Nicolas Chopin. PAC-Bayesian offline contextual bandits with
  guarantees. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 29777–29799. PMLR, 2023.

Milad Sefidgaran, Romain Chor, and Abdellatif Zaidi. Rate-Distortion Theoretic Bounds on Gener-
 alization Error for Distributed Learning. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and
 Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Yevgeny Seldin, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Peter Auer, François Laviolette, and John Shawe-Taylor.
  PAC-Bayes-Bernstein inequality for martingales and its application to multiarmed bandits. In
  Proceedings of the Workshop on On-line Trading of Exploration and Exploitation 2, pp. 98–111.
  PMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2012a.

Yevgeny Seldin, François Laviolette, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, John Shawe-Taylor, and Peter Auer.
  PAC-Bayesian Inequalities for Martingales. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 58(12):
  7086–7093, 2012b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1110.6886.

Marcin Sendera, Minsu Kim, Sarthak Mittal, Pablo Lemos, Luca Scimeca, Jarrid Rector-Brooks,
 Alexandre Adam, Yoshua Bengio, and Nikolay Malkin. Improved off-policy training of diffusion
 samplers, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05098.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to
  Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2014.

John Shawe-Taylor and Robert C Williamson. A PAC analysis of a Bayesian estimator. In Proceed-
  ings of the tenth annual conference on Computational Learning Theory, pp. 2–9, 1997.

Max W. Shen, Emmanuel Bengio, Ehsan Hajiramezanali, Andreas Loukas, Kyunghyun Cho, and
 Tommaso Biancalani. Towards Understanding and Improving GFlowNet Training. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

Tiago Silva, Eliezer de Souza da Silva, Rodrigo Barreto Alves, Luiz Max Carvalho, Amauri H
  Souza, Samuel Kaski, Vikas Garg, and Diego Mesquita. Analyzing GFlowNets: Stability, Expres-
  siveness, and Assessment. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Structured Probabilistic Inference & Gen-
  erative Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B8KXmXFiFj.

Huayi Tang and Yong Liu. Towards understanding generalization of graph neural networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 33674–33719. PMLR, 2023.

Bahareh Tasdighi, Abdullah Akgül, Manuel Haussmann, Kenny Kazimirzak Brink, and Melih Kan-
  demir. PAC-Bayesian Soft Actor-Critic Learning. In Symposium on Advances in Approximate
  Bayesian Inference, pp. 127–145. PMLR, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.
  12776.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Daniil Tiapkin, Nikita Morozov, Alexey Naumov, and Dmitry Vetrov. Generative Flow Networks
  as Entropy-Regularized RL. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 4213–4221. PMLR, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12934.
Brandon Trabucco, Xinyang Geng, Aviral Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Design-Bench: Bench-
  marks for Data-Driven Offline Model-Based Optimization. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 21658–21676. PMLR, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.
  08450.
Dustin Tran, Keyon Vafa, Kumar Krishna Agrawal, Laurent Dinh, and Ben Poole. Discrete Flows:
  Invertible Generative Models of Discrete Data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 32, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10347.
Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.
Vladimir Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory. John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
Vladimir N. Vapnik. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer New York, 2000. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-3264-1.
Vladimir N Vapnik and A Ya Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of
  events to their probabilities. In Measures of Complexity: Festschrift for Alexey Chervonenkis, pp.
  11–30. Springer, 2015.
Nikhil Vemgal, Elaine Lau, and Doina Precup. An Empirical Study of the Effectiveness of Using
  a Replay Buffer on Mode Discovery in GFlowNets. ICML 2023 Workshop on Structured Prob-
  abilistic Inference & Generative Modeling, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.
  07674.
Siddarth Venkatraman, Moksh Jain, Luca Scimeca, Minsu Kim, Marcin Sendera, Mohsin Hasan,
  Luke Rowe, Sarthak Mittal, Pablo Lemos, Emmanuel Bengio, Alexandre Adam, Jarrid Rector-
  Brooks, Yoshua Bengio, Glen Berseth, and Nikolay Malkin. Amortizing intractable inference in
  diffusion models for vision, language, and control. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20971.
Yi-Shan Wu, Andres Masegosa, Stephan Lorenzen, Christian Igel, and Yevgeny Seldin. Chebyshev-
  Cantelli PAC-Bayes-Bennett Inequality for the Weighted Majority Vote. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Semih Yagli, Alex Dytso, and H. Vincent Poor. Information-Theoretic Bounds on the Generalization
  Error and Privacy Leakage in Federated Learning. In 2020 IEEE 21st International Workshop on
  Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.02503.
David W Zhang, Corrado Rainone, Markus Peschl, and Roberto Bondesan. Robust scheduling with
  GFlowNets. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023a.
Dinghuai Zhang, Hanjun Dai, Nikolay Malkin, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and Ling Pan.
  Let the Flows Tell: Solving Graph Combinatorial Optimization Problems with GFlowNets. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023b.
Ming Yang Zhou, Zichao Yan, Elliot Layne, Nikolay Malkin, Dinghuai Zhang, Moksh Jain, Math-
 ieu Blanchette, and Yoshua Bengio. PhyloGFN: Phylogenetic inference with generative flow
 networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Pan Zhou, Jiashi Feng, Chao Ma, Caiming Xiong, Steven Hoi, and Weinan E. Towards Theoretically
  Understanding Why SGD Generalizes Better Than ADAM in Deep Learning. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 21285–21296, 2020. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2010.05627.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL FOR
        “G ENERALIZATION AND D ISTRIBUTED L EARNING OF
                        GF LOW N ETS ”

A Background and related works                                                                    19
   A.1 Directed Acyclic Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
   A.2 Generative Flow Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
   A.3 Learning GFlowNets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
   A.4 Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
   A.5 Additional review of PAC-Bayes bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21

B Experimental details and additional discussions                                                 23
   B.1 A non-generalizable distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23
   B.2 Non-vacuous generalization bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        23
   B.3 Oracle generalization bounds: Lemmata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        24
   B.4 Subgraph Asynchronous Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25

C SAL: Implementation and Theoretical Analysis                                                    26
   C.1 Summary of the experimental campaing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         26
   C.2 An efficient implementation of SAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
   C.3 Theoretical analysis and extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    30
   C.4 Conditional SAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      32
   C.5 SAL and EP-GFlowNets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         32

D Proofs                                                                                          34
   D.1 Proof of Lemma 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     34
   D.2 Proof of Proposition 4.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
   D.3 Proof of Proposition 5.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
   D.4 Proof of Lemma B.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       36
   D.5 Proof of Theorem 5.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     36
   D.6 Proof of Lemma B.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       36
   D.7 Proof of Theorem 5.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     36
   D.8 Proof of Theorem C.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     38
   D.9 Proof of Lemma C.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       39
   D.10 Proof of Proposition C.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
   D.11 Proof of Proposition C.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    40

E Limitations and future works                                                                    41
   E.1 Additional experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     41


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
For probability measures P and Q on the same space X , we recall for convenience that the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
                              h is KL(P ||Q) =i Ex∼P [log ( /dQ) (x)], the chi-squared
                                                            dP
                                                       2
divergence is χ2 (Q||P ) = Ex∼P ((dQ/dP ) (x)) − 1 ; and the total variation distance is given by
TV (P, Q) = supA⊆X |P (A) − Q(A)|. When X is finite, TV (P, Q) = 1/2 x∈X |P (x) − Q(x)|.
                                                                             P
There are other notions of ‘divergence’ for probability measures; we have mentioned here the ones
used in our paper. Readers are refereed to Boucheron et al. (2013) for further details on the topic.

A.1     D IRECTED ACYCLIC G RAPHS

We briefly recall the definition of a pointed directed acycliy graph. For this, we firstly define the
concept of a finitely absorbing Markov transition kernel (Lahlou at al., 2023) in a topological space.
Henceforth, we let ({so } ∪ S ∪ {sf }, V) be a topological space endowed with a topology V and two
special elements, so and sf . We denote S̄ = {so }∪S ∪{sf } the state space; so and sf are the initial
and final states, respectively. We also assume that both {so } and {sf } are open sets with respect to V.
Definition A.1 (Finitely absorbing Markov transition kernel (MTK)). Consider the measure space
(S̄, Σ, µ) with measure µ and a Borel σ-algerba Σ. Let κ : S̄ × Σ → R+ be a reference kernel, i.e.,
κ(s, ·) : Σ → R+ is Ra measure absolutely continuous with respect to µ for all s, and we recursively
define κ⊗t (s, A) = κ⊗t−1 (s, ds′ )κ(s′ , A) for measurable A ∈ Σ. We say that ρF : S̄ × Σ → R+
is a finitely absorbing Markov transition kernel if the following conditions are satisfied.
   1. ρF (s, ·) : Σ → R+ is an absolutely continuous probability measure with respect to κ(s, ·);
    2. there is a tm < ∞ such that ρ⊗t
                                    F
                                      m
                                        (s, {sf }) = 1 for every s ∈ {so } ∪ S and ρF (sf , {sf }) = 1;
    3. s 7→ ρF (·, B) is continuous for every measurable B ∈ Σ;
    4. if ρF (s, {sf }) > 0, then ρF (s, {sf }) = 1;

    5. for every A ∈ Σ, there is a t < tm such that ρ⊗t
                                                     F (so , A) > 0.
In this work, S̄ is always finite, V is the discrete topology, and µ is the counting measure. The state
graph G is induced by ρF , i.e., (u, v) is an edge in G if and only if ρF (u, {v}) > 0. Acyclicity is
ensured by the finitely absorbing property of ρF (item 2 of Definition A.1). Notably, the finite S̄
assumption covers the vast majority of use-cases for GFlowNets. Under these conditions, we say
κ⊤ is a backward reference kernel in S̄ with respect to κ if κ(u, {v}) = κ⊤ (v, {u}) for all (u, v) ∈
S̄ × S̄. We refer the reader to (Lahlou at al., 2023) for an overview of GFlowNets in infinite spaces.

A.2     G ENERATIVE F LOW N ETWORKS

A GFlowNet can be seen as a tuple ({so } ∪ S ∪ {sf }, PF , PB , ρF , ρB , κ, κ⊤ , µ, R) for which

    1. κ is a forward reference kernel on S̄;
    2. κ⊤ is a backward reference kernel in S̄ with respect to κ;
    3. ρF (resp. ρB ) is a finitely aborsbing MTK with respect to κ (resp. κ⊤ );
    4. R : Σ → R+ is a measure such that R ≪ µ;
    5. PF : S̄ × Σ → R+ is a MTK, called the forward policy, such that PF (s, ·) ≪ ρF (s, ·);
    6. PB : S̄ × Σ → R+ is a MTK, called the backward policy, such that PB (s, ·) ≪ ρB (s, ·).
We denote by pF and pB the densities of PF and PB with respect to their respective reference
kernels. For simplicity, we interchangeably let R(x) be the density of R with respect to µ. In
this scenario, the set of terminal states X is defined by X = {x ∈ S : PF (s, {sf }) > 0}. In
practice, pF is parameterized by a neural network and its parameters are estimated to ensure that
the marginal of PF (so , ·) over X matches R up to a normalizing S   constant. In the terminology of
Section 2, the abstract actions space A would correspond to A = s∈S̄ {(s, u) : PF (s, {u}) > 0}
and A(s) = {(s, u) : PF (s, {u}) > 0}. For most problems, we identify the edge (s, u) with an entity
representing the difference between u and s, e.g., a nucleotide base when S is the space of nucleotide
strings. We complement the discussion in Section 2 on how to learn a GFlowNet in the next section.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3    L EARNING GF LOW N ETS

Below, we illustrate our definition of GFlowNets for three common generative tasks. These tasks
encompass a large number of applications, e.g., Jain et al. (2022); Shen et al. (2023); Hu et al. (2024;
2023); Liu et al. (2023); Malkin et al. (2022); Pan et al. (2023b); Madan et al. (2022).

  1. Autoregressive generation. Each object in S is a string of length up to a L, and G is a tree
     rooted at so . Also, action sets A(s) represent an alphabet and a transition T (s, a) appends the
     character a to the string s. Here, pB (s|(s, a)) = 1 for every s ∈ S and a ∈ A(s).
  2. Set generation. Each s ∈ S is a subset of W = {1, . . . , W }, with X containing those s of size
     T . Action sets are A(s) = W \ s and transitions T (s, a) add the element a to s; see Figure 5.
  3. Hypergrid environment. Each s ∈ S is a point within {0, . . . , H − 1}d × {0, 1} for given H
     (size) and d (dimension); so = 0d+1 and the last coordinate indicates whether s ∈ X . Also,
     A(s) = {ei : si < H − 1} ∪ {⊤}, with ei denoting the i-th canonical vector in Rd and ⊤ a stop
     action. Transitions T (s, a) either add a to s, if a = ei for some i; or set sd+1 = 1, if a = ⊤.

Notably, T (x, ·) ∈ {sf } for every terminal state x ∈ X . We provided
examples of R, F , and pF throughout the main text; in particular, see
Sections 4 and 6.2 and Appendix B. Figure 5 illustrates the state graph for
the set generation task (omitting sf ). To learn a forward policy pF , we
minimize a stochastic objective based on the observed trajectories. Besides
the ones shown in Equation 1, many loss functions has been recently
proposed. The SubTB loss (Madan et al., 2022), for instance, is defined by
                                                                              
                                                                             2
                                   m−n
                                                                                     Figure 5: State graph

                 X               λ                      F (τn )pF (τn:m ) 
   Eτ ∼pE                P                 m−n
                                                   log                               for the set generation
                            1≤n<m≤|τ |    λ             p B (τn:m )F (τ m )
             1≤n<m≤|τ |                                                              task (W = 3, T = 2).
with the constraint that F (x) = R(x) for x ∈ X and τn representing the nth element within the
trajectory τ . Correspondingly, the VarGrad (Zhang et al., 2023a) and contrastive balance (da Silva
et al., 2024) objectives avoid the estimation of F by minimizing
  Eτ,τ ′ ∼pE (log pF (τ ) − log pF (τ ′ ) − log pB (τ |x) + log pB (τ ′ |x′ ) − log R(x) + log R(x′ ))2 ,


which led to faster training convergence in some cases. On the same page, Malkin et al. (2023)
considered a series of divergence-based loss functions for training GFlowNets, showing that
the on-policy version of the TB loss (Equation 1) corresponds to the reverse KL between the
forward and backward policies in terms of the gradients. In particular, we note that these learning
objectives can only be used for estimating the parameters of the root network in SAL. For the
leaf networks, which must provide an estimate of the flow function F for the aggregation step,
these loss functions cannot be used. Nonetheless, flow-based learning objetctives such as TB and
SubTB often exhibit a convergence speed comparable to that of variational alternatives and are
frequently implemented for large-scale applications (Nica et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2022; Hu et al.,
2024; Zhou et al., 2024). Learning objectives aside, there is a growing interest in the literature
in the development of more effective parametrizations for GFlowNets, with remarkable results
for the forward-looking GFlowNets (Pan et al., 2023a) and LED-GFlowNets (Jang et al., 2024),
which residually reparameterize F as log F (s) = log ϕ(s) + log F̃ (s) for a (given or learnable)
ϕ, temperature-scaled-GFlowNets (Kim et al., 2024a), in which pF (s′ |s) ∝ exp{ϕ(β) · ψ(s′ |s)}
for neural networks ϕ and ψ and an inverse-temperature parameter β > 0, and QGFN (Lau et al.,
2023), which learns a Q-function concomitantly to F and pF and prune the values of pF based on
Q during inference time for controlable greediness.

A.4    R ELATED WORKS

GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021; 2023; Lahlou at al., 2023) were canonically proposed as a rein-
forcement learning algorithm for sampling compositional objects (e.g., graphs) proportionally to a
prespecified reward function. From a theoretical perspective, the relationship between GFlowNets
and variational inference (Malkin et al., 2023), entropy-regularized Q-learning (Tiapkin et al., 2024;
Deleu et al., 2024), and diffusion models (Lahlou at al., 2023; Sendera et al., 2024; Venkatraman
et al., 2024) has been thoroughly established. From a practitioner’s viewpoint, GFlowNets have


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


been successfuly applied to many problems including, but not restricted to, causal discovery (Deleu
et al., 2022; 2023; da Silva et al., 2023), Bayesian phylogenetic inference (Zhou et al., 2024;
da Silva et al., 2024), language and image modelling (Hu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023; Hu et al.,
2023; Venkatraman et al., 2024), combinatorial optimization (Zhang et al., 2023a;b), and drug
discovery (Bengio et al., 2021; Nica et al., 2022; Vemgal et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023a). Indeed, we
are confident that problems such as language modelling and drug discovery could greatly benefit
from SAL if appropriate policy networks and fixed-horizon partitionings are designed. Nonetheless,
given the open-endedness and specialized nature of these applications, we believe that they would be
more suited for future, dedicated works and are, hence, not addressed in this text. Correspondingly,
recent work by Jiralerspong et al. (2024) highlighted the competitive performance of stochastic
GFlowNets in two-player zero-sum games, specifically, Tic-Tac-Toe and Connect-4, and we are
optimistic that an extension of SAL to stochastic environments would exhibit promising results for
games having larger trajectories, e.g., Chess and Go. Orthogonal to these advances, the issue of
generalization in GFlowNets has also received significant attention in the literature (Atanackovic
& Bengio, 2024; Krichel et al., 2024). In sharp contrast to previous works, ours is the first one
that derives PAC-Bayesian bounds and provides non-vacuous statistical guarantees for GFlowNets,
along with a theoretical analysis that highlights which factors are potentially harmful to the model’s
generalization performance. Notably, a recent discussion by Bengio & Malkin (2024) provides an
interesting perspective on generalization, active learning, and GFlowNets in the context of abstract
reasoning for machine-learning-based theorem proving and conjecture formation. Concomitantly,
we note that there is a well-established interest in the community towards the development of more
sample-efficient learning objectives for speeding up training convergence (Malkin et al., 2022;
Deleu et al., 2022; Madan et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023a; da Silva et al., 2024; Tiapkin et al., 2024).


A.5    A DDITIONAL REVIEW OF PAC-BAYES BOUNDS

Historically, McAllester (1998; 1999)’s PAC-Bayesian theorems, which were inspired by the work
of Shawe-Taylor & Williamson (1997), were developed towards the objective of providing Probably
Approximately Correct (PAC) guarantees to Bayesian algorithms with potentially misspecified prior
distributions. Recently, the relationship between PAC-Bayesian theory and (approximate) Bayesian
algorithms has been made explicit by Germain et al. (2016). From this perspective, Alquier (2024)
provides an informative and comprehensive account of the literature on PAC-Bayes bounds, both
theory and applications. In what are now well-established references, Catoni (2007) gives a rigorous
foundation of PAC-Bayes bounds in supervised classification, including results on the form of the
distributions that optimise the bounds; and Guedj (2019) provides a nice concise exposition of the
essential form of PAC-Bayesian inequalities. In the context of contemporary machine learning,
PAC-Bayesian theory has found enormous success in the development of numerical generalization
bounds for overparameterized neural network classifiers, achieving non-vacuous results (Dziugaite
& Roy, 2017; 2018) and tight certificates (Pérez-Ortiz et al., 2021), which subsequent works have
applied even for large language models (Lotfi et al., 2024a;b) with billions of parameters through
appropriate compression techniques (Dettmers et al., 2023). In a recent work, Malach (2024) intro-
duced the notion of length complexity for next-token autoregressive learning on Chain-of-Thought
data, referring to the minimum number of iterations required by an AR learner to compute a target
function, which is (vaguely) connected to our results regarding the harmful effects of the maximum
trajectory size on GFlowNet learning. Importantly, the advantegeousness of distributed approaches
for the generalization performance of learning algorithms was already pointed out by Yagli et al.
(2020); Barnes et al. (2022); Sefidgaran et al. (2022); similarly to SAL, these authors consider the
problem of training a set of models in parallel and subsequently aggregating them with a (possibly
randomized) estimator in a central server. In spite of these advances, the development of tighter
PAC-Bayes bounds with weaker assumptions on the risk functional, e.g., heavy tailedness instead
of boundedness, is still an active research field (Holland, 2019; Wu et al., 2021; Balsubramani,
2015; London et al., 2014; Biggs & Guedj, 2023; Rivasplata et al., 2020; Rodrı́guez-Gálvez et al.,
2024a;b). Also, the development of PAC-Bayesian theory in the setting of non-i.i.d. data is still
relatively underdeveloped when compared against other branches of machine learning, albeit there
are interesting results in online learning (Haddouche & Guedj, 2022), reinforcement learning (Fard
& Pineau, 2010; Beygelzimer et al., 2011; Sakhi et al., 2023), and time series (Alquier et al., 2012).
Finally, PAC-Bayesian theorems provide statistical guarantees for stochastic predictors, which are
arguably not frequently used in practice, and the problem of derandomizing the resulting bounds


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is still mostly open. Notably, the derandomization of PAC-Bayes bounds has a non-negligible cost,
and we refer the reader to Miyaguchi (2019); Biggs & Guedj (2022) for further details on this topic.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND ADDITIONAL DISCUSSIONS
All experiments were conducted on a single Linux machine with 128 GB of RAM and featuring
a NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU and 12th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-12900K CPU. Unless specified
otherwise, the code for reproducing the experiments below was executed on this GPU.

B.1   A NON - GENERALIZABLE DISTRIBUTION
                                                           (W, T )    χ2 (qE,T ||pT,E )   χ2 (qϵ,T ||pT,E )
For the experiments in Figure 1, we considered             (32, 6)       1.20 · 103             1.32
the set generation task (see Appendix A) with              (64, 6)       4.56 · 102             1.24
W ∈ {32, 64} elements to choose from and set size
S = 6, and the forward policy was parameterized Table 1: χ divergence between the ex-
                                                                     2

by an MLP with 2 64-dimensional layers. The             ploratory (pruned, pE,T , and ϵ-greedy, pϵ,T )
elements’ log-utilities u were sampled from [−1, 1] and uniform (qE,T ) distributions.
prior to training and the resulting values were normalized so that the largest reward of a set was
5. For both settings in Figure 1, the models were trained for 1500 epochs with a batch size of 128.
To compute the quantities in Table 1, we compared the uniform policy of an untrained GFlowNet
against a policy pE such that the (unnormalized) logit corresponding to the addition the element 1 is
set to log pE (1|s) = −11.5 ≈ log 10−5 . Table 1 shows the large discrepancy between the resulting
pE and an uniform policy, providing a taste for the upper bound in Proposition 4.2.

B.2   N ON - VACUOUS GENERALIZATION BOUNDS

A bounded risk functional for GFlowNets. We start recalling the definition of the flow-consistency
in subgraphs (FCS) metric (Silva et al., 2024). Given a policy pE , the FCS is defined as
                                                                                       
                                        1  X          pT (x i )            R(x  i )
      LFCS (R, pT ) = Eτ1 ,...,τB ∼pE           P                  −P                  ,    (10)
                                        2          1≤j≤B pT (xj )        1≤j≤B R(xj )
                                          1≤i≤B
in which B ≥ 2 is a (typically small) given integer. Equivalently, FCS may be seen the expected
total variation distance between the learned pT and target R distributions over random subsets of
X . It was shown by Silva et al. (2024) that LFCS (R, pT ) = 0 if and only if pT (x) ∝ R(x), i.e.,
the model samples correctly from the distribution proportional to R in X . Then, equipped with the
dataset Tn described in Section 4, an unbiased estimate of LFCS is
                            1           X              X      pT (xki )          R(xki )
     L̂FCS (Tn , R, pT ) =                                  PB               − PB             , (11)
                           2N                                    p T (x k  )        R(x  k  )
                              k1 ,...,kB ∼U {1,...,n} 1≤i≤B  j=1         j      j=1       j

in which the outer summation covers N uniformly random B-sized subsets of {1, . . . , n} and xki
represents the ki th observed terminal state in Tn . Importantly, LFCS ∈ [0, 1] for any R and pT ,
which enables the implementation of well-known algorithms for tightening PAC-Bayesian general-
ization bounds through the adoption of data-dependent priors (Dziugaite et al., 2021; Maurer, 2004).
Experimental details for computing non-vacuous bounds. To achieve the results illustrated in
Figure 2, we use Tα to learn an isotropic Gaussian prior Q with variance 10−6 over the parameters θ
of an MLP with 3 × 128-dimensional layers defining the forward policy by minimizing the expected
TB loss on Tα under Q. For each problem, we used the same architecture of the neural network,
changing only the input and output dimensions, and the resulting models were trained for 64 epochs
on their respective datasets. Then, we freeze θ and learn both the mean and the diagonal covariance
of a Gaussian posterior P over the parameters of a policy network by minimizing the upper bound
in Equation 6 with L̂FCS substituted by an unbiased estimate of the TB loss on Tα ∪ T1−α . Finally,
we evaluate the upper bound in Equation 6 on T1−α to certify its tightness. We closely followed
the experimental setup of Dziugaite et al. (2021); Pérez-Ortiz et al. (2021) for conducting these ex-
periments. In particular, the data-splitting protocol for learning the prior, learning the posterior, and
evaluating the bound is analogous to the one used by Pérez-Ortiz et al. (2021). Similarly, in contrast
to the other experiments, which rely on the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015), we use SGD with
a fixed learning rate of 10−3 that presumably achieves a flat minimum (Keskar et al., 2017) with
potentially better generalization properties (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Zhou et al., 2020;
Haddouche et al., 2024). Finally, we acknowledge Dziugaite et al. (2021) for making their code
publicly available and adhering to the best current practices of scientific reproducibility.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3   O RACLE GENERALIZATION BOUNDS : L EMMATA

Trajectory-level bounds. The technical lemma below ensures that KL(pB ||pF ) can be directly
bounded by adopting a mixture transition policy, sometimes called an α-uniform policy (Hu et al.,
2023), that keeps the trajectory-level probabilities away from zero and ensures the boundedness of
the log-probabilities (Dziugaite et al., 2021; Lotfi et al., 2024a) without limiting the GFlowNet’s
ability to learn the correct solution that samples from X proportionally to the reward.
Lemma B.1 (Realizability of mixture policies). Let pU (·|s) denote the uniform policy on the state
                                                  1
space S with reward R, i.e., pU (s′ |s) = |Ch(s)|     . Then, there is a α ∈ (0, 1] s.t. the family
{p̃F : p̃F (·|s) = αpU (·|s) + (1 − α)pF (·|s)} contains a policy sampling from X in proportion to R.

In the classical statistical learning terminology, the result above states that the family of α-uniform
policy networks is realizable, meaning that a member of this family satisfies the desired balance
conditions. However, as we note in the proof of Lemma B.1, finding such α depends on the knowl-
edge of the minimum value of R(x) on X , which may be an NP-hard problem for some generative
instances (Zhang et al., 2023b; Ma et al., 2013) that cannot be swifitly solved. Since the resulting
generalization bound depends on hardly computable quantities, we call it a oracle bound, similarly to
the distribution-dependent PAC-Bayesian inequalities in, e.g., (Alquier et al., 2012; Alquier, 2024).
Transition-level bounds. From Definition 5.3, we can readily conclude that the stochastic process
             X                    X
    Mt :=         M (Si , S<i ) =     LDB (Si , Si−1 ) − Esi ∼pE (·|Si−1 ) [LDB (si , Si−1 )] (12)
             1≤i≤t                 1≤i≤t

is a martingale with respect to the filtration {Ft }t≥1 . In Theorem 5.4, we developed concentration
inequalities for Mt to derive transition-level generalization bounds for GFlowNets. Complementar-
ily, the lemma bellow shows how the martingale Mt is connected to the traditionally implemented
trajectory-wide DB loss (see Equation 1). There, we assume that trajectories have fixed length, an
assumption that was also considered by Malkin et al. (2023) when showing that a GFlowNet can be
seen as an instantiation of a hierarchical variational inference model.
Lemma B.2. Let pE be the sampling distribution and pE,T be the corresponding marginal over
terminal states. Then, by denoting τ = (S1 , . . . , Sl ) with fixed l,
                                 
              X                          X
    Eτ ∼pE        LDB (Si , S<i ) =         ESi−1 ∼pE,T ESi ∼pE (·|Si−1 ) [LDB (Si , Si−1 )|Si−1 ] .
            1≤i≤l                      1≤i≤l
                                                                                                   (13)

In other words, the trajectory-wise objective in the left-hand side of Equation 13, which is often used
as a learning objective for GFlowNets (Pan et al., 2023a;b; Madan et al., 2022; Bengio et al., 2023;
Jang et al., 2024; Silva et al., 2024), corresponds to the transition-wise objective in Equation 8 when
the trajectories are sampled in a Markovian fashion. Under these circumstances, we defined the risk
functional associated to a specific parameterization θ of the policy network as
                                     1 X
                   L(θ) = Eτ ∼pE               ESi ∼pE (·|Si−1 ) [LDB (Si , Si−1 )|Si−1 ] ,         (14)
                                    |τ |
                                      1≤i≤|τ |

in which LDB implicitly depends on θ via the forward policy pF . Importantly, we take the trajec-
tory’s length |τ | into account when defining L(θ), which is often done in practice (Zhang et al.,
                                 (j)          (j)
2023b). Then, given a set {so , S1 , . . . , Stj }nj=1 of independently sampled trajectories, we define
                                      1 X 1 X       (j)  (j)
                            L̂(θ) =           LDB (Si , Si−1 )                                     (15)
                                      n   tj
                                        1≤j≤n     1≤i≤tj

as the empirical estimate of L(θ). Under these conditions, Theorem 5.4 established a high-
probability upper bound of L(θ) as a function of L̂(θ) and of some characteristics of the generative
process. We recall, however, that two assumptions were required to achieve this: that the DB loss
and thus the martingale difference sequence M are almost surely bounded and that the training is
constrained by a pre-specified transition budget. In practice, the boundedness can be achieved by


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


either clipping the loss function (McAllester, 1999; 2013) or, when more detailed information about
R is available, constraining the output of the neural networks in the fashion of Lemma B.1 with
the
  knowledge that P the optimal   flow F (s) satisfying the detailed balance is bounded by F (s) ∈
                                        ⋆                                                     ⋆

 minx∈X R(x), x∈X R(x) for each state s (Bengio et al., 2023), or a more refined version of this
constraint (with upper and lower limits possibly depending on s). On the other hand, due to the CPU-
bounded nature of GFlowNet transition sampling (which cannot be easily parallellized in a GPU),
we assume that training is computationally limited by a fixed number of observed transitions. Hence,
to promote an equitable assessment of different generative tasks, we assume in Theorem 5.4 that the
number n of sampled trajectories for training depends on a fixed budget of sampleable transitions T .

B.4   S UBGRAPH A SYNCHRONOUS L EARNING

Please refer to Section C.2 for a detailed experimental evaluation of SAL. We would like to
emphasize that all experiments below are based on standard practices for GFloNet training, with tra-
jectories sampled from an ϵ-greedy sampling policy, and not on the simplified setting of Section B.2.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     SAL: I MPLEMENTATION AND T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

Sampling correctness. We first recall how to sample a x ∈ X in the context of SAL. For a given
collection {poF } ∪ {pjF }mj=1 of forward policies trained in the style of Definition 6.2, we do so
by starting at so and following the root policy until we reach either a terminal state x ∈ X or a
leaf partition Sj . In the former case, we interrupt the generation and return x as a sample. In the
latter, we proceed to X by following the leaf’s policy pjF , as shown in the highlighted trajectory
in Figure 3. In Theorem C.1, we demonstrate that this approach samples x ∈ X proportionally to
R(x) when both the leaf and root policies globally minimize their respective learning objectives.
Theorem C.1 (Sampling correctness of SAL). Let {Sj }m                                    m
                                                          j=0 = FHP(S, m) and {Gj }j=0 be the
                                 ⋆,o        ⋆,j m
corresponding GFlowNets. Let pF and {pF }j=1 be global minimizers of their respective learning
objectives. Then, the marginal distribution over X induced by the learned policies {p⋆,j m
                                                                                     F }j=0 ,
                               X X X ⋆,o                      X ⋆,j
                     p⋆T (x) =                    pF (τ |so )       pF (τ ′ |s),              (16)
                                 1≤j≤m s∈Ij τ : so ⇝s             τ ′ : s⇝x
                                                              P
matches the target distribution π(x) := R(x)/Z , with Z =        x∈X R(x).

Remarkably, Theorem C.1 establishes SAL as the first asymptotically correct general-purpose
distributed learning algorithm for GFlowNets. On the other hand, a successful implementation of
SAL requires having an efficient mechanism concomitantly enabling to sample states from a given
partition (to minimize LATB ) and to recover the partition of a state (for inference). This is the
reasoning behind what we name, and have long named, an assignment function. In Section C.2,
we develop such mechanisms for some commonly considered generative tasks in the GFlowNet
literature and provide an empirical analysis asserting the effectiveness of the resulting algorithm.

C.1     S UMMARY OF THE EXPERIMENTAL CAMPAING

We provide a summary of the considered generative tasks for assessing the performance of SAL.
For a comprehensive discussion on the implementation of SAL, please consult the sections below.

    1. Hypergrid (Bengio et al., 2021; Malkin et al., 2022; 2023; Pan et al., 2023b; Krichel et al.,
       2024). We consider both a 8 x 8 and a 64 x 64 hypergrid environment (Section 2) with (Malkin
       et al., 2022, Section 5.1)’s reward function, which is illustrated in Figure 4 for H = 8.
    2. SIX6 (Jain et al., 2022; Malkin et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023; Chen & Mauch, 2024; Kim et al.,
       2024a). We generate 8-sized nucleotide strings. The reward represents wet-lab DNA binding
       measurements to a human transcription factor (Barrera et al., 2016; Trabucco et al., 2022).
    3. PHO4 (Jain et al., 2022; Malkin et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Similarly,
       we construct 10-sized nucleotide strings; the reward reflects wet-lab measurements of DNA
       binding activities to a yeast transcription factor (Barrera et al., 2016; Trabucco et al., 2022).
    4. Bit sequences (Malkin et al., 2022; Madan et al., 2022; Rector-Brooks et al., 2023; Tiapkin
       et al., 2024). We produce 60-sized binary sequences. Given a subset M of such sequences,
       we define R(x) = exp{− minm∈M dL (x, m)}, in which dL is the edit distance.
    5. Sequence design (Jain et al., 2022; da Silva et al., 2024). We build 8-sized sequences of
                                   P8
       {1, . . . , 6}. Also, R(x) = i=1 g(i)f (xi ), with f and g being [−1, 1]-valued functions.
    6. Set generation (Bengio et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023a). We assemble 16-sized subsets of a
       fixed 32-sized set. We employ the same additive reward function described in Section 4.

C.2     A N EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF SAL

We start defining an assignment function.
Definition C.2 (Assignment function). Let f : S → {0, 1, . . . , m} := [m], in which m is the number
of available computational units. Assume that f satisfies the following conditions.

    1. (Completeness). f −1 (j) ̸= ∅ for each j, i.e., f assigns at least one state to each available unit;


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   j=0 is a fixed-horizon partition of S.
  2. (Consistency). {Sj = f −1 (j)}m

Then, f is called an assignment function and {Sj }m
                                                  j=0 is the fixed-horizon partition associated to f .

Condition (1) above, which we call completeness, ensures that no computational unit is wasted,
whereas condition (2) – consistency – guarantees that the partition of S induced by f −1 is a FHP. In
this context, we denote by RV(S) the space of S-valued random variables (measurable functions).
Then, we say that a function g : [m] → RV(S) is a stochastic inverse of f if g(j) ∈ f −1 (j) with
probability one for each j ∈ [m]; a similar concept exists in the literature of discrete normalizing
flows (Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Tran et al., 2019). Notably, the distribution qj over the subnetworks’
sources in the definition of SAL (see Eq. 9) corresponds to the PMF of the random variable g(j).
Importantly, to efficiently implement SAL, one only needs to develop an f that is both fast to
compute and easily stochastically invertible. In this section, we show how to design such an assign-
ment function for the problems of autoregressive design and set generation and for the hypergrid
environment. The reader is reminded to recall Appendix A for an overview of each generative task.
SAL for autoregressive models. We first illustrate                          Sets       Sequences
the concept of an assignment function for autore-          Centralized 0.092±0.001 0.126±0.012
gressively generated objects, which are very com-               SAL     0.072±0.008 0.094±0.005
mon in applications (Jain et al., 2022; Malkin et al.,
2022; Jiralerspong et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024). For Table 2: Total variation distance between
this problem, each state s is represented as an ele- target and learned measures for the central-
ment of the set [[0, k − 1]]L for fixed k (the vocab- ized model (top row) and SAL (bottom row).
ulary size, e.g., k = 4 for nucleotide strings) and L (the sequence’s length). Then, to construct a
fixed-horizon partition, we choose a distance D from the initial state and define
                                                 X
                                       h(s) =          si · k i−1                              (17)
                                               1≤i≤D

as the k-ary representation of s. Then, f (s) = 1{#s≥D} (h(s) (mod m) + 1) is our assignment
function. Importantly, both f (s) and f −1 (j) add an negligible computational overhead to the train-
ing procedure. Indeed, to sample s from f −1 (j) for j ≥ 1, we first define h(s) = m·ξ +(j −1) with
ξ randomly sampled from [[0, ⌈k −1/m⌉]]. Thus, to recover s from h(s), we only need to solve a
                                   D


(triangular) linear system; the details are provided next. Let hn (s) = m·ξ +(j −1) (mod k n ). Also,
                                X                           X
                     hn (s) =         si k i−1 (mod k n ) =        si k i−1 ≤ k n − 1            (18)
                             1≤i≤D                        1≤i≤n

when n ≤ D. Clearly, h1 (s) = s1 and, recursively, hn (s) = k n−1 sn + hn−1 (s). Therefore,
s = (s1 , . . . , sD ) jointly satisfy the triangular system Ts = h, in which Ti,j = 1{i≥j} · k j−1 and
hi = h(s) (mod k i ) for i, j ∈ {1, . . . , D}. This system can be efficiently solved via backward
substitution in parallel for a batch {h(s1 ), . . . , h(sB )} of B sequences.
SAL for set generation. As in Section 4, we also                                      ×10−5       Sets                     ×10−4       Sequences

consider the problem of generating S-sized sets with                              4                                  1.0


elements extracted from a source W = {1, . . . , W }                                                                 0.8
                                                                    Centralized


                                                                                  3

of fixed size W . In this setting, each s ⊆ W can be                                                                 0.6


uniquely represented as a binary vector s ∈ {1, 0}W                               2
                                                                                                                     0.4


with si = 1 indicating that i ∈ W is a member of                                  1
                                                                                                                     0.2


s. Notably, the elements s at distance D ≤ S to
                                                           Target


                                                                                         1    2          3    4                0.25     0.50       0.75   1.00

the initial state can also be completely described by
                                                                                                             ×10−5                                        ×10−4
                                                                                      ×10−5                                ×10−4

PW
   i=1 si = D. For these elements, the prefix s1:D ∈
                                                                                  4                                   3


{1, 0}D has at least max{0, 2D − W } components                                   3
                                                                    SAL


                                                                                                                      2

equal to 1. Then, similarly to Equation 17, we de-                                2

fine the assignment function f for each s ∈ {1, 0}W                                                                   1

      PW                                                                          1

with i=1 si = D as the binary representation of s                                        1    2          3   4                     1           2          3
modulo the number of computational units,                                                                    ×10−5
                                                                                                               Learned
                                                                                                                                                          ×10−4


                 X
      f (s) =          2i−1 si (mod m) + 1.      (19)
                                                          Figure 6: Target vs. learned distributions.
              1≤i≤D


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Hypergrid 64 x 64                              SIX6                                   PHO4                                  Bit sequences                                  Set generation
          1000                                          600                                   5000                                                                                          Centralized
                                                                                                                                                                                            SAL
                                                                                                                                      20000                                          4000
           800                                          500                                   4000

                                                        400                                                                           15000                                          3000
# modes    600                                                                                3000
                                                        300
           400                                                                                2000                                    10000                                          2000
                                                        200
           200                                                                                1000                                     5000                                          1000
                                                        100

             0                                            0                                      0                                        0                                             0
                 5000   10000   15000   20000   25000         200   400    600   800   1000           500      1000     1500   2000           1000   2000    3000      4000   5000          500           1000     1500   2000

                                                                                                     Total number of epochs



Figure 7: SAL enacts faster mode discovery under varying time budgets. The horizontal axis
represents the total number of epochs used by the centralized model, which is set to the sum of the
number of epochs for each leaf GFlowNet and the root GFlowNet to ensure the approaches are fairly
compared. We provide additional evidence for the enhance performance of SAL in Figure 13.


On the other hand, let νmin = 2                   −1/m and ν             2 −1/m . To stochastically
                                     max{0,2D−W }                       D
                                                               max =
reverse f , we define h(j) = m · ξ + (j − 1) with ξ ∼ P(νmin , νmax , λ) sampled from a
Poisson truncated at [νmin , νmax ] and parameterized by λ. Then, we let [h(j)] ∈ {1, 0}D be the
corresponding bit-wise representation of h and yj ∈ {1, 0}W −D be a random binary vector with
               PD
exactly D − i=1 [h(j)]i components equal to 1, obtained via Fisher-Yates’ shuffling algorithm
(Fisher & Yates, 1963). Finally, we construct a sample s = ([h(j)], yj ) ∈ {1, 0}W by concatenating
[h(j)] and yj . Notably, an assignment function is closely related to the concept of ranking and
unraking functions in computational combinatorics (Myrvold & Ruskey, 2001). To see this, we
recall that a ranking r (resp. unranking u) function of a set S (resp. {0, . . . , |S| − 1}) injectively
maps each member of S to an element of {0, . . . , |S| − 1} (resp. S). A natural choice for r is based
on the lexicographic order on S (Liebehenschel, 1997); the corresponding u, however, may not be
efficiently computable. Given a ranking function r and a number m of computing nodes for training
a GFlowNet, we may defined an assignment function as f (s) = r(s) (mod m) + 1. We also provide
an implementation of a lexicographic-based ranking and unranking functions for the set generation
task to support future research on the development of more effective partioning schemes for SAL.
SAL for the hypergrid environment. In conclusion, we also consider the difficult-to-explore hy-
pergrid environment, which is defined by a distribution supported on [[0, H − 1]]d for fixed H
(the grid’s size) and d (the grid’s dimension) (Bengio et al., 2021). For this problem,
                                                                                  P we note the
states x at distance D to the initial state can be fully described by the equation 1≤i≤d xi = D.
Equivalently, each x satisfying the above equation can be injectively mapped to a point within the
(k − 1)-simplex. Hence, we define the assignment function f over states at distance D from so as
                            (   1                                                 )
                                      /d−1                    1/d−1
                                 j            x1       j+1
             f (x) = min                    ≤     <                 + [j = m − 1] + 1.        (20)
                     0≤j<m       m             D         m
The exponent 1/(d−1) is meant to ensure the workload is approximately homogeneously distributed
among the computational units. To sample from f −1 (j) for j ≥ 1, we let
                 l             1/d−1
                                     m                  j         1/d−1
                                                                        k
         νmin = D · (j−1/m)              and νmax = D · (j/m)             + [j = m − 1]    (21)
and pick x1 uniformly at random from [[νmin , νmax ]]. Then, (x2 , . . . , xd ) is drawn from a Dirichlet-
multinomial with number of trials D − x1 and concentration parameter α set (arbitrarily) to 1.
Remarkably, the hypergrid environment illustrates an approach differing
from the strategy of encoding-as-integer and computing-the-remainder
that was implemented for the other tasks. Figure 8 shows the partition
for d = 2, H = 8, and m = 2, which was the setup for Figure 4. We
represent in red and teal the sources of the subnetworks assigned to the
leaves j = 1 and j = 2, respectively, and in blue the remaining states.
Recall that, by definition, all descendants of a state s are members of s’s
partition. In this scenario, we hope that the development of sophisticated
and expert-driven partitioning techniques will greatly benefit the use of Figure 8: FHP for the
GFlowNets in specialized domains, e.g., drug discovery.                     hypergrid.
SAL results in better distributional approximations. Figure 4 shows that, when compared against
a centralized approach, SAL achieves a better distributional approximation for the hypergrid envi-
ronment under a fixed time-budget (for SAL, the training time is the longest client’s training time


                                                                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Hypergrid 64 x 64                       SIX6                          PHO4                            Bit sequences                                                    Set generation
                                                                                                             25000                                                          6000
                 1024                                     612                         4495                            23164                                                             5683
          1000                                      600
                                                                               4000                          20000                                                          5000
                                                    500
           800
                                                                       420                                                                                                  4000
                                                    400                        3000                          15000                                                                                              3468
# modes
           600
                                                                                                                                                                            3000
                                                    300
                                                                               2000                  1843    10000
           400
                                                    200                                                                                                                     2000
                                            256                                                                                                      5712
           200                                                                 1000                           5000
                                                    100                                                                                                                     1000

             0                                        0                           0                              0                                                               0
                 SAL                        Cent.         SAL          Cent.          SAL            Cent.            SAL                            Cent.                              SAL                     Cent.


Figure 9: SAL improves the discovery of high-value states for all considered tasks. For a fair
comparison, the centralized model is allowed to explore for twice the number of epochs permitted
to each client, ensuring the training times are roughly the same for SAL and the standard GFlowNet.


                    Centralized                                         SAL                                  Target
                                                                                                                                                                    25                                          24.50
                                                                                                                                                                         23.33       23.30

                                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                              Training time (min)
                                                                                                                                                                    15

                                                                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.80
                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                         Cln 1       Cln 2   SAL                Cent.
                                                                                                                                                                                         Model



Figure 10: SAL results in a more accurate approximation than a centralized approach for a similar
time budget on the 12×12 grid. Complementarily to Fig. 4, all models are trained by minimizing the
SubTB (instead of TB) objective with λ = 0.9. The running time for SAL is determined by the train-
ing time of the longest client (blue columns) plus the much faster aggregation step (green column).



plus the time for aggregation). Figure 6 and Table 2 corroborate this claim for the set generation
and sequence design tasks, showcasing that SAL learns a distribution that matches the target more
closely than a standardly trained GFlowNet. For the other tasks, learning an accurate distributional
approximation is not as important as finding high-value objects, and that is the reason we do not
consider them here. Notably, these results are consistent with Theorems 5.2 and 5.4: by reducing
the size of the state graph that each model needs to focus on, SAL potentially faciliates the learning
of a generalizable policy network and leads to a more accurate approximation to the target.


SAL greatly improves mode-discovery. In the GFlowNet literature, a mode is often defined as
a state x whose associated reward R(x) is larger than a predefined threshold t; see, e.g., (Bengio
et al., 2021; Pan et al., 2023a;b; Madan et al., 2022; Jang et al., 2024; Malkin et al., 2022). For
our experiments, we fix t = 0.1 for the hypergrid environment and, for the other generative tasks,
we sample an initial batch of 2 · 104 from the uniform policy and set t as the 0.99 quantile of
the observed rewards. Importantly, the same threshold is used for both the centralized, leaf, and
root GFlowNets. Under these conditions, Figures 4, 9, 7, and 13 show that SAL enacts a drastic
improvement of the mode-discovery rate over a centralized approach for varying computational
budgets in all considered generative problems, leading to the discovery of up to 8x more modes.
There are two reasons for this. Firstly, the distributed nature of SAL ensures that a much larger
portion of the state space is explored in a significantly shorter amount of time. Secondly, each client
model focus on a subset of the state graph and may be regarded as a specialist in the corresponding
subtask. By collecting the samples fostered by these local specialists, we end up with a significantly
more diverse and valuable collection than the one that would be obtained by, e.g., independently
training multiple GFlowNets in parallel. Remarkably, this interpretation highlights the relevance of
appropriately defining a fixed-horizon partition of the state graph, an issue that defines a key future
direction for our work, as we discussed in Section 7 of the main text.
Alternative learning objectives for SAL. For simplicity of exposition, we outlined SAL in Def-
inition 6.2 as a collection of TB-minimizing GFlowNets. However, as previously discussed, one
can straightforwardly adapt alternative learning objectives (e.g., SubTB (Madan et al., 2022)) and
sampling techniques (e.g., replay buffer (Deleu et al., 2022)) to the context of SAL. We illustrate


                                                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


these extensions here. Firstly, the SubTB objective for the jth partition would take the form
                                                                                                    
                                                        n−m
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                           |τ

                                        X             λ                   F (τ m )pF (τm:n    m )
 LjSubTB (pF , F ) = E        E                P              t−s
                                                                      log                            ,
                    s∼qj τ ∼pj (·|s)
                                                   1≤s<t≤|τ | λ            F (τn )pB (τn:m |τn )
                              E        1≤m<n≤|τ |

in which qj and pjE are a distribution over initial states of and a sampling policy for the jth partition,
respectively. Secondly, the replay buffer would store the trajectories τ leading to high-value states
within the jth partition, as measured by either R (for leaf partitions) or Ro (for the root partition;
see Algorithm 1). Figure 10 compares the accuracy of SAL against a centralized GFlowNet, both of
which trained by SubTB minimization (λ = 0.9), for the 12 × 12 hypergrid environment. Similarly
to Figure 4, SAL achieves a better distributional approximation in this case. Additionally, we
found that SubTB leads to faster convergence with respect to (A)TB (not reported) in this particular
problem, consistently with the evidence at Madan et al. (2022, Figure 1). On the other hand, our
experiments did not provide evidence in favor of using the replay buffer. However, we acknowledge
that a deeper empirical investigation, in the fashion of Vemgal et al. (2023)’s work, is required.

C.3   T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS AND EXTENSIONS

This section aims to answer two core questions regarding the nature of SAL. From a sampling
perspective, we ask which distribution each client learns and suggest potential diagnostic techniques
to evaluate their distributional accuracy. From a distributed learning standpoint, we assess the extent
to which local errors are propagated to the global model. Additionally, we formally extend SAL to
accommodate the learning over multi-layered fixed-horizon partitions of the state graph.
Local sampling distributions. Each leaf GFlowNet in SAL learns a distribution over a subset Xj of
the set of terminal states X . The character of such distribution, however, was not considered in the
foregoing discussion, and one may wonder whether it just corresponds to the restriction of the target
to Xj . As we show below, this is not generally the case: the optimal leaf distribution, which we de-
note by pjT , depends on both Xj and on the specific structure of the state graph induced by the leaf Sj .
Proposition C.3 (Local sampling distributions). Let {Sj }m                                     m
                                                                j=0 = FHP(S) and {Gj }j=0 be the
corresponding GFlowNets. Also, denote by TDc(s) the set of terminal descendants of s on the
original state graph, i.e., x ∈ TDc(s) if x ∈ X and there is a directed path from s to x. Then, for
fixed backward policy pB , the solution that globally minimizes Equation 9 satisfies
                   X               X                                    R(x) X
       Fj (s) =            R(x)          pB (τ |x) and pjT (x|s) =                     pB (τ |x)    (22)
                                 τ : s⇝x
                                                                        Fj (s) τ : s⇝x
                 x∈TDc(s)
                                                    S
for each j ∈ {1, . . . , m}, s ∈ Ij , and x ∈ Xj := s∈Ij TDc(s).

When the sum over backward trajectories in Equation 22 does not depend on x, e.g., for autore-
gressively generated object (in which pB (τ |x) = 1 for the unique trajectory τ connecting s to x)
and sets (in which the sum depends only on the depth of s when pB is fixed to an uniform policy),
Proposition C.3 says that pjT can be nicely interpreted as the restriction of the original target R to
the induced terminal set Xj . We emphasize this fact in the corollary below.
Corollary C.4 (Local sampling distributions for autoregressive models). In the context of Proposi-
tion C.3, assume that the state graph is represented as a tree. Then, pB (τ |x) = 1 for every τ and
                              X                                        R(x)
                  Fj (s) =           R(x) and pjT (x|s) = P                        .              (23)
                            x∈TDc(s)                               x∈TDc(s) R(x)


For the set generation task, it also holds that pjT (x|s) ∝ R(x) for each x ∈ TDc(s) and s ∈ Ij .

Interestingly, the result above suggests a straightforward procedure for assessing the goodness-of-fit
of the locally trained GFlowNets. When Xj is considerably smaller than X , we can compute the
normalized target in Equation 23 and directly compare it against the learned distribution in X .
Otherwise, any technique for diagnosing GFlowNets can be readily applied to probe the accuracy of
pjT , e.g., measuring the Spearman correlation between log pjT (·|s) and log R(x) for x ∈ Xj (Malkin
et al., 2022; Madan et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023; Tiapkin et al., 2024; Chen & Mauch, 2024).


                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Illustration of Recursive SAL. We show a two-level partition with m1 = 2 models
within the first level and m2 = 3 models within the second one. For training, we first train models at
the bottommost layer (represented in blue, red, and green) and recursively proceed upwards towards
the middle (magenta and yellow) and top (root partition, shown in pink) layers. For the non-root lay-
ers, learning is based on minimizing LATB with the reward defined as in Equation 25; for the root, we
minimize LTB instead. For inference, we start at so and iteratively select the policy based on the cur-
rent state, as illustrated in the highlighted trajectory and in the annotated text on the top-right corner.


Sensibility to error propagation. Proposition C.3 raises an important question: how do the errors of
the leaf models {Gj }m
                     j=1 affect the global goodness-of-fit? To address this issue, the next proposition
shows that the contribution of Gj to the overall distributional error is an increasing function of the
probability mass associated to the jth leaf by the root model, Go , and of how inaccurate Gj ’s itself is.
Proposition C.5 (Sensibility to error propagation). Let {Sj }m   j=0 = FHP(S, m) with GFlowNets
{Gj }m
     j=0 . Assume that Go satisfies its balance condition. Also, define
                     X                           X                           X
             ZR =          R(x), ZF =                     Fj (x), and Z =        ZR ,      (24)
                    x∈X ∩So
                                                      S
                                                        1≤j≤m Ij
                                                 x∈                                          x∈X

and note that ZR + ZF is the partition function associated to Go . Then, the TV distance between
the learned distribution pT in Equation 16 and the target π(x) ∝ R(x) for x ∈ X satisfies

                   ZR 1           1        1 X                             ZF     f (s)
   TV (pT , π) ≤           −             +            Es∼pT ,\X π(x) −
                                                           o                     p      (x|s) ,
                    2 Z       ZR + ZF      2                           ZR + ZF T
                       |       {z      }     x∈X \So |                 {z                     }
                        Error in estimating ZF                         Error of the local approximations

in which poT,\X is the restriction of poT to
                                                 S
                                                     1≤j≤m Ij and f is the assignment function.

Importantly, the bound above is tight in the sense that, when the root and leaf models satisfy
                                                                f (s)
their balance conditions, Z = ZR + ZF and π(x) ∝ Es [pT (x|s)], as we show in the proof of
Proposition C.5 in Appendix D. There, we also provide an alternative, trajectory-based upper bound
on the TV distance that similarly highlights the relatively large impact of the distributional errors
associated with large-probability leaves to the overall accuracy. Heuristically, this suggests that SAL
may benefit from a FHP that approximately homogeneously distribute the probability mass among
the leaf partitions, ensuring that no client has a disproportionate role on shaping the accuracy of the
aggregated model. To achieve this, however, one needs prior knowledge of the reward function; the
definition of a good fixed-horizon partition should be done in problem-by-problem basis. We also
believe that a human expert would have a remarkable impact on the effectiveness of SAL for the
highly-specialized, molecular-biology-based, tasks in which GFlowNet are often implemented.
Recursive SAL. In Section 6, we introduced an extension of SAL to recursively defined FHPs.
Proposition C.6 formalizes this procedure and demonstrates through an inductive argument that the
resulting model samples correctly from the target distribution.
Proposition C.6 (Recursive SAL). Let S be the vertices of a state graph with diameter D. Then,
S sequences 0 = do < d1 < d2 < · · · < dk ≤ D and {mo = 1, m1 , . . . , mk }, we define
for
  1≤j≤mi Iij as a disjoint mi -partition of the states distanced di from so . Also, let Xk = {x ∈
X : d(x, so ) ≥ dk } and, for i < k, let Xi = {s : s ∈ Ii+1,j ∨ (d(s, so ) ≤ di ∧ s ∈ X )}. Finally,


                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we define Gi S= {(pi,j    i,j
                    F , pB , Fij ) : 1 ≤ j ≤ mi } as a set of GFlowNets trained on a state graph with
initial states j Iij , terminal states Xi , and reward function Ri such that

                                         Fi+1 (s), if s ∈ Ii+1 and i < k,
                              Ri (s) =                                                           (25)
                                         R(s), if s ∈ X .
Then, when the GFlowNets ∪ki=0 Gi satisfy their respective balance conditions, the generative
process starting at so and recursively following pi,b
                                                   F until either reaching Ii+1,a , at which point the
guiding forward policy is changed to pi+1,a
                                         F   , for 0 ≤ i ≤ k, or reaching X , signaling to stop the
generation and return the sampled object, samples each x ∈ X proportionally to R(x).

Remarks on Recursive SAL. In plain English, the above proposition says that we can use the
learned flow function Fi+1 at the (i + 1)th layer as the reward function of the GFlowNets within
the ith layer to obtain a correct sampler when training the GFlowNets in a hierarchical fashion.
In computational terms, the number of trained models grows linearly with the depth k and width
maxi mi of the multi-layered partition. In the light of Theorems 5.2 and 5.4, however, each model
would have to solve a considerably simpler problem and we may be able to use a significantly
smaller neural network to parameterize the corresponding forward policies, with advantageous con-
sequences for both generalization—via the KL term in Theorems 5.2 and 5.4, which increases with
the number of estimable parameters—and storage. Albeit we do not provide an empirical evaluation
of Recursive SAL in this work, we believe its implementation could be beneficial for problems with
very large trajectory sizes and are optimistic about its potential applications in future endeavors.

C.4   C ONDITIONAL SAL

SAL and state-conditional flows. Bengio et al. (2023, Section 4.3) introduce state-conditional
flows as a family {Fs }s∈S of flow functions defined on the subgraphs Gs induced by {s′ ∈ S : s ≥
s′ }, in which s ≥ s′ means that there is a path from s to s′ on the original state graph. Remarkably, a
FHP(S, m) can be interpreted as a subset {Fs }s∈∪m   j=1 Ij
                                                            of a state-conditional flow. In spite of these
similarities, which serve only to strengthen the foundations of our work, we emphasize the novelty
and demonstrated effectiveness of our distributed strategy for learning state-conditional flows.
Learning reward-conditioned GFlowNets with SAL. Recently, there has been growing interest
in reward-conditioned flows, in which we learn a family {Fc }c∈C of flow functions conditioned on
some information c ∈ C given as an additional input to the neural network. In most applications,
c corresponds to either a temperature parameter (Zhang et al., 2023a; Kim et al., 2024a) defining
the peakiness of the target distribution or pharmaceutical properties (Roy et al., 2023; Pandey
et al., 2024) guiding the drug discovery process. In view of this, we extend SAL to accommodate
the distributed learning of reward-conditioned GFlowNets on a conditioned FHP, i.e., a FHP that
depends on the conditioning information. This may be formally expressed as follows.
Remark C.7 (Reward-conditioned SAL). Let C be a set of conditioning information and {Rc : X →
R+ : c ∈ C} be the corresponding family of conditioned rewards. Also, let F : C × S → R+ and
pF : C × S × S → [0, 1] be a conditional flow function and a conditional forward policy, that is,
pF (c, ·, ·) is a forward policy for each c. Finally, let {Sjc }m
                                                                j=0 = FHP(S, m, c) be a conditioned FHP
and {Gj }m  j=0   be a family of reward-conditional    GFlowNets.    Following the arguments for demon-
strating Theorem C.1, it is easy to see that SAL samples correctly in proportion to Rc when each Gj
satisfies its respective balance condition with respect to Rc for every c ∈ C and 0 ≤ j ≤ m.
Conditional GFlowNets are commonly implemented for controllable generation by setting the
conditioning information c at inference time (Roy et al., 2023); see also Lau et al. (2023)’s QGFN.
In fact, Pandey et al. (2024) recently explored this principle for the effective exploration of chemical
space at an atomic-level given some desirable pharmacological properties, e.g., synthetizability. In
this regard, Remark C.7 ensures that most of these approaches can ba adapted to the distributed set-
ting via SAL, and we believe that assessing the resulting methods is an important research direction.

C.5   SAL AND EP-GF LOW N ETS
                                                                              QK
The reward function of GFlowNets can often be decomposed as R(x) = i=1 Ri (x) (Jain et al.,
2023; Deleu et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Pandey et al., 2024), e.g., in multi-objective problems in


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which each Ri is an objective and our goal is finding samples that are concomintantly high valued
for every Ri . In these cases, da Silva et al. (2024) proposed a divide-and-conquer algorithm for
learning K GFlowNets in parallel, each targeting a reward Ri , and then aggregating them with an
extra GFlowNet. The resulting model, termed EP-GFlowNet, trains (K + 1) GFlowNets on the
same state graph, in sharp contrast to SAL which trains a GFlowNet for each component of a FHP.
To further highlight the distinction between SAL and EP-GFlowNets, we show below that these
approaches can be implemented in a complementar manner.
                                           QK
Proposition C.8 (EP-SAL). Let R(x) = i=1 Ri (x) be a multiplicative decomposition of R. For
each 1 ≤ i ≤ K, let {Sji }m   i
                                 = FHPi (S, mi ) be a fixed-horizon partition of the state space S.
                   i,j i,j j=0
Also, let Gi = {(pF , pB , Fi,j ) : 0 ≤ j ≤ mi } be the root- and leaf-GFlowNets corresponding to
the i-th FHP and denote by piF and piB the induced distributions over trajectories. Assume that each
piF samples terminal objects in X proportionally to Ri . Finally, let pE be any positive probability
measure over trajectories. Then, if a GFlowNet (pF , pB , G) globally minimizes
                                            QK i                         !
                                              i=1 pF (τ )        pF (τ )
                          Varτ ∼pE log QK                  + log           ,                    (26)
                                             i=1 pB (τ |x)
                                                                 pB (τ )
                                              QK
the marginal pT of pF over X matches R := i=1 Ri up to a normalizing constant.

Proof. The result follows directly from Theorem C.1 and (da Silva et al., 2024, Theorem 3.1).

For the sake of completeness, let τ1:d denote the first d transitions of τ and τd: be its complementar.
Then, let di be the distance from the initial state of so to the sets Ii,j in the underlying state graph
for j ∈ {1, . . . , mi } (recall Definition 6.1, and note that di does not depend on j). Under these
conditions, the sampling distribution piF in Proposition C.8 can be formally written as
                            (
                              poF (τ ) if |τ | ≤ di ,
                 piF (τ ) =                Pmi P                    i,j                             (27)
                              poF (τ1:di ) j=1        s∈Ij 1{s∈τ } pF (τdi : |s), otherwise.

Importantly, Equation 27 can be efficiently computed by keeping track of the partition associated to
each sampled state. In practice, the computational overhead wrt directly evaluating pF is negligible.
Empirical illustration. From an empirical standpoint, Proposition C.8 says
                                                                                            −4
                                                                                    ×10

that SAL can be used to learn a set Gi of GFlowNets jointly sampling x ∈ X        4
in proportion to Ri (x). Then, given Gi for 1 ≤ i ≤ K, a GFlowNet sampling
                                                                                   Target


                  QK                                                              3
in proportion to i=1 Ri can be obtained by minimizing EP-GFlowNet’s
learning objective. Figure 12 empirically validates this result for the task of   2
set generation with the same hyperparameters considered in Figure 6 with
K = 2 and mi = 2 for each i ∈ {1, 2}. Each GFlowNet was trained for 512                 2         4
                                                                                          Learned ×10−4
epochs and the log-utilities defining Ri were independently sampled for each
client. Nonetheless, in spite of its soundness, the effectiveness of this mixed Figure 12: SAL of
approach in realistic problems remains to be assessed. Looking at the bigger EP-GFlowNets.
picture, these observations emphasize the composability of GFlowNets (Garipov et al., 2023),
which might be relevant for the design of more data-efficient algorithms (Du & Kaelbling, 2024).


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     P ROOFS
D.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.1
                                                                                W
We simply note that the space of T -sized subsets of {1, . . . , W } has size           and the space of

                                                                                T
T -sized subsets of {2, . . . , W } has size WT−1 . Since


                                            W −1

                                                    W −T
                                             T
                                             W
                                                 =        →1                                        (28)
                                             T
                                                       W

when W → ∞, we can always find for any ξ ∈ (0, 1) a W and a T , both of which potentially
depending on ξ, for which |X ′ | ≥ ξ|X |. For the cases considered in Figure 1, in particular, we
compute the following proportions: (32−6)/32 = 81.25% and (64−6)/64 ≈ 90.63%.

D.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.2

Our proof has three steps. Firstly, we use Hölder’s inequality to bound the expectation of |π(x) −
pT (x)|. Secondly, we rely on Jensen’s inequality to bound |π(x) − pT (x)| with an expectation of
|pF (τ )/pB (τ |x) − π(x)| over τ . Thirdly, we convert the probabilities to a log-scale with a simple
technical argument based on the Taylor expansion of log. For this, let ϕ(x) = |π(x) − pT (x)|. Then,
                               X
             Ex∼qE,T [ϕ(x)] =       ϕ(x)qE,T (x)
                                x∈X
                                X       qE,T (x)
                            =         ϕ(x) ·      pE,T (x)
                                        pE,T (x)
                              x∈X
                                                    ! q1                            ! p1            (29)
                                X                         X   qE,T (x)  p
                                        q
                            ≤       ϕ(x) pE,T (x)                           pE,T (x)
                                                                pE,T (x)
                                x∈X                       x∈X
                                                                            p    p1
                                                1/q               qE,T (x)
                            = Ex∼pE,T [ϕ(x)q ]         Ex∼pE,T
                                                                  pE,T (x)
for any p, q > 1 such that 1/p + 1/q = 1. For p = q = 2, this bound becomes
                                                                             1
                   Ex∼qE,T [ϕ(x)] ≤ Ex∼pE,T [ϕ(x)2 ] χ2 (qE,T ||pE,T ) + 1 2 .                      (30)
For GFlowNets, we may write pT (x) = Eτ ∼pB [pF (τ )/pB (τ |x)]. Hence, by Jensen’s inequality,
                                          "                                    2 #
                             2
                                                             pF (τ )
               Ex∼pE,T ϕ(x) = Ex∼pE,T          Eτ ∼pB                 − π(x)
                                                           pB (τ |x)
                                          "           "                       2 ##              (31)
                                                             pF (τ )
                                 ≤ Ex∼pE,T Eτ ∼pB                     − π(x)       .
                                                            pB (τ |x)

In conclusion, we show that
                                        2                          2
                        pF (τ )                pF (τ )
                                 − π(x) ≲ log           − log π(x) .                                (32)
                       pB (τ |x)              pB (τ |x)

In fact, let M = maxτ,x ppBF(τ(τ|x)
                                 )
                                    , which always exists due to the finiteness of the state space. For
instance, M ≤ 1 for autoregressive generative tasks (i.e., when pB (τ |x) = 1). Thus,
                                            2                                 2
                        pF (τ )                           pF (τ )      π(x)
                                    − π(x) ≤ M 2                    −           .
                       pB (τ |x)                       M pB (τ |x)      M
The lemma below, which is a direct consequence of the mean value theorem, ensures that the
quantity above is bounded above by the log-squared difference between pF (τ )/pB (τ |x) and π(x).
Lemma D.1 (Lipschitzness of x 7→ ex ). For every x, y ∈ (0, 1], | log x − log y| ≥ |x − y|.


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Consider f : (−∞, 0] → R, f : t 7→ et , and notice that |f ′ (t)| = |et | ≤ 1. Consequently,
by the mean value theorem, f is 1-Lipstchitz and |et − es | ≤ |t − s| for every t, s ∈ (−∞, 0]. By
letting log x = t and log y = s, we conclude that |x − y| ≤ | log x − log y| for x, y ∈ (0, 1].

In summary, we have shown that
                                                                       2                               !1/2
                                                pF (τ )
                                                                           χ2 (qE,T ||pE,T ) + 1              . (33)

      E    [ϕ(x)] ≲   Ex∼pE,T Eτ ∼pB       log           − log π(x)
 x∼qE,T                                        pB (τ |x)
The statement thereby follows by considering an uniform reference distribution, qE,T (x) = |X1 | ,
                    |X |
      TV (pT , π) =      Ex∼qE,T [ϕ(x)]
                     2
                                                             2                        !1/2
                                         pF (τ )                2

                   ≲ Ex∼pE,T Eτ ∼pB log           − log π(x)   χ (qE,T ||pE,T ) + 1        .
                                        pB (τ |x)

D.3       P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5.1

For completeness, we provide a proof of Proposition 5.1. Clearly, it is enough to show that
                            r
                              η
                                                                       q
   LFCS (P ) ≤ L̂FCS (P ) +       and LFCS (P ) ≤ L̂FCS (P ) + η + η(η + 2L̂FCS (P )),                          (34)
                              2
in which we omit
               √
                   the dependence of L̂FCS on the dataset Tn for conciseness. We recall that η =
KL(P ||Q)+log 2 nα/δ
         nα          , with nα = ⌊(⌋1 − α)n⌋, is the complexity term that depends on the prior Q,
posterior P , confidence δ, and the number of data points nα . Notably, both inequalities directly
follow from Maurer (2004, Theorem 5) bound: with probability 1 − δ over Tn ,
                                   kl(L̂FCS (P )||LFCS (P )) ≤ η,                                               (35)
in which kl represents the binary KL divergence, i.e., kl(p||q) = p log pq + (1 − p) log 1−p
                                                                                         1−q . Below,
we show that kl(p||q) is greater than or equal to (p−q) /2q when p < q.
                                                       2


Lemma D.2. (Boucheron et al., 2013, Exercise 2.8). Let h(t) = (1−t) log(1−t)+t and p : {1, 0} →
[0, 1] (resp. q) represent the PMF of a Bernoulli with parameter p ∈ [0, 1]. Then,

                                                   p(x)
                                 Ex∼Be(q) h 1 −           = kl(p||q)                        (36)
                                                   q(x)
               2
and h(t) ≥ t2 for t ∈ [0, 1]. In particular, kl(p||q) ≥ (p−q) /2q when p ≤ q.
                                                               2


Proof. Equation 36 follows from a direct algebraic manipulation of the left-hand side. On the other
hand, define
                                                        t2
                                          g(t) = h(t) −                                        (37)
                                                        2
for t ∈ [0, 1]. Then, g is continuous, g(0) = 0, and g(t) → 1/2 when t → 1. Also, g (t) =   ′

− log(1 − t) − t ≥ 0 for t ∈ [0, 1] since − log(1 − t) = | log(1 − t)| ≥ t. In conclusion,
                                                                     2
                                                                           (q − p)2

                                   p(x)       1                p(x)
                Ex∼Be(q) h 1 −             ≥ Ex∼Be(q) 1 −               ≥                      (38)
                                   q(x)       2                q(x)           2q
when p ≤ q.

By the symmetry of Equation 35 with respect to LFCS and L̂FCS , we conclude that
                                                       p
                               LFCS (P ) − L̂FCS (P ) ≤ 2LFCS (P )η.                     (39)
                                                                         q
Under these circumstances, the inequality LFCS (P ) ≤ L̂FCS (P ) + η + η(η + 2L̂FCS (P )) is
obtained by solving the above quadratic inequality on LFCS (P ). Through a similar reasoning,
                                                        p

kl(p||q) ≥ 2(p − q)2 by Pinsker’s inequality and, consequently, LFCS (P ) ≤ L̂FCS (P ) + η/2.
                                                                                        p
These results jointly entail Proposition 6.


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4     P ROOF OF L EMMA B.1

Recall that p̃T (x) = τ →x p̃F (τ ) for p̃α,p  = αpU +(1−α)pF , in which we make the dependence
                      P                      F
                                          F
of p̃F on α and on the (unconstrained) policy pF explicit. Let F(α, pF ) be the family of such
policies and F(α) be the set of α-greedy policies. It is straightforward to see that F(α) is a convex
set. Clearly, it is enough to ensure that minα>0,pF minx p̃α,pT
                                                                 F
                                                                   (x) ≤ minx π(x), namely, that the
rarest object can be sampled correctly by properly adjusting pF and a (non-zero) α. Indeed, Bengio
[ref, Theorem 8] showed that, for each given backward policy pB and positive reward R, there is
a unique forward policy pF for which the marginal pT (x) ∝ R(x) for each x ∈ X . Hence, since
p̃α,p
  T
      F
        = αpU,T + (1 − α)pT , with pU,T being the marginal of pU over X , the realizability of F(α)
is ensured when α satisfies minx∈X αpU,T (x) < minx∈X π(x), i.e., α < minx π(x)/minx pU,T (x), in
which case we may set a pF such that pT (x) = 1−α    1
                                                        (π(x) − αpU,T (x)). As an example, consider
the set generation task, the details of which are provided in Section 4. There, pU induces an uniform
distribution over X and we may set α = N/2 minx π(x) < minx π(x)/minx pT ,U (x). Importantly, our
analysis is not considering the (limited) expressivity of the chosen parametric model for the policy
network, which touches on a mostly open problem in the deep learning literature. Rather, we are
concerned with the feasibility of finding a transition policy p̃F consistent and compatible with the
given target distribution R, in the sense of Bengio et al. (2023, Definition 4, Definition 20).

D.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

We first show that the risk function is bounded. Then, Equation 7 follows directly from Maurer
(2004, Theorem 5) and Jensen’s inequality. Under these conditions, notice that
  KL(pB ||pF ) = Eτ ∼pB [log pB (τ )] − Eτ ∼pB [log pF (τ )] = −H[pB ] − Eτ ∼pB [log pF (τ )].                    (40)
Also, by definition,
                                       Y
                       pF (τ ) =               pF (s′ |s)
                                   (s,s′ )∈τ
                                       Y
                               =               (αpU (s′ |s) + (1 − α)pF (s′ |s))
                                   (s,s′ )∈τ
                                                                                                                  (41)
                                                                                         |τ |
                                           Y             1                 α
                               ≥ α|τ |                        ≥                                   ,
                                                      |Ch(s)|         maxs∈τ |Ch(s)|
                                         (s,s′ )∈τ

and, consequently,
                                                                                                  maxs∈τ |Ch(s)|

                                                         α
  −Eτ ∼pB [log pF (τ )] ≤ − min |τ | log                                     = max |τ | log                        ,
                                   τ                maxs∈τ |Ch(s)|               τ                     α
                                                                               |                   {z            }
                                                                                                  =MT

i.e., KL(pB ||pF ) ≤ −H[pB ] + MT . In conclusion, the convexity of the KL divergence along with
the the fact that pT and π are respectively convex functions of pF and pB imply that KL(π||pT ) ≤
KL(pB ||pF ). The rest follows from Maurer (2004, Theorem 5) applied to KL(pB ||pF ).

D.6   P ROOF OF L EMMA B.2

The result follows directly from the Markov property of the MDP. Equivalently, we note that
                                                
                              X                      X
                ES1 ,...,St      LDB (Si , S<i ) =      ES1 ,...,Si [LDB (Si , Si−1 )]
                              1≤i≤S                              1≤i≤t                                            (42)
                              X
                          =            ESi−1 ∼p(e) ESi ∼pe (·|Si−1 ) [LDB (Si , Si−1 )|Si−1 ] .
                                                  T
                              1≤i≤t


D.7   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.4

Our proof has three main ingredients. Firstly, we build upon a Azuma-Hoeffding-type inequality
to bound the expected transition-level error with the observed empirical error. Secondly, we derive


                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a trajectory-level bound of the transition-level results by relying on McAllester’s linear PAC-Bayes
inequality. Thirdly, we combine these results with a standard union bound
                                                                        P argument. To start with,
Beygelzimer et al. (2011, Theorem 1) shows that the martingale Mt = 1≤i≤t M (Si , Si−1 ) defined
above, with Ai ≤ M (Si , Si−1 ) ≤ Bi and Bi − Ai ≤ C, satisfies
                                E exp λMt − (e − 2)λ2 Vt ≤ 1,                                   (43)


in which Vt = 1≤i≤t M (Si , Si−1 )2 and λ ∈ [0, 1/C ]. In our context, |M (Si , Si−1 )| ≤ 2U by the
                P
triangle inequality, and we can take C = 2U . By assumption, Vt ≤ K for all t ≤ tm .
Then, for the martingale Mt (θ) and corresponding Vt (θ), with θ representing the parameters of the
forward policy, by Donsker-Varadhan’s variational formula, we notice that
Eθ∼P λMt (θ) − (e − 2)λ2 Vt (θ) ≤ KL(P ||Q) + log Eθ∼Q exp λMt (θ) − (e − 2)λ2 Vt (θ) .


Similarly to (Seldin et al., 2012b, Theorem 1), let δt = δ/2tm , so that 1≤t≤tm δt = δ/2. Then, by
                                                                        P
Markov’s inequality, with probability at least 1 − δt ,
                                       1
  Eθ∼Q exp λMt (θ) − (e − 2)λ2 Vt (θ) ≤ E Eθ∼Q exp λMt (θ) − (e − 2)λ2 Vt (θ)

                                                                                 ;
                                       δt
where the outer expectation is with respect to the joint distribution of {S1 , . . . , St }. By Tonelli’s
theorem and Equation 43, the right-hand side of the equation above satisfies
1                                             1
   E Eθ∼Q exp λMt (θ) − (e − 2)λ2 Vt (θ)    = Eθ∼Q E exp λMt (θ) − (e − 2)λ2 Vt (θ)

δt                                            δt
                                              1    2tm
                                            ≤    ≤     .
                                              δt    δ
Consequently, by Donsker-Varadhan’s formula applied to λMt (θ) − (e − 2)λ2 Vt (θ), bounding its
exponential moment as above, and a union bound over t, yields with probability at least 1 − 2δ ,

                                                           KL(P ||Q) + log tm + log 2δ
              Eθ∼P [Mt (θ)] ≤ (e − 2)λEθ∼P [Vt (θ)] +                                  .            (44)
                                                                       λ
Hence, by the definition of Mt (θ) and the bounded-variance assumption,
                                         
         1  X                                 1 X
 Eθ∼P            E[LDB (Si , Si−1 )|S<i ] ≤        LDB (Si , Si−1 )
         t                                    t
             1≤i≤t                                1≤i≤t                                             (45)
                                                          K   KL(P ||Q) + log tm + log 2/δ
                                             + (e − 2)λ ·   +                              .
                                                          t               tλ
              (j)
Nextly, let S1 be independent samples from a forward policy pF (·|so ) for 1 ≤ j ≤ n and
  (j)          (j)
{S1 , . . . , Stj } be the correspondingly observed trajectories. Also, we recall that
                                                                              
                                                  1 X
                         L(θ) = ES1 ,S2 ,...,St      E [LDB (Si , Si−1 )|S<i ]       (46)
                                                  t
                                                 1≤i≤t

and define
                                 1 X 1 X  h
                                                 (j)  (j)    (j)
                                                                 i
                       L̂(θ) =           E LDB (Si , Si−1 )|S<i ;                                   (47)
                                 n   tj
                                  1≤j≤n      1≤i≤tj

the inner expectations are computed with respect to the Markovian data-generating process (recall
that the conditional expectation E[LDB (Si , Si−1 )|S<i ] is a random variable). By assumption,
L(θ) ≤ U . Hence, McAllester’s linear PAC-Bayes inequality (McAllester, 2013, Theorem 2)
entails, with probability at least 1 − 2δ over draws of {S1 , . . . , St },
                                 1     h     i     U        KL(P ||Q) + log 2/δ
               Eθ∼P [L(θ)] ≤       Eθ∼P L̂(θ) +           ·                     .                   (48)
                                 β              2β(1 − β)           n

                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Under these conditions, equations 45 and 48 jointly imply that, by a standard union-bound argument,

                                                                           (e − 2)λK

                      1         1 X        1 X              (j)   (j)
     Eθ∼P [L(θ)] ≤ Eθ∼P                              LDB (Si , Si−1 ) +              +
                      β         n          tj                                  tj
                                  1≤j≤n       1≤i≤t

                      KL(P ||Q) + log tm + log 2/δ                         KL(P ||Q) + log 2/δ

                                                                 U
                                                         +               ·
                                    tj λ                    2β(1 − β)              n

with probability 1 − δ over draws of (S1 , . . . , St ). Since ntj ≥ T for all tj , as we observe T
transitions (n is between ⌊T /tmin ⌋ and ⌈T /tm ⌉, with tmin being the minimum length of a complete
trajectory), and tj ≤ tm , as tm is the trajectory’s maximum lenght, the result above is equivalent to

                                                                             (e − 2)λK

                       1         1 X          1 X            (j)  (j)
      Eθ∼P [L(θ)] ≤ Eθ∼P                               LDB (Si , Si−1 )    +             +
                       β         n            tj                                  T
                                    1≤j≤n        1≤i≤t
                                 |                  {z                }
                                                            =L̂(θ)

                       KL(P ||Q) + log tm + log 2/δ      U        KL(P ||Q) + log 2/δ
                                                    +           ·                     .                 (49)
                                  Tλ                  2β(1 − β)           n

By aggregating the terms corresponding to KL(P ||Q) and log 2/δ, we derive the desired upper
bound on the expected risk of the DB loss.

D.8    P ROOF OF T HEOREM C.1

Intuitively, when each balance condition is satisfied, each state s on Ij is sampled in proportion
to Fj (s) and, conditioned on s, each terminal state will be sampled in proportion to R(x)/Fj (s),
implying that, marginally, each x is sampled proportionally to R(x). In the following, we make
this argument rigorous. We first consider the case in which x ∈ X \ So . As we are assuming that
Fj (s)pF (τ |s) = pB (τ |x)R(x) for each trajectory τ starting at s ∈ Ij and finishing at x, we must
conclude that
                                      X                 R(x) X
                        pjT (x|s) =         pF (τ |s) =                pB (τ |x).               (50)
                                    τ : s⇝x
                                                        Fj (s) τ : s⇝x

On the other hand, since Fo (so )poF (τ |s) = poB (τ |s)Fj (s) for s ∈ Ij ,
                                  X                          Fj (s) X                      Fj (s)
                poT (s|so ) =               pF (τ |so ) =                      pB (τ |s) =          ,   (51)
                                τ : so ⇝s
                                                             Fo (so ) τ : s ⇝s             Fo (so )
                                                                          o


as the probability of reaching so by starting from s and following pB is equal to one since so is the
only sink state of the transposed state graph. In this context,
                                     X X j
                       pT (x|so ) =             pT (x|s)poT (s|so )
                                        1≤j≤m s∈Ij
                                            X X Fj (s) R(x) X j
                                    =                   ·              p (τ |x)
                                                Fo (so ) Fj (s) τ : s⇝x B
                                        1≤j≤m s∈Ij
                                            X      R(x) X X X j                                         (52)
                                    =                              pB (τ |x)
                                                  Fo (so ) τ : s⇝x
                                        1≤j≤m                 1≤j≤m s∈Ij

                                       R(x)                 X                        R(x)
                                    =                                pjB (τ |s) =            ;
                                      Fo (so )          S                           Fo (so )
                                                   s∈   1≤j≤m Ij



i.e., pT (x|so ) samples x proportionally to R(x). For the forth line above, we relied on the fact that
the probability of eaching Ij is equal to one when starting at x ∈ X \ So and following pB .
                             S
Correspondingly, when x ∈ X , it follows from the satisfiability of the trajectory balance condition
that pT (x|so ) ∝ R(x). This ensures SAL is a sound distributed learning algorithm for GFlowNets.


                                                             38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.9      P ROOF OF L EMMA C.3

The global minimizer of Equation 9 satisfies, for every j, Fj (s)pjF (τ ) = R(x)pjB (τ |x) for every
trajectory τ : s ⇝ x starting at s ∈ Ij and finishing at x ∈ Xj . Consequently,
                              X                      X pj (τ |x)R(x)   R(x) X j
            pjT (x|s) =             pjF (τ |s) =           B
                                                                     =               p (τ |s).             (53)
                          τ : s⇝x                  τ : s⇝x
                                                             Fj (s)    Fj (s) τ : s⇝x B
Similarly,                          X                                X
                                            Fj (s)pjF (τ |s) =                pjB (τ |x)R(x)               (54)
                                  τ : s⇝x                           τ : s⇝x
implies that                                               X
                                            Fj (s) =              pjB (τ |x)R(x)                           (55)
                                                       τ : s⇝x
                   j
since     τ : s⇝x pF (τ |s) for every s. These equations jointly entail the proposition.
        P


D.10      P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION C.5

As in the demonstrations above, we consider two cases in separate. First, when x ∈ X ∩ So , then
pT (x) = R(x)/ZF +ZR due to the satisfiability of the balance condition by the model. Hence,
        X                         X          R(x)        R(x)
             |pT (x) − π(x)| =                        −
                                          ZF + ZR          Z
     x∈X ∩So                    x∈X ∩So
                                                                                             (56)
                                      1          1     X                  1        1
                             =                −              R(x) =             −     ZR .
                                 ZF + ZR        Z                     ZF + ZR     Z
                                                                  x∈X ∩So

Second, when x ∈ X \ So , we note that
                      X X            X
            pT (x) =                                        pF (τ |so )
                              1≤j≤m s∈Sj τ : so ⇝s⇝x
                                                                          !                            !
                               X X                 X                           X
                          =                                poF (τ |so )                 pjF (τ ′ |s)       (57)
                              1≤j≤m s∈Sj       τ : so ⇝s                      τ : s⇝x
                               X X                                    X X            Fj (s)
                          =                  poT (s)pjT (x|s) =                             · pj (x|s).
                                                                                    ZF + ZR T
                              1≤j≤m s∈Sj                             1≤j≤m s∈Sj

Similarly, for any X -valued function f ,
                                                     X X Fj (s)
                                        f (x) =                 · f (x);                                   (58)
                                                          ZF
                                                    1≤j≤m s∈Sj

hence,
                                            X X   Fj (s)           Fj (s)        j

                π(x) − pT (x) =                         · π(x) −              · p (x|s)
                                                  ZF             ZF + ZR T
                                  1≤j≤m s∈Sj
                                    X X Fj (s)                     ZF

                               =                       π(x) −              pjT (x|s)             (59)
                                                ZF              ZF + ZR
                                  1≤j≤m s∈Sj

                                                            ZF      f (s)
                               = Es∼poT ,\X     π(x) −            pT (x|s) .
                                                         ZF + ZR
By recalling that TV(π, pT ) = 2  1
                                        x∈X |π(x) − pT (x)| , this result, along with Equation 56 and
                                     P

Jensen’s inequality applied to the function x 7→ |x|, implies the proposition. To further strengthen
our intuition, we also consider directly bounding the accuracy of Go as a function of the trajectory-
level inaccuracies of each Gj . For this, we re-write π(x) as
                                         X X               X j
                              π(x) =               π(x)         pB (τ |x).                       (60)
                                               1≤j≤m s∈Sj              τ : s⇝x



                                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                 j
Correspondingly, by recalling the property pT (x) =                                  s∈Sj pT (s)pT (x|s), we conclude
                                                                                           o
                                                                   P             P
                                                                       1≤j≤m

                                        X X X
               |π(x) − pT (x)| =                                   π(x)pB (τ |x) − pF (τ |s)poT (s)
                                       1≤j≤m s∈Sj τ : s⇝x
                                       X X X                                                                               (61)
                               ≤                                   π(x)pjB (τ |x) − pjF (τ |s)poT (s) .
                                   1≤j≤m s∈Sj τ : s⇝x
                                                |                              {z                              }
                                                              Error associated to the jth client

Hence, the total variation distance between π and pT is bounded above by
               ZR 1      1      1                   X         X X X
TV(π, pT ) =        −         +                                                            π(x)pjB (τ |x) − pjF (τ |s)poT (s) .
                2 Z   ZR + ZF   2
                                                x∈X \So 1≤j≤m s∈Sj τ : s⇝x
                                                                       |                              {z                      }
                                                                                      Error associated to the jth client

For tree-shaped state graphs, the second term of the equation above can be significantly simplified
by noticing that (i) each x is uniquely associated to a j, a relationship which we denote by g(x) = j,
and (ii) that pjB (τ |x) = 1 and pjF (τ |s) = pjT (x|s). Under these conditions,
                      ZR 1      1      1                     X             X                   g(x)
       TV(π, pT ) ≤        −         +                                              π(x) − pT         (x|s)poT (s) .       (62)
                       2 Z   ZR + ZF   2
                                                         x∈X \So s∈Sg(x)
                                                                       |                     {z                      }
                                                                           Error associated to the j=g(x)th model


D.11     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION C.6

We proceed by strong induction on the number k of fixed-horizon partitions. For k = 1, the result
above is equivalent to Equation C.1. Assume, then, that the statement holds for j fixed-horizon
partitions of the state graph for all j < k. Let Gi , 0 ≤ i ≤ k, be a sequence  S of GFlowNets
satisfying the amortized trajectory balance condition. By induction, each x ∈ 1≤j≤k−1 Xj is
sampled proportionally to 1≤j≤k−1 1[x ∈ Xj ]Rj (s). In particular, if x ∈ X ∪ 1≤j≤k−1 Xj ,
                            P                                                     S

then x is sampled proportionally to R(x). For what remains, let x ∈ X \ 1≤j≤k−1 Xj . Hence, for
                                                                       S

each state s ∈ 1≤j≤mk Ik,j ⊆ Xk−1 and each trajectory τ : s ⇝ x,
               S

                                       Fk (s)pF (τ |s) = pB (τ |x)R(x),                                                    (63)
i.e., pF (τ |s) = pB (τ |x)R(x)/Fk (s). Thus, by marginalizing out the non-terminal components of τ ,
                                                    R(x) X
                                   pT (x|s) =                      pB (τ |x)                                               (64)
                                                    Fk (s) τ : s⇝x

and, since each s is sampled proportionally to Rk−1 (s) := Fk (s),
                                     X
                       pT (x) ∝                pT (x|s)Fk (s)
                                       S
                                  s∈       1≤j≤mk Ik,j

                                            X                          R(x) X
                              =                          Fk (s) ·                     pB (τ |x)
                                       S                               Fk (s) τ : s⇝x                                      (65)
                                  s∈       1≤j≤mk Ik,j
                                                    X                  X
                              = R(x)                                         pB (τ |x) = R(x).
                                            s∈ 1≤j≤m Ik,j τ : s⇝x
                                              S
                                                         k
                                            |                     {z                   }
                                                                  =1

This ensures that each x ∈ X \ 1≤j≤k−1 Xj is sampled proportionally to R(x). By induction,
                                 S

each x ∈ X is sampled proportionally to R(x). Hence, the recursive instance of SAL is a sound
approach for sampling objects proportionally to a reward function.



                                                             40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Hypergrid 64 x 64                                       SIX6                                   PHO4                                  Bit sequences                                  Set generation
          1000                                                   600                                   5000
                                                                                                                                               20000                                          4000
           800                                                                                         4000
                                                                 400                                                                           15000                                          3000
# modes
           600                                                                                         3000

           400                                                                                         2000                                    10000                                          2000
                                                                 200
           200                                                                                         1000                                     5000                                          1000

             0                                                     0                                      0                                        0                                             0
                 5000   10000    15000   20000   25000                 200   400    600   800   1000           500      1000     1500   2000           1000   2000    3000      4000   5000          500           1000     1500   2000


          1000                                                                                         2500                                    60000                                          8000
                                                                 500
           800                                                                                         2000
                                                                 400                                                                                                                          6000
                                                                                                                                               40000
# modes


           600                                                                                         1500
                                                                 300
                                                                                                                                                                                              4000
           400                                                   200                                   1000
                                                                                                                                               20000
                                                                                                                                                                                              2000
           200                                                   100                                    500

             0                                                     0                                      0                                        0                                             0
                 5000   10000    15000   20000   25000                 200   400    600   800   1000           500      1000     1500   2000           1000   2000    3000      4000   5000          500           1000     1500   2000


          1000                                                                                                                                                                                       Centralized
                                                                 600                                                                                                                          4000   SAL
                                                                                                       3000                                    20000
           800

                                                                                                                                               15000                                          3000
# modes


           600                                                   400
                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                               10000                                          2000
           400
                                                                 200                                   1000
           200                                                                                                                                  5000                                          1000

             0                                                     0                                      0                                        0                                             0
                 5000    10000      15000      20000     25000         200   400    600   800   1000           500      1000     1500   2000           1000   2000    3000      4000   5000          500           1000     1500   2000

                                                                                                              Total number of epochs



Figure 13: Complementary results for Figure 7 with different random seeds. Notice that, except for
the hypergrid task, the threshold defining a mode is a random variable, which explains the variability
(albeit consistency) of the number of modes found within the same column.


E                  L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
We presently discuss the limitations of our work and the consequent opportunities for future re-
search. Although informative, our theoretical analysis was limited to the case of i.i.d. sampled
trajectories which, as highlighted in Section 5, does not necessarily reflect the nature of usual strate-
gies for learning GFlowNets, e.g., ϵ-greedy sampling. Indeed, the typical training of GFlowNets is
closer in spirit to active learning (AL) (Cohn et al., 1994; Gal et al., 2017) in the sense that a batch of
trajectories is sampled from a policy that is dynamically updated as more data points are observed,
and it would be interesting and important to pursue an investigation in this direction (Jain et al.,
2022; Malik et al., 2023). In contrast to AL, however, there is no explicit acquisition function guid-
ing GFlowNet training. On the other hand, Deleu & Bengio (2023)’s interpretation of GFlowNets
as Markov chains in the trajectory-space could be used together with Azuma’s inequality (Azuma,
1967), in the fashion of Theorem 5.4, as a useful starting point for this. More specifically, one could
consider that a sequence of trajectories {τt }t≥1 is observed during training and use the same tech-
niques enabling the proof of Theorem 5.4, namely, constructing a martingale difference sequence
Mt = LTB (τt ) − Eτt [LTB (τt )|τs<t ] and applying Theorem 1 of Seldin et al. (2012a) both within
and between trajectories, the results of which would then be unified via an union bound argument.
Additionally, the promising results of SAL pave the road to a range of interesting investigations.
Most promitently, we believe the development of principled partitioning methods can lead to
substantial improvements in scaling GFlowNet training. Although our discussion is constrained to
fixed-horizon partitions for easeness of exposition and implementation, the algorithm could in prin-
ciple be extended to more general settings. Theorem 5.2 suggests that a good partition would ensure
that the within- and between-partition distributions are close to uniform. Intuitively, we would like
that the target distribution of both the leaf and root GFlowNets are relatively simple to approximate
when compared against the original target and that the most important regions of the state space, as
measured by the reward function, are appropriately covered. The best way to ensure these properties,
however, remains an open problem and we think it is a promising venue for future endeavors.

E.1                     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

Robustness of SAL with respect to the FHP’s size. It is intuitively clear that an increase in the
number m of partitions in a FHP would improve the coverage of the state graph and accelerate
mode discovery. In doing so, however, we also enlarge the memory cost of the algorithm due to the
necessity of aggregating a larger number of leaf GFlowNets in the server. To shed light on the effect
of m on SAL’s performance, Figure 14 presents the number of modes found during training for the
tasks of SIX6 and PHO4. As anticipated, SAL drastically improves upon a centralized GFlowNet,


                                                                                                                      41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 SIX6                                   PHO4
                                                600                                   6000


                              Number of modes
                                                400                                   4000
                                                                                                               SAL
                                                                                                               Centralized
                                                200                                   2000


                                                  0                                      0
                                                            10           20                       10               20
                                                                               FHP’s size


Figure 14: SAL consistently outperforms a centralized GFlowNet irrespective of the number of
components defining the underlying FHP. As expected, the coverage of the state graph is an increas-
ing function of the FHP’s size. Results for the centralized model are included solely for comparison.

                                                      SAL          Intentionally mode-collapsed SAL    Target distribution


Figure 17: Extremely inaccurate estimation of the flow function might lead to mode collapse. (left)
Standard SAL-trained GFlowNet for a 8 × 8 grid with 2-sized FHP. (middle) SAL-trained GFlowNet
when the flow function F1 is severely inaccurate. (right) Target distribution.


notably regardless of the size of the underlying FHP. Overall, our experiments throughout this work
indicated that SAL is notably robust to the choice of hyperparameters defining its implementation.

          50-sized subsets of {1, . . . , 100}                                                               Intentionally bad partition sampling
                21490                                                                                      6000                     5553
     20000

     15000                                                          SAL            Centralized             4000
                                                                 0.045±0.001       0.061±0.009
     10000
                                           6170                                                            2000
      5000                                                   Table 3: SAL improves upon a
                                                             centralized GFlowNet for large-                   0
                                                                                                                        352
          0
                  SAL                     Cent.              scale set generation in terms of                           SAL        Cent.

                                                             FCS (Silva et al., 2024).
 Figure 15: SAL leads to signif-                                                                          Figure 16: SAL underperforms
 icantly faster mode discovery                                                                            when the within-subgraph
 for large-scale set generation.                                                                          sampling distribution is inade-
 Results averaged across 3 runs.                                                                          quately designed.


Experiments on large-scale set generation tasks (|X | ≈ 1030 ). To underscore the scalability of
SAL with respect to the underlying domain’s size, Figure 15 and Table 3 respectively show that
our distributed algorithm entails faster mode discovery and lead to a more accurate distributional
approximation for the problem of generating 50-sized subsets of {1, . . . , 100}; see Section A.3 for a
definition of this task. For a fair comparison, the centralized GFlowNet is trained for 60 seconds —
twice the time allocated to each leaf GFlowNet and to the aggregation step. Besides, we adopt the
experimental setup described in Section B. Importantly, these results suggest that the applicability
of SAL is not limited by the domain sizes presented in the main text.
In the following paragraphs, we examine two potential causes for catastrophic failures of the
aggregated model, as mentioned in Proposition C.5 on Section C.3.


                                                                                 42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Insufficient training of a leaf GFlowNet. As the aggregation phase in SAL relies on the locally
estimated flows as a surrogate reward for the root GFlowNet (recall Algorithm 1), a natural driver
of catastrophic failures is an inaccurately approximated flow function by a leaf GFlowNet. In
particular, if a local flow Fj is significantly larger than its correct value, the resulting model might
allocate a substantial probability mass to the subgraph associated to the jth leaf GFlowNet. In
this case, high-probability regions of the remaining subgraphs might be completely missed by the
global GFlowNet. We illustrate this effect in Figure 17, which shows the learned distribution over
a 8 × 8 grid for (i) a SAL-trained GFlowNet and (ii) a SAL-trained GFlowNet with a substantially
over-estimated F1 . To emulate (ii), we train each leaf GFlowNet in a standard fashion and, during
the aggregation phase, multiply the learned F1 by 100. In both cases, we considered 2-sized
FHPs and followed the experimental setup of Section 6.2. Notably, Figure 17 confirms that a
severely inaccurate flow function Fj may lead to a misrepresentation of the target distribution’s
high-probability regions by the global GFlowNet. In spite of these results, we stress that we did not
observed this pathological behavior throughout our experiments in the main text and in Section C.
Insufficiently diverse within-subgraph sampling distributions. Recall in Definition 6.2 that SAL
depends on a distribution qj over the initial states Ij of the jth subgraph defining the FHP; see
Figure 3. Clearly, when qj ’s probability mass is overly concentrated in a relatively small subset of
Ij , the corresponding leaf GFlowNet might fail to accurately learn from the target distribution due
a restricted exploration of the state graph — this was observed in Section 4. Also, the efficiency
of mode discovery during training would be significantly hindered. In this context, Figure 16
illustrates the mode discovery rate for the task of generating 16-sized subsets of {1, . . . , 32} with
the reward function described in Section A when each qj is a truncated Poisson distribution with
mean equal to 1/5000-th of the size of the corresponding Ij . Importantly, similarly to Figure 17,
this is an extreme corner case that did not pose an issue in our experiments. In practice, we suggest
setting qj as an uniform distribution to maximize the diversity of the explored partitions.


                                                  43
