Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EVERAGING F LATNESS TO I MPROVE I NFORMATION -
T HEORETIC G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS FOR SGD
 Ze Peng† , Jian Zhang† , Yisen Wang‡ , Lei Qi♢ , Yinghuan Shi†∗, Yang Gao†
 †
   State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
 ‡
   State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
   School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
 ♢
   School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
 {pengze, zhangjian7369}@smail.nju.edu.cn, yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn,
 qilei@seu.edu.cn, {syh, gaoy}@nju.edu.cn



                                              A BSTRACT
            Information-theoretic (IT) generalization bounds have been used to study the
            generalization of learning algorithms. These bounds are intrinsically data- and
            algorithm-dependent so that one can exploit the properties of data and algorithm
            to derive tighter bounds. However, we observe that although the flatness bias is
            crucial for SGD’s generalization, these bounds fail to capture the improved gen-
            eralization under better flatness and are also numerically loose. This is caused by
            the inadequate leverage of SGD’s flatness bias in existing IT bounds. This paper
            derives a more flatness-leveraging IT bound for the flatness-favoring SGD. The
            bound indicates the learned models generalize better if the large-variance direc-
            tions of the final weight covariance have small local curvatures in the loss land-
            scape. Experiments on deep neural networks show our bound not only correctly
            reflects the better generalization when flatness is improved, but is also numeri-
            cally much tighter. This is achieved by a flexible technique called “omniscient
            trajectory”. When applied to Gradient Descent’s minimax excess risk on convex-
            Lipschitz-Bounded
                  √              problems, it improves representative IT bounds’ Ω(1) rates to
            O(1/ n). It also implies a by-pass of memorization-generalization trade-offs. 1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Over-parameterized deep models trained by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) are observed to
generalize well, contradicting classic statistical learning theories that over-parameterization leads
to overfitting (Vapnik et al., 1998; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002; Zhang, 2002). The drawback of
these theories is that they are too general and unable to leverage the specific properties of learning
algorithms and data (Nagarajan & Kolter, 2019). Therefore, modern learning theories have turned
to data- and algorithm-dependent bounds that leverage the properties of data and popular algorithms
(e.g., the limited hypothesis subset reached by SGD, various norms of matrix weights, low-rankness
and sparsity of parameters or hidden representations, etc.) to derive tighter bounds specific to them
(Brutzkus et al., 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Cao & Gu, 2019; Neyshabur et al.,
2019; Pesme et al., 2021; Muthukumar & Sulam, 2023; Alquier, 2023).
Recently, generalization bounds have been developed using information-theoretic measures (Hell-
ström et al., 2024), because these measures are defined with the data distribution and the conditional
distributions of the output hypothesis given the training data and are naturally data- and algorithm-
dependent. Representative examples include the PAC-Bayesian bounds (McAllester, 1999) and the
bounds using mutual information (MI) between the training data and the output of the algorithm
(Russo & Zou, 2020; Xu & Raginsky, 2017). Thanks to the dependence, PAC-Bayesian approaches
have led to the first non-vacuous numerical generalization bound for deep networks (Dziugaite &
Roy, 2017), later tightened (Pérez-Ortiz et al., 2021) and scaled up (Zhou et al., 2019; Lotfi et al.,
2022; 2024). MI bounds, the focus of this paper, can be seen as PAC-Bayesian bounds with optimal
priors (Alquier, 2023). Tighter variants of the MI bound have been developed, e.g., its chaining
    1
        Codes are available at https://github.com/peng-ze/omniscient-bounds.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                        Generalization error bound             Estimated generalization error
               Generalization error bound                  Estimated generalization error                   lr=0.0005              lr=0.001           lr=0.005                         lr=0.01        lr=0.02
                                            700                                                                                                                              0
   lr=0.0005              lr=0.001                  lr=0.005                lr=0.01               lr=0.02


                                                                                                                                                                                 Estimated Gen. Gap
                          Gen. Gap Bound
                                                                                 1.3                                         1.3                                  1.3 × 10


                          (Cross Entropy)
                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                   108


                                                                                                                                                                                   (Cross Entropy)
                                            600                                 1.2                                          1.2                                  1.2 × 100
                                                                                      2                                                                           1.1 × 100
                                            500                                 1.1                                          1.1
                                                                                                                                    7
                                            400                                 1.0 1                                        1.0 10                               100

                                                  100   200 300       400
                                                                                0.9
                                                                              500           100     200 300       400
                                                                                                                             0.9
                                                                                                                           500                200        400      9 × 10 1
                                                         Batch size                                  Batch size                               Batch size

                                                    (a) Bound                             (b) Trajectory Term                            (c) Flatness Term

    Figure 1: Wang & Mao (2022)’s bound for ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10 under varied flatness.


variants (Asadi et al., 2018), its individual-sample variants (Bu et al., 2020), the conditional MI
framework (CMI) (Steinke & Zakynthinou, 2020), the evaluated variants (Harutyunyan et al., 2021;
Hellström & Durisi, 2022; Wang & Mao, 2023), and bounds using other measures like rate-distortion
(Sefidgaran et al., 2022) and Wasserstein distance (Wang et al., 2019). By bounding the measures
for specific algorithms, they have been applied to SGLD (Pensia et al., 2018; Negrea et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2021b; Futami & Fujisawa, 2023), discretized SDE (Wang & Mao, 2024b), and SGD
(Neu et al., 2021; Wang & Mao, 2022).
Another line of research on algorithmic properties finds SGD favors flat minima (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2017). Flat minima are minima at wide and flat basins of the loss
landscape, and they are robust to loss landscape changes between the training and testing set. Con-
sequently, flatness has been used to understand and improve the generalization of SGD-trained deep
models (Achille & Soatto, 2018; Jiang et al., 2019; Foret et al., 2020; Cha et al., 2021; Zhao et al.,
2022), where it is formulated with the Hessians ĤS , Hµ of empirical and population losses (Achille
& Soatto, 2018; Orvieto et al., 2022). Therefore, as algorithm-dependent bounds, information-
theoretic bounds for SGD should leverage the flatness as an important algorithmic property.
However, existing information-theoretic bounds for SGD do not adequately leverage the flatness
bias. By controlling flatness through varying learning rate and batch size (Jastrzȩbski et al., 2018;
He et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2022), we empirically observe how the generalization under varying
flatness is captured by Wang & Mao (2022)’s bound (which is tighter than Neu et al. (2021)’s)
                                         v
                                                                 σ2
                                         u 2X
                                         u 2R                                   h         i
            [Generalization Error] ≤ inf t 2           V [gt ] +    · T · tr E ĤS − Hµ ,
                                     σ>0   nσ                    2 |
                                                t∈[T ]                           {z       }
                                                | {z }                      Flatness Term
                                                                                                        Trajectory Term

with gt being the update at step t. As shown in Figure 1a, as batch size decreases, the actual general-
ization error decreases while Wang & Mao (2022)’s bound increases. That is, their result misaligns
with the true generalization under varied flatness. The bound consists of two terms: the trajectory
term and the flatness term. Figures 1b and 1c show the flatness term can capture the generalization
to some extent while the trajectory term cannot, causing the misalignment. Unlike the flatness term
that depends on Hessians, which are the explicit formulation of flatness, the trajectory term depends
on gradient variance that is an implicit measure of flatness and requires extra conditions (e.g., near-
zero losses) to approximate the Hessian traces (Zhu et al., 2019; Martens, 2020; Feng et al., 2023).
Therefore, we postulate it is the trajectory term’s implicit dependence on flatness that causes the mis-
alignment, and we intend to make the whole bound fully explicitly depend on and leverage flatness.
To this end, Proposition 8 of Neu et al. (2021) (see Proposition 2) is a good start, which involves
finer-grained optimization and depends on more algorithmic properties, potentially including flat-
ness. It is proved by a technique of auxiliary trajectory that is constructed by randomly perturbing
the SGD trajectory with independent Gaussian noises of covariance Σ. The bound optimizes Σ as a
parameter and takes the form
                                                        [Generalization Error] ≤ inf EW [f (W ; Σ)] ,
                                                                                                                  Σ

i.e., a mixture of an optimization over Σ and an expectation over output weight W . By constructing
Σ from the Hessians of empirical and population losses, the bound will fully explicitly depend on the
flatness. However, we find the bound still has two drawbacks: Firstly, it is suboptimal because the
optimization is outside the expectation and cannot depend on or leverage the specific properties of
W instances. Secondly, accurate estimation is crucial for evaluating, comparing bounds and helping


                                                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


algorithm design. Yet, the bound is not easy to estimate: It is similar to optimizing the “population
risk” of “sample” W over “hypothesis” Σ, which requires sampling some W and minimizing the
“empirical risk” (ERM). Since only a few W can be sampled due to the computation and data cost
of training deep models, the “ERM” is prone to “overfitting”, i.e., negative bias in estimation.
Both issues can be addressed by moving the optimization inside the expectation (i.e., bounds like
EW [inf Σ f (W ; Σ)]) so that the optimization depends on W : The inside optimization can lever-
age the specific properties (e.g., population Hessian instance) of W , leading to a tighter bound;
                                     Pk
moreover, the empirical mean k1 i=1 inf Σi f (W i ; Σi ) of the inside (instance-overfitting) opti-
mization is an unbiased estimator and overfitting is no longer a source of negative bias in es-
timations. To implement this interchange, we find it is the independence of the Gaussian aux-
iliary perturbation that makes Σ the same when conditioned on any W instance, i.e., Σ cannot
adapt to W instances and unable to leverage their specific properties. Therefore, we extend the
auxiliary trajectory technique by building it from an auxiliary perturbation that is no longer inde-
pendent but at least depends on W . This is equivalent to moving the optimization inside (check
inf Σ(w) E [f (W ; Σ(W ))] = E [inf Σ f (W ; Σ)]). Pushing this insight further, we make the pertur-
bation depend on all random variables (e.g., the training data) in the SGD training process (e.g., to
leverage the instance empirical Hessian that depends on training data), leading to the “omniscient
trajectory”2 , which leads to tighter bounds if well optimized.
The technique yields a tighter generalization error bound for SGD that explicitly and fully depends
on the flatness of the SGD output instance. Intuitively, it indicates the algorithm generalizes well
when the output weights are flat and the flatness aligns with the covariance of output weights. Here,
the covariance of output weights is computed after independently training multiple models, and the
alignment means that the variance is low along sharp directions and high along flat directions, as
illustrated in Figures 2b and 2c. As discussed in Section 3.4, our alignment better leverages the
flatness compared to similar notions of alignments (Wang & Mao, 2024b; Wang et al., 2021a). The
bound is evaluated on ResNet-18 trained by CIFAR-10. When varying batch size, it aligns well
with the actual generalization error, indicating better exploitation of flatness. Moreover, our bound
is numerically tight by being only a few percentages looser than the truth across hyperparameters.
Our omniscient trajectory technique has a simple nature, namely, interchanging the order of the
expectation and optimization. Thanks to the simplicity, our technique can be flexibly combined
with many existing techniques. Furthermore, recent works (Livni, 2024; Haghifam et al., 2023;
Attias et al., 2024) have highlighted the limitations of information-theoretic bounds for having an
Ω(1) lower-bound for GD or any accurate learners on some convex-Lipschitz-Bounded (CLB) prob-
lems. It can also be seen as an information-accuracy trade-off highlighting the complex relationship
between
     √ memorization and generalization. We find our simple and flexible technique yields an
O(1/ n) minimax rate for GD on CLB problems. Therefore, despite being simple, it provides
asymptotic improvements and addresses a significant limitation of existing information-theoretic
generalization theory. It also implies a by-pass of the trade-off: although accurate learners them-
selves memorize a lot, they are quite close to some oracle learners that memorize little.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: 1) We derive an information-theoretic generalization
bound for SGD that better leverages its flatness bias and is numerically tighter; 2) our bound shows
how the direction of flatness affects generalization;
                                       √              3) we introduce a flexible omniscient trajectory
technique that also 4) yields an O(1/ n) information-theoretic bound for GD on CLB problems.


2    P RELIMINARY

We first introduce basic notations. To present existing information-theoretic bounds for SGD and
discuss important insights behind them for our (re)use in Section 2.3, we first introduce the algorithm
of interest in Section 2.1 and the formulation and properties of flatness in Section 2.2. For k ∈ N+ ,
let [k] := {1, 2, . . . , k}. For sequence a0 , a1 , . . . , let al:r := (ai )ri=l and√
                                                                                      let a−i denote the rest after
excluding ai . For vector x ∈ Rk and matrix A ∈ Rk×k , let ∥x∥ := x⊤ x, and, with an abuse,
   2
     The above anisotropic Gaussian noises with covariance Σ are only an example of auxiliary trajectory and
Theorem 1 generalizes the technique to more general auxiliary trajectories. Therefore, note the technique is
about neither anisotropic noises (Neu et al., 2021; Wang & Mao, 2024b) nor general noises (Sefidgaran et al.,
2022), but the auxiliary trajectory’s extra dependence on all randomness and the instance-level optimization.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     2
∥x∥A := x⊤ Ax. Random variables, realizations, and domains are denoted by capital, lowercase,
and calligraphic letters, respectively. For example, Z is a random sample, Z is the sample space,
and z is a realization. Let µ over Z be the sample distribution. Let X ′ denote an I.I.D. copy of
random variable X. Let d be the number of model parameters and W ⊆ Rd be the hypothesis space.
If not specified otherwise, assume W = Rd . Let S := (Z1 , . . . , Zn ) ∼ µn be the training set of n
I.I.D. samples. A stochastic learning algorithm is formulated as conditional distribution PW |S .
Let ℓ : W × Z → R be a loss function. The ultimate goal of the learning algorithm is to opti-
mize the population risk Lµ (w, ℓ) := EZ∼µ [ℓ(w, Z)] over w ∈ W. Since µ is not fully accessi-
ble, one uses empirical risk minimization (ERM) by sampling a training set S ∈ Z n from µ and
                                                       P|s|
optimizing the empirical risk defined by L̂s (w, ℓ) := i=1 ℓ(w, zi )/ |s| . The difference in expec-
tation over training sets and algorithmic
                                        h randomness is the (expected)
                                                                i        generalization error (gap)
gen(µ , PW |S , ℓ) := E(S,W )∼µn ◦PW |S Lµ (W, ℓ) − L̂S (W, ℓ) ,where µn ◦ PW |S denotes the joint
       n

distribution determined by µn and PW |S . We may omit the loss function ℓ when it is clear from the
context. Let the loss difference under transnational perturbation
                                                           h      γ ∈ Rd and Gaussiani perturbation
                           d×d
ξ with covariance Σ ∈ R        be ∆γ (w, s) := Eξ∼N (0,Σ) L̂s (w + γ + ξ) − L̂s (w) . We write σ 2
                                   Σ

instead of Σ in the superscript if Σ = σ 2 I, and omit γ or Σ if they are zero.

2.1   I TERATIVE S TOCHASTIC A LGORITHMS

To facilitate analysis, we assume an abstract form of iterative stochastic algorithms to hide unneces-
sary details and improve generality. We assume the algorithm first prepares an independent random
variable V for internal randomness, then starts from an independent initial hypothesis W0 ∈ W and
updates the hypothesis iteratively for T ∈ N+ steps by Wt := Wt−1 − gt (Wt−1 , S, V, W0:t−2 ) ∈ W
for t ∈ [T ], and finally outputs W := WT . Here, gt is a deterministic function. The algorithm speci-
fies a random process W0:T , referred to as the original trajectory. We may omit gt ’s dependence on
(Wt−1 , S, V, W0:t−2 ) to save space. SGD with batch size b can be obtained by first generating the
indices B1:T ∈ ([n]b )T for each mini-batch, then saving them in V and finally letting gt compute
the gradients in the mini-batch defined by Bt . Lastly, with access to past weights W0:t−2 and all
randomnesses V , gt can recover past gradients and covers momentum or Adam, etc. As a result, our
theoretical results can be directly applied to these algorithms.

2.2   F LATNESS

The flatness at w ∈ W is formulated by the Hessians ĤS (w) and Hµ (w) of the empirical and
population losses, respectively. Empirically, the flatness of the empirical loss is highly anisotropic
for deep models: after SGD training, most empirical Hessian eigenvectors have small eigenvalues
while only the rest few have large eigenvalues (Sagun et al., 2018; Papyan, 2019). We distinguish
these eigenvectors by “flat” versus “sharp” directions (Jastrzȩbski et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2022).
Perturbations in the weight space along the sharp directions cause large loss changes, while those
along the flat directions cause only slight loss changes.

2.3   I NFORMATION -T HEORETIC B OUNDS AND A PPLICATION ON SGD
                                                                2 2
A random variable X is R-sub-Gaussian if E eλ(X−E[X]) ≤ eλ R /2 for any λ ∈ R. Let I(A; B)
be the mutual information (MI) between a pair of random variables (A, B) (Cover & Thomas, 2006).
The MI between the training set and the output weight can bound the generalization error:

Lemma 1 (Xu & Raginsky (2017)) Assume ℓ(w, ·) is R-sub-Gaussian    p on µ for any w ∈ W. The
generalization error of PW |S on µ is bounded by gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤ 2R2 I(W ; S)/n.

MI is hard to compute for SGD and one must bound it to apply Lemma 1. However, directly bound-
ing MI on SGD is not enough because the MI of SGD can be infinite (Hellström et al., 2024), leading
to a vacuous generalization bound. Neu et al. (2021) propose auxiliary trajectories to address this
problem. Auxiliary trajectories are perturbed versions of the original trajectory, aiming to decrease
the MI between the training set and the output weight. If well designed, the larger the perturbation is,
the more the MI decreases. It is often easier to bound the MI of the auxiliary trajectory, which finally


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


becomes the “trajectory term” in the bound. Given the auxiliary trajectory, to transform the bound of
it into a bound for the original trajectory, one must pay a penalty term of the loss difference between
their output weights. The penalty comprises of several instances of ∆Σ    γ terms, which are approxi-
                                                 h                                                i
                                   Σ               ⊤                    ⊤
mated by Taylor expansion to ∆γ (w, s) ≈ E γ ∇L̂s (w) + (γ + ξ) × Ĥs (w) × (γ + ξ)/2 . As
a result, the penalty is related to the flatness: It will be very large if the perturbation (γ + ξ) has
large projections onto the top eigenvectors of Ĥs , i.e., the sharp directions, while it is safe to have
large projections onto the flat directions. Trading off between the trajectory and penalty terms, we
have Insight 1 for designing auxiliary perturbation and trajectories.

Insight 1 The ideal perturbation for the auxiliary trajectory should have large projections onto
flat directions to reduce MI and the trajectory term while maintaining small projections onto sharp
directions to keep the penalty term small.

We now present the existing information-theoretic bounds for SGD with the help of auxiliary trajec-
tories. 3 Neu et al. (2021) propose isotropic Gaussian as the perturbation for the auxiliary trajectory:

Definition 1 (SGLD-Like Trajectory) The SGLD-like trajectory W̃0:T of any trajectory W̄0:T is

                          W̃0 := W̄0 ,      W̃t := W̃t−1 + (W̄t − W̄t−1 ) + Nt ,

where Nt ∼ N (0, σt2 I) is an independent isotropic Gaussian noise with σt > 0.

After building the SGLD-like auxiliary trajectory of the original trajectory, Neu et al. (2021) exploit
the properties of Gaussian noises to bound the MI of the SGLD-like output weight. Based on the
same SGLD-like trajectory, Wang & Mao (2022) improve the technique for bounding MI, providing
a numerically tighter result in Proposition 1.

Proposition 1 (Theorem 2 of Wang & Mao (2022)) SGD’s generalization error is bounded by
                    v
                    u
                    u R2 XT
                             1 h                2
                                                  i   h P 2                           P 2                  i
 gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤ t         2 E ∥gt − E [gt ]∥ + E ∆ t σt (WT , S) − ∆ t σt (WT , S ′ ) ,
                      n t=1 σt                      |                         {z                           }
                         |         {z             }   Penalty for the SGLD-like trajectory (Flatness Term)
                                 MI bound (Trajectory Term)
where the expectations are over the randomness of training set sampling, initialization, and V .

Since the trajectory term and the flatness term correspond to the MI bound and the penalty of
the SGLD-like trajectory, respectively, these two terminologies will be used interchangeably. The
SGLD-like trajectory decreases MI at the cost of the penalty term. The flatness is exploited to ensure
the penalty is not very large. However, as shown in Figure 1, Proposition 1’s trajectory term does
not adequately exploit the flatness. This drawback is partially due to the isotropic Gaussian that adds
perturbations of the same strength along all directions, violating Insight 1. To exploit the anisotropy
of flatness, one can use non-isotropic Gaussian noises as in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2 (Proposition 8 of Neu et al. (2021)) SGD’s generalization error is bounded by
                          r
                             R2 h                   2
                                                       i
         n
                                 E ∥WT − E [WT ]∥Σ−1 + E ∆Σ (W, S) − ∆Σ (W, S ′ ) ,

   gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤ inf
                    Σ∈S+      n

where S+ ⊆ Rd×d is the set of symmetric positive definite matrices.
                                                                              h i−1
Here, Σ is the covariance of the Gaussian. By setting, for example, Σ = E ĤS          , the noise has
large variances along the directions with small curvatures, better exploiting the flatness. Neverthe-
less, we find Proposition 2 still has room for improvement, as elaborated in Section 3.1.

  3
    They are slightly modified to have simpler, similar and more comparable forms to each other. These
modifications only make the bounds tighter, and will not cause unfair comparisons.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     S                                                         Loss Contour   SGD Output Weight

      Original        W0     W1      W2     ···     WT           gen(WT )
                                                          Penalty      +∆Γ (WT , S)
       Definition 2                                                       T
                                                            Term       −∆Γ (WT , S ′ )
                                                                            T

 Omniscient           W̆0    W̆1     W̆2    ···     W̆T          gen(W̆T )
                                                          Flatness     +∆Σ (W̆T , S)
       Definition 1                                          Term      −∆Σ (W̆T , S ′ )

    SGLD-like         W̃0    W̃1     W̃2    ···     W̃T          gen(W̃T )


                                                                          ≤
                                            ···              q
                                                                     2R2 I(W̃ ; S)
                             N1      N2             NT                n      T



                      (a) The relationships between trajectories.                         (b) Aligned.         (c) Not aligned.

Figure 2: The relationship between the original, omniscient, and SGLD-like trajectories, and illus-
trative examples of of alignment and misalignment between flatness and output weight covariance.
The two trajectories have decoupled roles: the omniscient trajectory optimizes the whole bound
while the SGLD-like trajectory bounds the MI for the omniscient trajectory.


3      P ROPOSED O MNISCIENT T RAJECTORY
3.1        A NALYSIS ON E XISTING R ESULTS ’ D RAWBACKS

To see the inefficiencies of Proposition 2, we recall a generic principle:

Principle 1 Being specific enhances optimization: minA EX [f (X; A)] ≥ EX [minA f (X; A)] .

Through the lens of this principle, Proposition 2 is closer to LHS of Principle 1 since Σ to be opti-
mized is shared among all instances in the expectation, leading to trade-offs between these instances.
As a result, it is suboptimal compared to a fully specific and dependent one.
Moreover, Proposition 2 is prone to overfitting when estimated in numerical studies. Since the dis-
tribution of output weights is not fully accessible, one must sample some of them before optimizing
over Σ. This procedure is identical to ERM, leading to potential overfitting to the sampled weights.
Sampling output weights involves training multiple models on multiple training sets. The computa-
tional costs and data requirements of training deep models limit the number of samples. In contrast,
S+ is a Θ(d2 )-dimensional manifold. Therefore, the overfitting is severe at least in the classic view
and the estimated bound has a severe negative bias. Although the overfitting may be benign as
it is in deep learning, a meta-generalization theory is needed to ensure it, which is too complex
and may even induce a meta-meta-overfitting problem with more parameters. To our knowledge,
Proposition 2 lacks numerical results, possibly due to the large parameter count and the overfitting.
Some examples of the two drawbacks can be found in Appendix B.1. As indicated by Principle 1,
both issues can be addressed by moving the optimization inside the expectation. Regarding the
suboptimality, Principle 1 explicitly shows better tightness. Regarding overfitting, the RHS of Prin-
ciple 1 is already the result of overfitting to instance trajectories, eliminating overfitting as a bias
source. Furthermore, depending on more random variables, such as the training set, makes it easier
to access and exploit the empirical flatness. Motivated by these benefits, we propose fully dependent
auxiliary trajectories in the form of functions of all random variables in the training process. With
knowledge of all random variables, the trajectories are termed “omniscient (auxiliary) trajectories”.

3.2        O MNISCIENT T RAJECTORY

The omniscient trajectory that depends on all random variables in the training is defined as follows:

Definition 2 (Omniscient Trajectory) The omniscient trajectory W̆0:T of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T ) spec-
ified by omniscient perturbation ∆g1:T is given by
                      W̆t := W̆t−1 − (gt (Wt−1 , S, V, W0:t−2 ) − ∆gt (S, V, g1:T , W0:T )),
                  W̆0 :=W0 ,
                                                Pt
where ∆gt is a deterministic function. Let Γt := τ =1 ∆gτ (S, V, g1:T , W0:T ), then W̆t = Wt +Γt .

To bound the generalization error of the original SGD trajectory, we transform the generalization
error of the original output weight into that of the omniscient output weight at the cost of a “penalty
term” for the translational perturbation ΓT . To bound generalization error and MI of the omniscient


                                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


output weight, we construct an SGLD-like auxiliary trajectory W̃0:T based on the omniscient trajec-
tory and transform the generalization of the omniscient trajectory into that of the SGLD-like trajec-
tory, at the cost of another penalty, i.e., the flatness term. We then bound the generalization error of
the SGLD-like output weight using the MI I(W̃ ; S). The relationships between the trajectories and
their generalization errors are summarized in Figure 2a. To bound the MI, we extend the key Lemma
4 of Wang & Mao (2022) that bounds the mutual information using variances in Lemma B.1 so that
it can be used for the double-layered auxiliary trajectories despite its heavy dependence to S. Putting
these problem transformations and bounds together, we obtain a generalization bound Theorem 1
using trajectory statistics similar to Proposition 1 but modified by the omniscient perturbation.
                                                                                      T
Theorem 1 Assume R-sub-Gaussianity for ℓ. For any ∆g1:T and any σ1:T ∈ R>0 , we have
                    v
                    u
                    u R2 XT
                            1 h                       2
                                                        i
       n
  gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤ t        2 E ∥gt − E [gt ] − ∆gt ∥ + E [∆ΓT (WT , S) − ∆ΓT (WT , S ′ )]
                      n t=1 σt                            |                     {z                      }
                         |             {z               } Penalty for the omni. trajectory (Penalty Term)
                                         MI bound (Trajectory term)
                                                     h P 2                                     P      2
                                                                                                                          i
                                              +E ∆          t σt   (WT + ΓT , S) − ∆               t σt   (WT + ΓT , S ′ ) .
                                               |                                {z                                        }
                                                               Penalty for the SGLD-like trajectory (Flatness Term)


Setting ∆gt ≡ 0 recovers Proposition 1. We further optimize it to tighten the bound.

3.3      O PTIMIZING THE O MNISCIENT T RAJECTORY AND E XPLOITING F LATNESS

To avoid optimizing over T elements ∆g1:T , we first simplify Theorem 1 with ∆gt = (gt − E [gt ])−
1
  PT                       1
T    τ =1 (gτ − E [gτ ]) + T ∆G. As a result, for any deterministic function ∆G of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T )
and σ > 0, we have Corollary B.1 that can be informally stated as (with ∆Wt := Wt − W0 )
           r
               R2      h
                                                     2
                                                       i     h 2
                                                                σ T               σ2 T          ′
                                                                                                   i
  gen ≤             E    ∥∆W  T − E [∆W  T ] + ∆G∥       + E  ∆ ∆G  (W T , S) − ∆ ∆G   (W T , S   )  .
             nσ 2 T
Appendix B.4 verifies such ∆gt is optimal under the constraint ΓT = ∆G, and the generality is not
harmed by this simplification. Setting ∆G = 0 recovers the isotropic version of Proposition 24 .
We then optimize over ∆G. It can decrease the trajectory term by canceling ∆WT − E [∆WT ].
However, large ∆G would increase the penalty term, leading to a trade-off. Fortunately, near flat
minima, most directions are flat, and the penalty term is insensitive to perturbations along them.
Following Insight 1, we confine ∆G to align with the flat directions. This is done by approximating
the penalty terms to the second order, where Hessians emerge, and solving an optimization problem
formed by the output weights and the Hessians (see Appendix B.6). Theorem 2 presents the result,
where the three expectations correspond to the penalty, flatness, and trajectory terms, respectively.

Theorem 2 Assume ℓ(w, ·) is R-sub-Gaussian on µ for any w ∈ W, ℓ(·, z) and Lµ (·) are thirdly
                                                                                                    4
continuously differentiable w.r.t. w for any z ∈ Z, and there is a constant D > 0 such that D ∥∆w∥
bounds the residuals in the third-order Taylor expansions of ℓ(·, z) and Lµ (·) for any z ∈ Z. Then
for any λ > 0 trading-off between the trajectory and penalty terms, we have
                                                                 r
         n                                               ′     3 3 R2
   gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤ E [∆∆G (WT , S) − ∆∆G (WT , S )] +                E [tr (∆H(WT + ∆G))]
                                                               2     n
       s
                                                                                         2
     × 3 E (I − (I + H̃pen /2λC)−1 )(∆WT − E [∆WT ]) − (2λCI + H̃pen )−1 J                   + r, (1)

 where ∆H(w) := ĤS (w) − Hµ (w), H̃flat is chosen from ∆H(WT ) and ĤS (WT ), H̃pen is cho-
sen from ∆H(WT ) and ĤS (WT ), and J is chosen from ∇(L̂S (WT ) − Lµ (WT )) and L̂S (WT ),
                           1/3
C := 23 Rn2 |tr(H̃flat )|      , ∆G =−(2λCI+H̃pen )−1 (2λC(∆WT −E[∆WT ])+J), and r = O(d2 σ∗4 ) is the


residual in a second-order approximation. See Eq. (B.6) in Appendix B.7 for the form of σ∗ .
   4
       Using non-isotropic Gaussian noises for the SGLD-like trajectory fully recovers Proposition 2.


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.4    D ISCUSSION AND C OMPARISON

To see the dependence on the flatness more clearly, we approximate the result of Theorem 2. To
simplify the approximation, only for this subsection, we assume J := ∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ), and
the model is sufficiently trained so that ∇L̂S (WT ) ≈ 0. We also assume λ is large enough so that
2λC surpasses H̃pen ’s top singular value to approximate I − (I + H̃pen /2λC)−1 ≈ H̃pen /2λC.
Be noted that the above assumptions are used only in this subsection, i.e., Theorem 2 and experi-
ments in Section 4 do not require them. Results without some of these assumption can be found in
Appendix B.8. Approximating the penalty term to the second order leads to the following result:

                                    2                                   2
   gen ⪅ E ∥∆WT − ∆E [WT ]∥|∆H(WT )|−∆H(E[WT ]) + ∥∇Lµ (WT )∥ |∆H(WT )| I
                                                                           4λ2 C 2
                                                                                   − 2λC
          |                                      {z                                      }
                                        Corresponding to Penalty Term
       s
      3 3 2R2

                                                              2                      2
 +            E [|tr (∆H(WT + ∆G))|] · E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥ H̃pen   2     + ∥∇Lµ (WT )∥ I       ,
      2    n |               {z                }               4λ2 C 2
                                                                                     4λ2 C 2
                Corresponding to Flatness Term
                                                                                               (2)
                                                  |               {z                       }
                                                    Corresponding to Trajectory Term

where |·| replaces the eigenvalues of a matrix with their absolute values. The details can be found
in Appendix B.8. It can be seen that all terms except the two population gradient norms depend
on Hessians. Particularly, the “norms” of deviation ∆WT − E [∆WT ] are defined by the Hessians.
As a result, the components of the deviation along flat directions contribute little to the bound. The
flatter the minima are, the more and flatter the flat directions there are, and more components of the
deviations contribute little to the bound. Moreover, if the flatness is aligned with the covariance,
most large deviations can be found near the “flat subspace”, leading to a smaller bound. As a result,
generalization is better if minima are flat and the flatness aligns with the covariance.
This focus on alignment is similar to the work by Wang & Mao (2024b) and Wang et al. (2021a).
These alignments are compared in Appendix B.8.1 in detail. Briefly, the main difference is that
our alignment directly relies on flatness. Our technique is also similar to the rate-distortion bound
(Sefidgaran et al., 2022) as both involve weight-dependent perturbations. However, our omniscient
trajectory depends on more random variables, such as the training data that is crucial for leveraging
the empirical Hessian. Besides, the existing chaining (Asadi et al., 2018) and evaluated (Harutyun-
yan et al., 2021; Hellström & Durisi, 2022; Wang & Mao, 2023) bounds, which can leverage the
similarity between adjacent hypotheses, are potentially useful because the flatness of a minimum
reflects a similarity with neighboring weights. However, chaining requires partitioning the hypoth-
esis space, which is difficult for deep neural networks; the evaluated bounds directly rely on model
losses, obscuring insights in the language of weights and flatness.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY
In this section, we experimentally show how our bound captures the true generalization error/gap
measured by Cross Entropy (0-1 loss does not have Hessians and is motivationally incompatible)
compared to the existing bounds. We vary the hyperparameter and train 6 independent ResNet-18
models on CIFAR-10 at each hyperparameter. To ensure sub-Gaussianity, capped cross-entropy
(CE) is used in testing and bound estimation,
                                               while vanilla CE is used for training for efficient train-
ing. We estimate Theorem 2 with λ ∈ 1, 103 , 109 , H̃flat = H̃pen = ĤS (WT ) to make estimation
easier and J = ∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ) for numerical tightness as detailed in Appendix C.2. Es-
timating the bounds requires splitting datasets: The 6 models are trained by 6 random splits of the
training set. Terms involving population statistics (e.g., the population Hessians in the flatness terms
and the population gradient in the penalty term) are approximated to the second order and estimated
on validation sets. But for existing bounds, we assume Lµ (W ) ≤ Eξ∼N (0,σ2 I) [Lµ (W + ξ)] (Wang
& Mao, 2022) and avoid the population Hessian. The true generalization error is estimated on a
separate test set. See Appendix C for more details and the results with population Hessians.
We first evaluate whether our bound can better capture the generalization under varying flatness. As
shown in Figure 3, the bound correctly captures the tendency of generalization error under varied
batch size and learning rate. Specifically, the tendency of the trajectory term w.r.t. the batch size


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                                                                    Generalization error bound                               Estimated generalization error

                                      Generalization error bound                     Estimated generalization error                     lr=0.0005                       lr=0.001                  lr=0.005                         lr=0.01                lr=0.02
                                                                                   1e 8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Estimated Gen. Gap
                        lr=0.0005
                      1.3
                                                  lr=0.001                lr=0.005
                                                                      1.3 2.0
                                                                                                       lr=0.01             lr=0.021.3                                                    1.3                                                     1.3 × 100
                                                                                                                            1.3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Cross Entropy)
 Gen. Gap Bound
 (Cross Entropy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 107                                             1.2 × 100
                      1.2                                              1.2 1.5                                              1.2 1.2                                                      1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.1 × 100
                      1.1                                              1.1                                                  1.1 1.1                                                      1.1
                                                                           1.0
                      1.0                                              1.0                                                  1.0 1.0                                                      1.0 106                                                 100
                                                                           0.5
                      0.9       100      200 300            400     5000.9                100     200 300        400
                                                                                                                            0.9
                                                                                                                          500 0.9             100      200 300              400       5000.9                       200        400                9 × 10 1
                                          Batch size                                               Batch size                                           Batch size                                                 Batch size

                                      (a) Bound                                    (b) Trajectory Term                                     (c) Penalty Term                                             (d) Flatness Term

Figure 3: Thm. 2 (λ = 109 ) on CIFAR-10 and ResNet-18 with varied learning rate and batch size.

              Wang and Mao (2021)                            Prop. 8 of Neu et.al. (2021)                    Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+00)                     Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+03)                           Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+09)                           Generalization error
                                                                         3                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                    10                                                                                                                                             10
    Gen. Gap/Bound
    (Cross Entropy)


                      102                                           102                                          102                                           102                                                 102

                      10   1
                                                                    10   1                                       101                                           10   1                                              101

                           0                                             0                                       10   0
                                                                                                                                                               10   0                                              100
                      10                                            10
                               0.2     0.4     0.6    0.8     1.0            0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6                0.5       1.0        1.5       2.0                  1                2               3            0.00       0.01        0.10        1.00
                                        Training data                                Label noise level                    Width / channel scaling factor                     Depth / filter scaling factor                                Weight decay        1e 3



Figure 4: Numerical results for ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10 under varied training data usage, label
noise level, width, depth, and weight decay. The isotropic version of Proposition 2 is used.


is corrected. The penalty term for the omniscient trajectory correlates well with the generalization
error w.r.t. both learning rate and batch size, thanks to the Hessians in Eq. (2). The flatness term
also generally has the correct tendency w.r.t. both hyperparameters. Unfortunately, the tendency of
the trajectory term w.r.t. learning rate is still incorrect. As shown in Section 3.4, the trajectory term
is essentially the product between Hessians and the variance of the last-step weight. We conjecture
it is the increased variance when learning rate increases that overpowers the improved flatness and
makes the tendency uncorrected. In contrast, the variance is less sensitive to batch size. Detailed
discussion can be found in Appendix C.4.1. Nevertheless, after multiplied together, they contribute
little to the bound and the uncorrected tendency does not affect the bound very much.
Figure 4 shows how our bound captures the generalization under varied generalization-critical hy-
perparameters. It can be seen that our bound with large λ (i.e., putting more weights on reducing the
trajectory term) can well capture the generalization under these variations, while the some existing
bounds fail to capture the improved generalization under stronger weight decay.
Results for MLP on MNIST can be found in Appendix C.4. According to Figures 3 and 4 and results
in the appendix, our bounds are numerically much tighter. The main improvement comes from the
trajectory term, as a result of both Proposition 2 and the optimized omniscient trajectory leveraging
flatness. See Appendix C.4.1 for detailed discussions. In Appendix C.6, we evaluate our bounds
under weight scaling, where the generalization is still well captured.
The trajectory term and the flatness almost diminish after multiplied together, and the bound mainly
comprises of the penalty term. In Theorem 2 and Eq. (2), the term heavily relies on the population
gradients. We consider this reliance to be the major limitation of our bound.

5                  E XTENSIONS

Our technique is so flexible that it can be combined with existing techniques, such as the individual-
sample technique and CMI framework. We can also combine it with the data-dependent prior tech-
nique of Negrea et al. (2019) for SGLD to yield an SGD bound. The combined results are listed in
Appendix D. Notably, the omniscient trajectories in these results depend on all new random vari-
ables introduced by the variants. As a result, the omniscient trajectory can leverage the features of
the variants and optimize more specifically.
Our technique can also address the known limitations of representative existing information-
theoretic bounds on convex-Lipschitz-Bounded (CLB) problems in stochastic convex optimization
(SCO). An SCO problem is a triplet (W, Z, ℓ), where W is convex and ℓ(·, z) is convex given any
z ∈ Z. The CLB subclass CL,D of SCO further requires W is closed and bounded with a diameter


                                                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D, while ℓ(·, z) is L-Lipschitz given any z ∈ Z. The goal is to minimize the excess (population) risk
EW [Lµ (W )]−inf w∈W Lµ (w) under an unknown sample distribution, which can be bounded by the
excess optimization error and the generalization error. The minimax excess risk reflects the worst-
case generalization: inf PW |S ∈A supµ∈M1 (Z) EW ∼µn ◦PW |S [Lµ (W )] − inf w∈W Lµ (w), where A is
a family of algorithms and M1 (Z) is the set of all distributions over Z.
             √
An O(LD/ n) minimax rate has been obtained for Gradient Descent (GD) using uniform stabil-
ity. However, Haghifam et al. (2023) have shown there exist CLB instances where PAC-Bayesian
bounds, the vanilla (C)MI bounds, their Gaussian-perturbed variants (Propositions 1 and 2 fall in
this category if adapted to CLB settings), and representative variants all have an Ω(1) lower-bound,
meaning these representative bounds cannot explain the generalization of GD on CLB problems.
Attias et al. (2024) have shown any accurate CLB learner with low excess generalization risk must
have high CMI, i.e., the CMI-accuracy trade-off. Recently, Wang & Mao (2024a) have addressed
the counterexample by Haghifam et al. (2023) and all CLB problems by augmenting CMI bounds
with stability. However, a lot of complicated CMIs are involved and due to this complexity it is
hard to intuitively interpret their relationship with the CMI-accuracy trade-off. Therefore, we try
our technique to see whether it leads to a similar but simpler result. Combining individual-sample
bounds with omniscient trajectory, we can easily resemble the stability argument:
Theorem 3 (Informal) For CLB problem (W, Z, ℓ) and distribution µ over Z, we have
                          n
                       1X      p
    gen ≤ inf1:n             LD 2I (WT + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i ) + E [∆∆Gi (WT , Zi ) − ∆∆Gi (WT , S ′ )]
              ∆G       n i=1
           (for stable algorithms) 2L P
                                          n
                                                                               (for GD)                 √
                   ≤                      i=1 E [∥WT − E [WT | Z−i ]∥]             ≤                 8L2 T η + 8L2 T η/n
                                n                                        (with T steps of size η )

This bound recovers that of Bassily et al. (2020) up to a constant.√ Following similar steps of Haghi-
fam et al. (2023), one can recover the best-achievable O(LD/ n) excess risk bound. Theorem 3
and its proof essentially state the original trajectory has a vanishing distance (measured by loss dif-
ferences) to the omniscient trajectory of zero individual MI. Therefore, Theorem 3 provides an al-
ternative to the trade-off on GD or stable algorithms: although the accurate learners have high CMI,
they are quite close to auxiliary (oracle) learners with low MI5 . Extending this intuition for more
general accurate learners in Theorem 4 of Appendix D.5, we explore to replace CMI with a new in-
formation measure induced by our technique and break through the information-accuracy trade-off:
this generalization-bounding new information measure vanishes together with risks. However, The-
orem 4 requires vanishing excess optimization error and is still partial and preliminary. Lastly, when
losses are smooth and convex, we also recover a stability-based O(1/n) rate for SGD, as detailed in
Appendix D.6.

6       C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATION
In this paper, we address the inadequate leverage of flatness in existing information-theoretic gener-
alization bounds for SGD. By continuing the “being more specific” trend in generalization theory,
we propose the omniscient trajectory that can be optimized depending on all random variables in the
training process to better leverage the flatness. Our bound shows that an algorithm generalizes better
if its output flatness aligns with its output covariance. When applied to deep neural networks, our
bound aligns well with the generalization under varied flatness
                                                             √ and is numerically tighter. When ap-
plied to CLB problems for GD, the technique yields an O(1 n) minimax rate, addressing a recently
highlighted limitation of information-theoretic generalization theory.
However, our bound relies on population gradients and Hessians. Although tolerable for theories
(e.g., Neu et al. (2021) and Wang & Mao (2022; 2024b) also rely on population statistics), this
problem prevents the bound from being a part of self-certified algorithms (Pérez-Ortiz et al., 2021).
Moreover, the most information-theoretic components vanish in both the CLB bound and the exper-
iments (see Eq. (D.5) and Figures 3c and C.4c). We conjecture these two issues may be addressed
in future works by information-theoretically bounding the generalization of higher-order statistics.
More detailed discussions on the limitations can be found in Appendix E.
    5
        The auxiliary oracle learners E [WT | Z−i ] does not obey the MI-accuracy trade-off due to its access to µ.


                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All proofs and full versions of informally stated results can be found in the appendices for the
corresponding sections. Details of experiments can be found in Appendix C. The codes for the ex-
periments can be found in the supplementary material or at https://github.com/peng-ze/
omniscient-bounds.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the NSFC Project (62192783, 92370129, 62222604, 62206052,
62376010), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2024M750424), Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities (020214380120, 020214380128), State Key Laboratory Fund
(ZZKT2024A14), the Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of CPSF (GZC20240252), Jiangsu Funding
Program for Excellent Postdoctoral Talent (2024ZB242), Jiangsu Science and Technology Major
Project (BG2024031), and Beijing Nova Program (20230484344, 20240484642).

R EFERENCES
Alessandro Achille and Stefano Soatto. Emergence of invariance and disentanglement in deep rep-
  resentations. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19(50):1–34, 2018.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Yingyu Liang. Learning and generalization in overparameter-
  ized neural networks, going beyond two layers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Pierre Alquier. User-friendly introduction to PAC-Bayes bounds, 2023. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/2110.11216.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon S. Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, and Ruosong Wang. Fine-grained analysis of
  optimization and generalization for overparameterized two-layer neural networks. In Proceedings
  of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 477–502. PMLR, 2019.
Amir Asadi, Emmanuel Abbe, and Sergio Verdu. Chaining mutual information and tightening gen-
 eralization bounds. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, 2018.
Idan Attias, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Mahdi Haghifam, Roi Livni, and Daniel M. Roy. Informa-
  tion complexity of Stochastic Convex Optimization: Applications to generalization and memo-
  rization, 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09327. arXiv:2402.09327 [cs].
Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and Gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and
  structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Nov):463–482, 2002.
Raef Bassily, Vitaly Feldman, Cristóbal Guzmán, and Kunal Talwar. Stability of Stochastic Gradient
  Descent on nonsmooth convex losses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 4381–4391, 2020.
Alon Brutzkus, Amir Globerson, Eran Malach, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. SGD learns over-
  parameterized networks that provably generalize on linearly separable data. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Yuheng Bu, Shaofeng Zou, and Venugopal V. Veeravalli. Tightening mutual information based
  bounds on generalization error. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, 1(1):
  121–130, 2020.
Yuan Cao and Quanquan Gu. Generalization bounds of Stochastic Gradient Descent for wide and
  deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Junbum Cha, Sanghyuk Chun, Kyungjae Lee, Han-Cheol Cho, Seunghyun Park, Yunsung Lee, and
  Sungrae Park. SWAD: Domain generalization by seeking flat minima. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory 2nd Edition (Wiley Series
  in Telecommunications and Signal Processing). Wiley-Interscience, 2006. ISBN 0471241954.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Imre Csiszár and János Körner. Information theory: Coding theorems for discrete memoryless
  systems. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Mathieu Dagréou, Pierre Ablin, Samuel Vaiter, and Thomas Moreau.    How to
 compute hessian-vector products?      In ICLR Blogposts 2024, 2024.    URL
 https://iclr-blogposts.github.io/2024/blog/bench-hvp/
 #inverse-hessian-vector-products-ihvps-in-optimization.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M. Roy. Computing nonvacuous generalization bounds for
  deep (stochastic) neural networks with many more parameters than training data. In Proceedings
  of the 33rd Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2017.
Yu Feng, Wei Zhang, and Yuhai Tu. Activity–weight duality in feed-forward neural networks re-
  veals two co-determinants for generalization. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(8):908–918, 2023.
  Publisher: Nature Publishing Group UK London.
Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimiza-
  tion for efficiently improving generalization. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations. ICLR, 2020.
Futoshi Futami and Masahiro Fujisawa. Time-independent information-theoretic generalization
  bounds for SGLD. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Mahdi Haghifam, Borja Rodrı́guez-Gálvez, Ragnar Thobaben, Mikael Skoglund, Daniel M. Roy,
 and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Limitations of information-theoretic generalization bounds for
 Gradient Descent methods in Stochastic Convex Optimization. In Proceedings of The 34th Inter-
 national Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 663–706. PMLR, 2023.
Hrayr Harutyunyan, Maxim Raginsky, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Information-theoretic
  generalization bounds for black-box learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Fengxiang He, Tongliang Liu, and Dacheng Tao. Control batch size and learning rate to generalize
  well: Theoretical and empirical evidence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 32, 2019.
Fredrik Hellström and Giuseppe Durisi. A new family of generalization bounds using samplewise
  evaluated CMI. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Fredrik Hellström, Giuseppe Durisi, Benjamin Guedj, and Maxim Raginsky. Generalization bounds:
  Perspectives from information theory and PAC-Bayes, 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2309.04381.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Flat minima. Neural computation, 9(1):1–42, 1997.
Stanisław Jastrzȩbski, Zachary Kenton, Devansh Arpit, Nicolas Ballas, Asja Fischer, Yoshua Ben-
  gio, and Amos Storkey. Three factors influencing minima in SGD, 2018. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1711.04623.
Stanisław Jastrzȩbski, Zachary Kenton, Nicolas Ballas, Asja Fischer, Yoshua Bengio, and Amos
  Storkey. On the relation between the sharpest directions of DNN loss and the SGD step length.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations. ICLR, 2019.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantastic
  generalization measures and where to find them, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1912.02178.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations. ICLR, 2017.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yunwen Lei and Yiming Ying. Fine-grained analysis of stability and generalization for stochastic
  gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5809–5819. PMLR,
  2020.

Roi Livni. Information theoretic lower bounds for information theoretic upper bounds. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Sanae Lotfi, Marc Anton Finzi, Sanyam Kapoor, Andres Potapczynski, Micah Goldblum, and An-
  drew Gordon Wilson. PAC-Bayes compression bounds so tight that they can explain generaliza-
  tion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Sanae Lotfi, Marc Finzi, Yilun Kuang, Tim G. J. Rudner, Micah Goldblum, and Andrew Gordon
  Wilson. Non-vacuous generalization bounds for large language models, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2312.17173.

James Martens. New insights and perspectives on the Natural Gradient Method. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 21(146):1–76, 2020.

David A. McAllester. PAC-Bayesian model averaging. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Con-
  ference on Computational learning theory, pp. 164–170, 1999.

Ramchandran Muthukumar and Jeremias Sulam. Sparsity-aware generalization theory for deep
  neural networks. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 195, pp. 5311–5342.
  ML Research Press, 2023.

Vaishnavh Nagarajan and J. Zico Kolter. Uniform convergence may be unable to explain gener-
  alization in deep learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32,
  2019.

Jeffrey Negrea, Mahdi Haghifam, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Ashish Khisti, and Daniel M Roy.
   Information-theoretic generalization bounds for SGLD via data-dependent estimates. In Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.

Gergely Neu, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Mahdi Haghifam, and Daniel M. Roy. Information-
  theoretic generalization bounds for Stochastic Gradient Descent. In Proceedings of Thirty Fourth
  Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3526–3545. PMLR, 2021.

Behnam Neyshabur, Zhiyuan Li, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Yann LeCun, and Nathan Srebro. The role
  of over-parametrization in generalization of neural networks. In 7th International Conference on
  Learning Representations. ICLR, 2019.

F.     Orabona.       Last iterate of SGD converges (even in unbounded do-
     mains),    2020.          URL   https://parameterfree.com/2020/08/07/
     last-iterate-of-sgd-converges-even-in-unbounded-domains/.

Antonio Orvieto, Hans Kersting, Frank Proske, Francis Bach, and Aurelien Lucchi. Anticorrelated
  noise injection for improved generalization. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 17094–17116. PMLR, 2022.

Vardan Papyan. The full spectrum of deepnet hessians at scale: Dynamics with SGD training and
  sample size, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07062.

Ankit Pensia, Varun Jog, and Po-Ling Loh. Generalization error bounds for noisy, iterative al-
  gorithms. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 546–550. IEEE,
  2018.

Scott Pesme, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, and Nicolas Flammarion. Implicit bias of SGD for diagonal
  linear networks: a provable benefit of stochasticity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 35, pp. 29218–29230, 2021.

Marı́a Pérez-Ortiz, Omar Rivasplata, John Shawe-Taylor, and Csaba Szepesvári. Tighter risk certifi-
 cates for neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(227):1–40, 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Daniel Russo and James Zou. How much does your data exploration overfit? Controlling bias via
  information usage. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 66(1):302–323, 2020.

Levent Sagun, Utku Evci, V. Ugŭr Güney, Yann Dauphin, and Léon Bottou. Empirical analysis of
  the hessian of over-parametrized neural networks. In 6th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2018 - Workshop Track Proceedings. ICLR, 2018.

Milad Sefidgaran, Amin Gohari, Gaël Richard, and Umut Simsekli. Rate-distortion theoretic gener-
 alization bounds for stochastic learning algorithms. In Proceedings of Thirty Fifth Conference on
 Learning Theory, pp. 4416–4463. PMLR, 2022.

Thomas Steinke and Lydia Zakynthinou. Reasoning about generalization via conditional mutual
  information, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.09122.

Vladimir Naumovich Vapnik, Vlamimir Vapnik, et al. Statistical learning theory. Wiley New York,
  1998.

Bohan Wang, Huishuai Zhang, Jieyu Zhang, Qi Meng, Wei Chen, and Tie-Yan Liu. Optimizing
  information-theoretical generalization bound via anisotropic noise of SGLD. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 26080–26090, 2021a.

Hao Wang, Mario Diaz, Jose Candido S. Santos Filho, and Flavio P. Calmon. An information-
  theoretic view of generalization via Wasserstein distance. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium
  on Information Theory, pp. 577–581. IEEE, 2019.

Hao Wang, Yizhe Huang, Rui Gao, and Flavio Calmon. Analyzing the generalization capability
  of SGLD using properties of Gaussian channels. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 34, pp. 24222–24234, 2021b.

Ziqiao Wang and Yongyi Mao. On the generalization of models trained with SGD: Information-
  theoretic bounds and implications. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
  ICLR, 2022.

Ziqiao Wang and Yongyi Mao. Tighter information-theoretic generalization bounds from super-
  samples. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 36111–
  36137. PMLR, 2023.

Ziqiao Wang and Yongyi Mao. Sample-conditioned hypothesis stability sharpens information-
  theoretic generalization bounds. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 36, 2024a.

Ziqiao Wang and Yongyi Mao. Two facets of SDE under an information-theoretic lens: Gener-
  alization of SGD via training trajectories and via terminal states. In The 40th Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2024b.

Lei Wu, Mingze Wang, and Weijie Su. The alignment property of SGD noise and how it helps
  select flat minima: A stability analysis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 35, pp. 4680–4693, 2022.

Aolin Xu and Maxim Raginsky. Information-theoretic analysis of generalization capability of learn-
  ing algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.

Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Kurt Keutzer, and Michael W. Mahoney. PyHessian: Neural Networks
  Through the Lens of the Hessian. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data, pp. 581–
  590, 2020.

Tong Zhang. Covering number bounds of certain regularized linear function classes. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 2(Mar):527–550, 2002.

Yang Zhao, Hao Zhang, and Xiuyuan Hu. Penalizing gradient norm for efficiently improving gen-
  eralization in deep learning. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 162, pp. 26982–26992. PMLR, 2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenda Zhou, Victor Veitch, Morgane Austern, Ryan P. Adams, and Peter Orbanz. Non-vacuous gen-
 eralization bounds at the imagenet scale: a PAC-bayesian compression approach. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations. ICLR, 2019.
Zhanxing Zhu, Jingfeng Wu, Bing Yu, Lei Wu, and Jinwen Ma. The anisotropic noise in Stochastic
  Gradient Descent: Its behavior of escaping from sharp minima and regularization effects. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7654–7663. PMLR, 2019.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
Lemma A.1 If X, Y ∈ Rd are independent random variables, then we have E [∥X − E [Y ]∥] ≤
E [∥X − Y ∥].

Proof By the convexity of the L2 norm and the independence between X and Y , we have
      E [∥X − Y ∥] =EX [EY [∥X − Y ∥]] ≥ EX [∥EY [X − Y ]∥] = EX [∥X − E [Y ]∥] .


Corollary A.1 If X1 , X2 ∈ Rd are I.I.D. copies of X, then we have E [∥X − E [X]∥] ≤
E [∥X1 − X2 ∥].
                                                                   h             i
                                                                               2
Lemma A.2 If X1 , X2 ∈ Rd are I.I.D. copies of X, then we have E ∥X − E [X]∥       ≤
    h             i
1               2
2 E ∥X1 − X2 ∥ .


Proof
                  h            i    h      i                 h       i
                             2           2                         2
                 E ∥X1 − X2 ∥ =E ∥X1 ∥ − 2E X1⊤ X2 + E ∥X2 ∥

                                    h      i                     h        i
                                         2           ⊤                  2
                                 =E ∥X1 ∥ − 2E [X1 ] E [X2 ] + E ∥X2 ∥
                                    h     i                    h      i
                                        2          ⊤                2
                                 =E ∥X∥ − 2E [X] E [X] + E ∥X∥
                                      h           i
                                                2
                                 =2E ∥X − E [X]∥ .


Lemma A.3 Let f : W → R≥0 be a non-negative convex function. Let W ∈ W be a random
variable, then we have
                               E [|f (E [W ]) − f (W )|] ≤ 2E [f (W )] .

Proof
        E [|f (E [W ]) − f (W )|] ≤E [|f (E [W ])|] + E [|f (W )|]
                                  =E [f (E [W ])] + E [f (W )]                     (f ≥ 0)
                                  ≤2E [f (W )] .                           (convexity of f )


B     P ROOFS AND D ETAILS FOR S EC . 3 P ROPOSED O MNISCIENT T RAJECTORY
B.1     D ETAILS FOR S ECTION 3.1

In this section, we present illustrative examples of suboptimality and overfitting of Proposition 2
mentioned in Section 3.1.

B.1.1    S UBOPTIMALITY
Different (S, W ) has different empirical and population Hessians with different sharp directions.
For instance, assume v1 is the only sharp direction for (s1 , w1 ) and v2 for (s2 , w2 ). Then the non-
specific Σ would apply small noises in both directions. If v1 and v2 are nearly orthogonal, the noises
along v2 and v1 are insufficient for (s1 , w1 ) and (s2 , w2 ), respectively.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1.2      OVERFITTING

When k output weights are sampled, they lie in a k-dimensional subspace. As a result, noises
along the remaining d − k directions will not decrease the trajectory term. The optimal Σ induces
infinitely small noises along the remaining d − k directions to decrease the penalty terms. Therefore,
the optimal Σ will have rank at most k when k samples are used. If one additional weight is sampled
and it does not reside in the k-dimensional subspace, Σ cannot reduce the variance along the (k +1)-
th direction. As a result, the bound optimized for k samples is suboptimal for the k + 1 samples,
indicating overfitting.


B.2       L EMMA B.1

Lemma B.1 extends Lemma 4 of Wang & Mao (2022) that bounds the mutual information using
gradient variances.

Lemma B.1 Let X, Y ∈ Rd1 , ∆ ∈ Rd2 and O ∈ Rd3 be arbitrary random variables. Let N ∼
N (0, I) be a d1 -dimensional Gaussian noise that is independent of (X, Y, ∆, O). Then for any
σ > 0, for any deterministic Rd1 function f of (X, Y, ∆), we have for any function Ω solely of
(Y, O),

                                                            1    h
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           i
                  I(f (X, Y, ∆) + σN ; X | Y, O) ≤            2
                                                                E ∥f (X, Y, ∆) − Ω(Y, O)∥ ,                (B.1)
                                                           2σ

and for any function Ω solely of Y ,

                                                            1     h
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          i
                       I(f (X, Y, ∆) + σN ; X | Y ) ≤           E  ∥f (X, Y, ∆) − Ω(Y )∥    .              (B.2)
                                                           2σ 2

Proof We prove Eq. (B.1) first. Let 0k ∈ Rk denote k-dimensional zero vector. Define X ′ :=
  ⊤             ⊤ ′                       ⊤                         ⊤
      0⊤   0⊤     , Y := Y ⊤ 0d2 O⊤ , ∆′ := 0⊤           ∆⊤ 0⊤        and f ′ : Rd1 +d2 +d3 ×

 X     d2   d3                                       d1         d3
Rd1 → Rd and Ω′ : Rd1 +d2 +d3 → Rd1 by

          f ′ (v, u) := f (u1:d1 , v1:d1 , vd1 +1:d1 +d2 ), Ω′ (v) := Ω(v1:d1 , vd1 +d2 +1:d1 +d2 +d3 ),

where 0d ∈ Rd is the zero vector. By assumption, (X ′ , Y ′ , ∆′ ) is independent of N . Consequently,
by Lemma 4 of Wang & Mao (2022), we have

                                              E [∥f ′ (Y ′ + ∆′ , X ′ ) − Ω′ (Y ′ )∥ | Y ′ ]

      ′      ′     ′     ′         d  ′     ′
  I(f (Y + ∆ , X ) + σN ; X | Y ) ≤ E log                                                    +1
                                   2                              dσ 2
                                     1
                                  ≤ 2 E [∥f ′ (Y ′ + ∆′ , X ′ ) − Ω′ (Y ′ )∥] .
                                   2σ

By construction, we have f ′ (Y ′ + ∆′ , X ′ ) = f (X, Y, ∆) and Ω′ (Y ′ ) = Ω(Y, O). Combined with
the definition of Y ′ , they lead to Eq. (B.2) of Lemma B.1.
To obtain Eq. (B.2), let O′′ be the constant 0d2 and Ω′′ (y, o′′ ) := Ω(y). Then by Eq. (B.1), we have

                   I(f (X, Y, ∆) + σN ; X | Y ) =I(f (X, Y, ∆) + σN ; X | Y, O′′ )
                                                  1    h
                                                                                   2
                                                                                     i
                                                ≤ 2 E ∥f (X, Y, ∆) − Ω′′ (Y, O′′ )∥
                                                 2σ
                                                  1    h
                                                                              2
                                                                                i
                                                = 2 E ∥f (X, Y, ∆) − Ω(Y )∥ ,
                                                 2σ

which is exactly Eq. (B.2).



                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

By the technique of a change of trajectory, we first transform the generalization error of the original
trajectory into that of the omniscient and SGLD-like trajectories at the cost of penalty terms:
         gen(µn , PW |S )
          h                   i
       :=E Lµ (W ) − L̂S (W )
          h                      i   h                       i   h                      i
        =E Lµ (W̆T ) − L̂S (W̆T ) + E L̂S (W̆T ) − L̂S (WT ) − E Lµ (W̆T ) − Lµ (WT )
          h                      i   h                       i   h                      i
        =E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T ) + E L̂S (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̆T ) − E Lµ (W̃T ) − Lµ (W̆T )
        + E [∆ΓT (WT , S) − ∆ΓT (WT , S ′ )]
         h                      i   h P 2                    P 2                   i
       =E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T ) + E ∆ t σt (WT + ΓT , S) − ∆ t σt (WT + ΓT , S ′ )
          + E [∆ΓT (WT , S) − ∆ΓT (WT , S ′ )] .                                                 (B.3)
With the penalty terms matching those in Theorem 1, the goal reduces to bounding the generalization
error of W̃T . To this end, we apply Lemma 1 that bounds the error by mutual information and
then decompose the mutual information using the chain rule. Since ℓ(w, ·) is R-sub-Gaussian by
assumption, we have
                                                                 r
                  h                     i
                                                 n                  2R2
               E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T ) = gen(µ , PW̃T |S , ℓ) ≤         I(W̃T ; S),
                                                                      n
where
  I(W̃T ; S) ≤I(W̃0:T ; S)                                              (Data-processing inequality)
                                T
                                X
             =I(W̃0 ; S) +            I(W̃t ; S | W̃0:t−1 )                      (Chain rule of MI)
                                t=1
                 T
                 X
             =         I(W̃t ; S | W̃0:t−1 )                         (W̃0 = W0 is independent of S)
                 t=1
                 T
                 X
             =         I(W̃t−1 − (gt − ∆gt ) + Nt ; S | W̃0:t−1 ).                    (Definition 1)
                 t=1

To bound the stepwise conditional mutual information, we apply Lemma B.1 with X = S, Y =
W̃0:t−1 , ∆ = (W0:T , V ) and
            f (X, Y, ∆) = W̃t−1 − (gt (Wt−1 , S, V, W0:t−2 ) − ∆gt (S, V, g1:T , W0:T )).
Since (X, Y, ∆) is a function of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T ), which is independent with the SGLD noise
Nt ∼ N (0, σ 2 I), by Lemma B.1, we have
               I(W̃t ; S | W̃0:t−1 ) =I(W̃t−1 − (gt − ∆gt ) + Nt ; S | W̃0:t−1 )

                                       1                                         2
                                     ≤ 2 E W̃t−1 − (gt − ∆gt ) − Ω(W̃0:t−1 )
                                      2σ
for any function Ω of Y = W̃0:t−1 . To make things simpler by removing W̃t−1 and minimize the
expected squared norm, we set Ω(w̃0:t−1 ) = w̃t−1 − E [gt ] and obtain
                                              1   h
                                                                       2
                                                                         i
                      I(W̃t ; S | W̃0:t−1 ) ≤ 2 E ∥gt − E [gt ] − ∆gt ∥ .               (B.4)
                                             2σ
Plugging Eq. (B.4) back to Eq. (B.3) leads to Theorem 1.

Remark B.1 The bound can be further tightened by setting Ω(w̃0:t−1 ) = w̃t−1 − E [gt ] + E [∆gt ].
However, this eventually leads to an extra E [∆G] in the trajectory terms of Corollary B.1. This
extra term creates a “feedback” between instances that hinders optimization: when optimizing ∆G,
we must consider all instances of ∆G(S, V, g1:T , W0:T ) even if we are optimizing against a single
instance of trajectory to form Theorem 2. For simplicity, we only set Ω(w̃0:t−1 ) = w̃t−1 − E [gt ].


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4       S ELECTION OF ∆gt G IVEN ΓT

In the result of Theorem 1, the penalty and flatness terms only rely on ΓT among omniscient-related
variables. Therefore, we can first fix ΓT and optimize ∆g1:T .
Assume for this subsection that ΓT is fixed as ∆G, a function of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T ), and that ∆g1:T
                                 PT
is constrained to satisfy ∆G = i=1 ∆gt . Penalty and flatness terms are now fixed since they only
rely on ΓT and we only need to optimize the trajectory term
                                        v
                                        u
                                        u R2 X T
                                                  1 h                         2
                                                                                i
                           arg min      t           E   ∥gt − E [gt ] − ∆g t ∥
                             P
                      ∆g1:T : t ∆gt =∆G   n t=1 σt2
over ∆g1:T . We then set σt = σ, throw the square root and coefficients away, and move the summa-
tion inside the expectation, arriving at
                                             " T                           #
                                              X                          2
                                arg
                                 P
                                    min    E       ∥gt − E [gt ] − ∆gt ∥
                           ∆g1:T :   t ∆gt =∆G   t=1
Set νt := gt − E [gt ]. Since the constraints are instance-wise, we can also optimize ∆gt instance-
wisely:
                   T                                  h               i
                 X                  2                               2                              2
     arg
      P
         min           ∥ν t − ∆g t ∥  = T · Et∼U [T ]   ∥νt − ∆gt ∥     ≥T · Et∼U [T ] [νt − ∆gt ]
∆g1:T :    t ∆gt =∆G t=1

                                                                                                  2
                                                                                           1
                                                                   =T · Et∼U [T ] [νt ] −    ∆G ,
                                                                                          T
where inequality is due to the convexity of theP           and takes equality if and only if νt −∆gt
                                               squared normP
is constant (w.r.t. t), sayP∆. Then we have τ ∆gτ = ( τ ντ ) − T · ∆ = ∆G, which implies
∆gt = gt − E [gt ] − T1 τ (gτ − E [gτ ]) + T1 ∆G.

B.5       C OROLLARY B.1

Corollary B.1 Assume ℓ(w, ·) is R-sub-Gaussian on µ for any w ∈ W. For any deterministic
function ∆G of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T ) and any σ > 0, we have
                      v         h                          i
                      u
                      u 2 E ∥∆W − E [∆W ] + ∆G∥2
                         R             T          T            h 2                  2
                                                                                                  i
   gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤                                        +E ∆σ∆GT (WT , S) − ∆σ∆GT (WT , S ′ ) ,
                      t
                        nσ   2                T

where ∆WT := WT − W0 is the change before and after the training. If we give up further
optimization, i.e., ∆G = 0, then we have
                             r
                                 R2                h    2               2
                                                                                    i
                  n
          gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤          2
                                       V [∆WT ] + E ∆T σ (WT , S) − ∆T σ (WT , S ′ ) ,
                               nT σ
                    h              i
                                 2
where V [X] := E ∥X − E [X]∥ denotes variance.

Proof We prove Corollary B.1 by instantiating ∆gt of Theorem 1.
Since ∆gt depend on g1:T , we can use νt := gt − E [gt ] and ν̄ = T1 t νt when constructing
                                                                           P
∆gt . Let ∆G be a deterministic function of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T ) and σ > 0 be a constant. Then
∆gt := (νt − ν̄) + T1 ∆G is indeed a deterministic function of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T ).
             P           P
With ΓT := t ∆gt = t νt − T · ν̄ + ∆G = ∆G and σt set to constant σ, by Theorem 1 we
obtain
                  v            "                             #
                  u
                  u R2 X                                   2
                                                    1
gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤t 2         E νt − (νt − ν̄) − ∆G            + E [∆∆G (WT , S) − ∆∆G (WT , S ′ )]
                     nσ t                           T
                       h     2                        2
                                                                        i
                  + E ∆T σ (WT + ∆G, S) − ∆T σ (WT + ∆G, S ′ ) ,


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where
                                                                                      
                "
                                          2
                                              #                                      2
      X                             1              X        1 X                   1
            E       νt − (νt − ν̄) − ∆G           =    E       (gτ − E [gτ ]) − ∆G 
        t
                                    T               t
                                                           T  τ
                                                                                  T
                                                                                       
                                                                       "        #     2
                                                       1  X             X
                                                  =T · 2 E      gt − E        gt − ∆G  .
                                                      T       t           t
                P             P
Since WT = W0 − t gt , we have t gt = −∆WT and
              "                         #
                                      2
         X                     1           1 h                     2
                                                                     i
            E νt − (νt − ν̄) − ∆G         = E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ] + ∆G∥ .
          t
                               T           T
Putting everything together leads to Corollary B.1.



B.6     D ETAILS FOR S ECTION 3.3

Firstly, we need a explicit form of the penalty terms to balance the tradeoff. Therefore, the penalty
terms are approximated to the second order in the surrogate optimization, where the Hessians at the
output weight show up. The approximation is the same as Appendix B.7. Secondly, we assume the
empirical and population Hessians in the penalty term for the SGLD-like trajectory does not change
too much, namely ĤS (WT + ∆G) − Hµ (WT + ∆G) ≈ ĤS (WT ) − Hµ (WT ), to simplify the
surrogate optimization. These simplifications lead to the following surrogate optimization target (be
noted that we have not replacing terms with H̃flat , H̃pen or J):
          r
         3 3 R2     h                           i h
                                                                                   2
                                                                                     i
   min           E tr ĤS (WT ) − Hµ (WT )          E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ] + ∆G∥
   ∆G 2      n
                                                              1
                    + E ∆G⊤ ∇(L̂S (WT ) − Lµ (WT )) + ∆G⊤ (ĤS (WT ) − Hµ (WT ))∆G ,
                                                              2
where ĤS (w) is the Hessian of the empirical loss at the trajectory terminal and Hµ (w) is that of
the population loss. If we optimize the above surrogate target, we will rely on testing/validation
sets to estimate the population gradient and Hessian. Therefore, one may want to partially
avoid this reliance as much as possible by simply ignoring them. On the other hand, optimiz-
ing against validation sets leads to bettern numerical tightness.o To accommodate
                                                                           n       both needs, weo
leave it as an option by letting H̃flat ∈ ∆H(WT ), ĤS (WT ) , H̃pen ∈ ∆H(WT ), ĤS (WT )
and J ∈ ∇(L̂S (WT ) − Lµ (WT )), ∇L̂S (WT ) and replacing the empirical-population differences
in the above surrogate losses. Another difficulty is that, one has to consider other independent runs
when optimizing ∆G for one trajectory. To further simplify optimization, we modify the surrogate
optimization target so that only one trajectory is considered:
           r
         3 3 R2
                                                            2              1
     min          tr H̃flat ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ] + ∆G∥ + ∆G⊤ J + ∆G⊤ H̃pen ∆G,
     ∆G 2     n                                                            2
where ∆G is a function of the trajectory. To obtain a convex optimization problem, we partially
remove the cubic root, giving
                                                      2              1
               min λC ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ] + ∆G∥ + ∆G⊤ J + ∆G⊤ H̃pen ∆G,
                ∆G                                                   2
                r
                     2
where C := 23 3 Rn tr H̃flat . Bound parameter λ here is used to compensate the “weight”
change after twisting the target: When the terms under the cubic root become smaller, the derivative
of the cubic root increases fast; but after the cubic root is removed, the derivative of the norm
becomes smaller when the term becomes smaller. Therefore, we should use large λ to emphasize
the reduction of trajectory term. The convex optimization problem has a closed form solution
                                              −1
                   ∆G = − 2λCI + H̃pen           (2λC(∆WT − E [∆WT ]) + J).                    (B.5)


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since all variables in Eq. (B.5) is a function of weights, empirical and population gradients and
Hessians, which are functions of weights, the training set and the population distribution, Eq. (B.5)
indeed specifies a function of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T ). This omniscient trajectory is used in Theorem 2.

B.7   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Based on Corollary B.1, Theorem 2 considers the specific omniscient trajectory defined by ∆G =
−(2λCI + H̃pen )−1 (2λC(∆WT − E [∆WT ]) + J) as Eq. (B.5). We first optimize σ given the
specific ∆G, for which we approximate the penalty for the SGLD-like trajectory to the third order.
Specifically, for the empirical part we have
                 2
           ∆σ T (WT + ∆G, S)
                          h                                  i
         :=Eξ∼N (0,σ2 T I) L̂S (WT + ∆G + ξ) − L̂S (WT + ∆G)
                                                                                   
                                      1                      X
          =Eξ ξ ⊤ ∇L̂S (WT + ∆G) + ξ ⊤ ĤS (WT + ∆G)ξ +       ai,j,k ξi ξj ξj + r0 
                                      2
                                                                     i≤j≤k
             2
           σ T
         =     tr ĤS (WT + ∆G) + Eξ [r0 ] .
            2
where r0 is the residual at the third order and the coefficients ai,j,kh are independent
                                                                              i          ξ. By the
                                                    4                        4
assumption of Theorem 2, we have |r0 | ≤ D ∥ξ∥ and |Eξ [r0 ]| ≤ DE ∥ξ∥ = Dd(d + 2)σ 4 . One
can obtain similar results for the population loss difference, and combining the both we have
 h 2                    2
                                          i σ2 T
E ∆σ T (WT + ∆G, S) − ∆σ T (WT + ∆G, S ′ ) =    tr ĤS (WT + ∆G) − Hµ (WT + ∆G) + r,
                                             2
where |r| ≤ Dd(d + 2)σ 4 = O(d2 σ 4 ).
Similarly to Theorem 2 of Wang & Mao (2022), we optimize σ > 0 to balance
                        v       h                           i
                        u
                        u 2 E ∥∆W − E [∆W ] + ∆G∥2
                        tR            T          T                A
                              2
                                                              =: .
                           nσ                T                    σ
and
                          σ2 T
                              tr ĤS (WT + ∆G) − Hµ (WT + ∆G) =: σ 2 B
                           2
For A, B > 0, A/σ + σ 2 B takes the minimum 3(A/2)2/3 B 1/3 at

  σ∗ =(A/2B)1/3
      s                                                                                           1/3
                                                                                             2
             R2
            n E         (I − (I + H̃pen   /2λC)−1 )(W   T − ∆WT ) − (2λCI + H̃pen   )−1 J        
                                                                                                 
      =                                                                                                 .
       
                                      T 3/2 tr (∆H(WT + ∆G))                                     
                                                                                                  

                                                                                                      (B.6)
The proof is finished by setting σ to this value and putting everything together.

B.8   D ETAILS FOR S ECTION 3.4

We take J := ∇(L̂S (WT ) − Lµ (WT )) and sufficiently large λ > 0 so that λ1 (H̃pen /2λC) ≪ 1.
We assume the training is sufficient so that ∇L̂S (WT ) ≈ 0. We also assume that the initial weight
W0 is fixed.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     2        2        2
By applying ∥x + y∥ ≤ 2 ∥x∥ + 2 ∥y∥ and approximating the penalty for the omniscient trajec-
tory to the second order, we obtain
  gen(µn , PW |S )
   r
  3 3 2R2                          h
                                                    2                           2
                                                                                                i
⪅          E [|tr (∆H(WT + ∆G))|] E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥(I−(I+H̃pen /2λC)−1 )2 + ∥J∥(2λCI+H̃pen )−2
  2 hn                                                                    i
  + E −2λC(∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ))⊤ (2λCI + H̃pen )−1 (∆WT − E [∆WT ])
     h                                               i
  + E −(∇L̂S (WT ) − Lµ (WT ))⊤ (2λCI + H̃pen )−1 J
     h                                                                                                    i
                         2                                             2
  + E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥4λ2 C 2 (2λCI+H̃pen )−1 |∆H|(2λCI+H̃pen )−1 + ∥J∥(2λCI+H̃pen )−1 |∆H|(2λCI+H̃pen )−1 .

By selection of λ, we have (2λCI + H̃pen )−1 ≈ (2λCI)−1 = I/2λC and I −(I + H̃pen /2λC)−1 =
  P∞
− k=1 (−1)k (H̃pen /2λC)k ≈ H̃pen /2λC. These approximations lead to
     gen(µn , PW |S )
      r
     3 3 2R2                          h
                                                       2                  2
                                                                                    i
   ⪅          E [|tr (∆H(WT + ∆G))|] E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥H̃ 2 /4λ2 C 2 + ∥J∥ /4λ2 C 2
     2 hn                                          i
                                                         pen


     + E −(∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ))⊤ (∆WT − E [∆WT ])
         h                               i
     + E −(∇L̂S (WT ) − Lµ (WT ))⊤ J/2λC
         h                                      i
                            2          2
     + E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥|∆H| + ∥J∥|∆H|/4λ2 C 2
       r
     3 3 2R2                          h
                                                      2                  2
                                                                                   i
   =         E [|tr (∆H(WT + ∆G))|] E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥H̃ 2 /4λ2 C 2 + ∥J∥ /4λ2 C 2
     2    n                                             pen
           ⊤
     − E J (∆WT − E [∆WT ])
         h            i
              2
     − E ∥J∥ /2λC
         h                                      i
                            2          2
     + E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥|∆H| + ∥J∥|∆H|/4λ2 C 2 .

The second term E ∇Lµ (WT )⊤ (∆WT − E [∆WT ]) can also be transformed to Hessian-induced


norms by exploiting the symmetry of the terminal deviation ∆WT − E [∆WT ]. To this end, ap-
proximate the population gradient ∇Lµ (WT ) at the mean terminal weight E [WT ] by ∇Lµ (WT ) ≈
∇Lµ (E [WT ]) + Hµ (E [WT ])(WT − E [WT ]). Then we have
   E J ⊤ (∆WT − E [∆WT ])

     h                                                                                      i
 ≈E (∇L̂S (E [WT ]) − ∇Lµ (E [WT ]) + ∆H(E [WT ])(WT − E [WT ]))⊤ (∆WT − E [∆WT ])
     h                              i
                           2
 =E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥∆H(E[WT ]) .

Plugging this back leads to
     gen(µn , PW |S )
      r
     3 3 2R2                          h
                                                       2                  2
                                                                                    i
   ⪅          E [|tr (∆H(WT + ∆G))|] E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥H̃ 2 /4λ2 C 2 + ∥J∥ /4λ2 C 2
     2 hn                             i
                                                         pen

                                  2
      − E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥∆H(E[WT ])
         h        i   h                                      i
             2                         2         2
      − E ∥J∥ /2λC + E ∥∆WT − E [∆WT ]∥|∆H| + ∥J∥|∆H|/4λ2 C 2 .

The above results apply without the assumption that ∇L̂S (WT ) ≈ 0.
Using the assumption ∇L̂S (WT ) ≈ 0 leads to Eq. (2).


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.8.1    C OMPARISONS WITH S IMILAR A LIGNMENTS WITH L OCAL G EOMETRY

In Section 3.4, Theorem 2 is shown to connect with an alignment between terminal weight devia-
tions/covariance and Hessians. This is similar to the work by Wang & Mao (2024b) and Wang et al.
(2021a) on the alignment and the more fine-grained structure of local geometry.
Wang & Mao (2024b) provides two types of generalization bounds for discretized SDE: the
trajectory-state bound based on the statistics along the full trajectories and terminal-state bound
based on the statistics after the last update, which are separately compared below.
The trajectory-state bound focuses on the alignment between the population gradient noise co-
variance (GNC) Σµt (Wt ) := VZ ′ ∼µ [∇ℓ(Wt , Z ′ )] that depends on Wt and the empirical GNC
                    n−b
Ct (Wt , S) := b(n−1)    Vi∼U [n] [∇ℓ(Wt , Zi )] that depends on (Wt , S). Therefore, this alignment
and ours are both alignment between weight/gradient distribution and the local geometry. They also
have the same dependence: the weight/gradient statistics are both Wt−1 -dependent and the local
geometric properties are both (Wt−1 , S)-dependent. Differences mainly lie in the type of geometric
properties used and how directly they reflect flatness. Wang & Mao (2024b)’s trajectory-state bound
uses the inverted GNC Ct−1 to capture local geometry, which is an indirect measure of flatness. By
comparing Wang & Mao (2024b)’s Figure 2 and 3, one can see that their bound does not correlate
correctly with Hessian traces even along training steps. In contrast, we directly use Hessians, allow-
ing us to better leverage the flatness as required by our motivation. Their choice of Ct−1 is a result
of the discretized SDE algorithm instead of bound optimization (Σµt is the ingredient corresponding
to bound optimization). Therefore, it is determined by the algorithm and it is difficult to switch to
Hessians or other statistics. Another result of the above determining is that Ct−1 can only reflect the
flatness at step t instead of the flatness of terminal weights. In contrast, our alignment only involves
the flatness at terminal weights. According to the empirical results from Wang & Mao (2024b)’s
Figure 3 and Jastrzȩbski et al. (2019)’s Figure 2, the eigenvalues of Hessians during the middle of
training are much larger than those at terminal. Therefore, it is better to only use terminal flatness,
as it is in our alignment. Regarding Wang & Mao (2024b)’s terminal-state bound, both this bound
and our bound involve terminal states. Still, their bound uses the inverted weight covariance instead
of Hessians to reflect local geometries.
Wang et al. (2021a) optimize the noise in SGLD, with a new information-theoretic generalization
bound as a surrogate for real risks. They show the square root of expected GNC is greedily optimal
under their bound and use this noise to improve the optimization and generalization of SGLD and
closes the gap with SGD. Their results indicate the importance of direction and alignment of noises.
If we put their algorithms and bounds together, then the result will be very similar with Wang &
Mao (2024b)’s. Therefore, our alignment has similar differences with Wang et al. (2021a) as with
Wang & Mao (2024b).
Moreover, our omniscient trajectory can be seen as a surrogate algorithm, and optimizing it is very
similar to designing new algorithms with better generalization. As a result, additional similarities
and differences can be found on the goal of introducing local geometry. In Wang et al. (2021a)’s
work, before Theorem 1, the only use of local geometry is in Constraint 1 on not rising empirical
risks. Therefore, it is used to guide how to increasing noises without sacrificing the empirical risks.
In our bound, as discussed in Insight 1, we use local geometry to guide how to pull terminal weights
together/closer without changing the losses too much. Therefore, local geometry in alignments has a
similar role between Wang et al. (2021a)’s results and ours of guiding information reduction without
sacrificing losses. Regarding differences, Wang et al. (2021a) decrease information measures by
adding noises, while we do so by mapping things together or closer.


C     D ETAILS FOR S EC . 4 E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY

Codes are available in the supplementary material or at https://github.com/peng-ze/
omniscient-bounds.

C.1     H ESSIAN -R ELATED D ETAILS

In experiments, all Hessian traces are computed using PyHessian (Yao et al., 2020).


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The optimized omniscient trajectory in Theorem 2 requires products between an Hessian-related
inverse matrix (I + H̃pen /2λC)−1 and vectors, say, u. Since Hessians of deep models are too large
to store and compute with, it is ubiquitous to directly compute the inverse-vector product (iVP).
For iVP, following Dagréou et al. (2024), we use conjugate gradient method that only requires the
product (I + H̃pen /2λC)v of the original matrix with an arbitrary vector v, which is supplied with
PyHessian’s hv product. More specifically, we approximate v such that (I + H̃pen /2λC)v = u
                                                                                               2
to obtain a v̂. We run conjugate gradient method until the error (I + H̃pen /2λC)v̂ − u            is less
                2
than 1% of ∥u∥ , or the maximum iteration 20 is reached.


C.2   B OUND E STIMATION D ETAILS

This section presents the details in estimating Eq. (1) of Theorem 2. For the randomness in weights,
we train k > 1 models independently to obtain weights WT1:k . To ensure the training data for each
model is I.I.D. sampled, we assume the whole training set is sampled in an I.I.D. manner, randomly
                                                     k
partition the whole training set into k subsets S i i=1 and use S i to train W0:T
                                                                              i
                                                                                  . For fair comparison,
we then make unbiased or positively biased estimates for expectations in Eq. (1) separately and
then compute the bound using these estimates. Being concave, the cubic root will bring negative
bias. Nevertheless, this negative bias can also be found in baseline existing bounds. Moreover,
in experiments, the expectation product under the cubic root is extremely small. Therefore, this
negative bias will not influence the overall result too much and we leave it as it is for simplicity.
When optimizing the bound to obtain ∆G, we use a validation set S ′′ to estimate J.
For the penalty terms, i.e., E [∆∆G (WT , S) − ∆∆G (WT , S ′ )] and E [tr (∆H(WT + ∆G))], we
unbiasedly estimate them with the test set. The same test set is used for all weights to fully use the
data. The loss differences are directly computed by modifying the parameters and forwarding the
testing data S ′ instead of approximating them.
For the flatness-optimized trajectory term, the estimate is more complicated, since we must also
estimate E [∆WT ] within the estimate and handle the matrix inverses and the population gradients
in J.
To estimate E [∆WT ] in expectations, one should use samples of WT that are independent of WTi .
However, another draw of k weights results in further partitioning on the training set, and the data
used for each weight is much less. To fully use the data, similarly to cross validation, we estimate
                                       Pi′ ̸=i       i′
the inner expectation by ∆W̄T−i := k−1
                                    1
                                          i′ ∈[k] ∆WT , which is independent of WT .
                                                                                     i


To avoid the population Hessian in the inverses and make estimation easier, we select H̃pen :=
ĤS (WT ). In this way, the inverses solely depend on the training data and the terminal weight, and
their interaction with the testing set is only linear, which is much more friendly to expectations.
Define E := I − (I + H̃pen /2λC)−1 and F := (2λCI + H̃pen )−1 , which only depend on (S, WT ).
Initial experiments on CIFAR-10 indicate that it is necessary to include the population gradients for
numerical tightness, and we set J := ∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ). Under these specific settings, we
will estimate


                                                                                  2
                    E       E(∆WT − E [∆WT ]) − F (∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ))                          (C.1)



Replacing the expectation with the empirical mean and the random variables with I.I.D. copies, we
obtain an estimator of the trajectory term

                        k                                                       2
                1X
                      E i (∆WTi − ∆W̄T−i ) − F i (∇L̂S i (WTi ) − ∇LS ′′ (WTi )) ,
                k i=1


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which is positively biased because
    " k                                                                    #
      1X                                                                 2
  E           E i (∆WTi − ∆W̄T−i ) − F i (∇L̂S i (WTi ) − ∇LS ′′ (WTi ))
      k i=1
      k
                                                                                 2

  1X
=       ES i ,WTi E E i (∆WTi − ∆W̄T−i ) − F i (∇L̂S i (WTi ) − ∇LS ′′ (WTi )) | S i , WTi
  k i=1
      k             h                                                                      i 2
  1X
≥       ES i ,WTi E E i (∆WTi − ∆W̄T−i ) − F i (∇L̂S i (WTi ) − ∇LS ′′ (WTi )) | S i , WTi
  k i=1
      k
  1X                  i     i
                                        −i    i     i
                                                            i            i
                                                                                            i    i i
                                                                                                       2
=       E i i E (∆WT − E ∆W̄T | S , WT ) − F (∇L̂S i (WT ) − E ∇LS ′′ (WT ) | S , WT )
  k i=1 S ,WT
      k
                                                                              2

  1X                  i     i                    i          i               i
=       E i i E (∆WT − E [∆WT ]) − F (∇L̂S i (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ))
  k i=1 S ,WT

                                                                 2
=E E(∆WT − E [∆WT ]) − F (∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ))                    ,

                                                ⊤
where the second step is because E X ⊤ X ≥ E [X] E [X].


Among the above estimations, the most loose step comes from the last estimation, i.e., the estimation
on the trajectory term, because other expectations are estimated unbiasedly and this expectation is
positively biased. In principle, we can estimate it without bias. To see this, set A := E∆WT −
F (∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT )) expand Eq. (C.1) as

                                                                                 2
                    E E(∆WT − E [∆WT ]) − F (∇L̂S (WT ) − ∇Lµ (WT ))
                      h                       i
                                            2
                 =E ∥A − E × E [∆WT′ ]∥
                      h      i     h                  i     h                    i
                           2                   ⊤                               2
                 =E ∥A∥ − 2E E [∆WT′ ] E ⊤ A + E ∥E × E [∆WT′ ]∥
                      h      i                              h                    i
                           2               ⊤                                   2
                 =E ∥A∥ − 2E [∆WT′ ] E E ⊤ A + E ∥E × E [∆WT′ ]∥ ,


which can be term by term estimated without bias. However, since E involves Hessian inversion,
this unbiased estimator requires more Hessian iVPs (iHVP): Computing A requires two iHVPs,
while E ⊤ A and E × E [∆WT ] require another two iHVPs. As a result, the unbiased estimator
requires 4k iHVPs. In contrast, the positively biased estimate only requires 2k iHVPs. Since IVPs,
especially iHVPs, are extremely time-consuming, we still use the positively biased estimator in the
experiments.

C.3   T RAINING D ETAILS

For both MNIST and CIFAR-10, we train k = 6 independent models from the same randomly cho-
sen initial weight, which means each model receives 10, 000 training samples. We use 2-layer MLPs
for MNIST as Wang & Mao (2022) while ResNet-18 for CIFAR-10. Since a bounded loss is natu-
rally sub-Gaussian (Xu & Raginsky, 2017), we employ cross-entropy (CE) losses capped at 12 log c
for both testing and bound estimation, where c represents the class number. Here, log c corresponds
to the expected cross-entropy at random initialization, which are heuristically the maximum of the
average loss during the training. However, we still use vanilla CE losses for training. As Wang
& Mao (2022), we use SGD with momentum of 0.9. The use of momentum does to violate the
assumptions in Section 2.1 because each update can access history weights to recover gradients and
compute momentum. ResNet-18 models are trained for 200 epochs while 2-layer MLP models are
trained for 500 epochs as Wang & Mao (2022). We start from a base hyperparameter, where the
learning rate is 0.01, the batch size is 60, and no dropout or weight decay is used. For the 2-layer
MLP, the base hidden width is 512. To enhance the generalization of the networks on CIFAR-10
for evaluating the bounds, we use random horizontal flip and random resized crop. This use of data


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


augmentations does not violate the assumptions in Section 2.1, as they can be achieved by passing
in V the random seeds for the augmentations and letting gt augment the samples using these seeds
before computing the gradients.
For single-hyperparameter variations in Figures 4 and C.5, we vary that single hyperparameter while
keeping others the same as the base. For Figures 3 and C.4, we vary the learning rate and the batch
size in a grid-search manner while keeping others the same as the base. When the learning rate is
too small or too large, or the batch size is too large, the model even cannot fit the training data well.
Therefore, we exclude the training records whose final weight has a training accuracy less than 95%.
Models are trained on 12 NVidia RTX4090D GPUs for 2 day with auto mixed precision (BF16) and
torch.compile() to save memory and increase parallelization. To ensure consistency of model
and training details with previous results, our codes are modified based on Wang & Mao (2022) with
bound estimation modules totally re-implemented.
We must remark that the test accuracy of our models on CIFAR-10 is relatively low, because each
model is trained by a one-sixth subset of CIFAR-10.


C.4     M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

C.4.1    M ORE R ESULTS FOR R ES N ET-18 ON CIFAR-10 AND M ORE D ISCUSSIONS

Here, we display more results of existing bounds for ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10. Figure C.1 displays
the result of the isotropic Proposition 2 of Neu et al. (2021).
From Figure C.1, we find that the trajectory term of isotropic Proposition 2 is insensitive to batch
size, which is an improvement over the incorrect tendency of Proposition 1. However, this im-
provement is only partial compared to our trajectory term that decreases as the batch size decreases.
Thanks to the flatness term that has the correct tendency w.r.t. batch size under large learning rates,
the bound also has the correct tendency w.r.t. batch size if learning rate is large enough. Compared
to this result, our bound can even better capture the generalization under all learning rates by having
a more aligned trajectory term.
Now we focus on the tendency w.r.t. learning rate. Our bound fails to fully correct the wrong
tendency of the trajectory term of Propositions 1 and 2 w.r.t. learning rate. Nevertheless, the wrong
tendency seems partially corrected because the lines corresponding to the trajectory terms under
different learning rates are well separated in Figures 1b and C.1b of the existing bounds, while
some of those from our bounds twist together in Figure 3b. However, this partial correction is
not enough to invert the wrong tendency, unlike the tendency w.r.t. batch size. We conjecture it
is because the trajectory term is not solely determined by flatness, but is a “product” between the
Hessians and the output weight variance (see Eq. (2)). Increasing the learning rate increases the step
size, which then increases the variance of the output weight. This variance increase is empirically
confirmed by Figure C.1b: we display the trajectory term with σ −1 excluded in this figure. As a
result, what is displayed in this figure is proportional to the output weight variance. It clearly shows
that the variance increases as the learning rate increases. Therefore, there is a competition between
the increased variance and the improved flatness. Unfortunately, it seems the increased variance
overpowers the improved flatness in this process and our bound fails to invert the wrong tendency
w.r.t. learning rate. On the other hand, decreasing the batch size seems to also increase the variance
and we must explain why the tendency w.r.t. batch size is fixed. The reasons is that, the variance
is, in fact, very insensitive to batch size: From Figure C.1b, we can see that the variance is almost
fixed when batch size changes. As a result, the trajectory term is dominated by the improved flatness
when the batch size decreases.
Regarding the tightness improvement (mainly due to the trajectory term), Proposition 2 has a much
smaller trajectory term than Proposition 1 (∼ 10−2 v.s. ∼ 100 ). It mainly happens because gradients
of SGD are noisy and gradients from different steps often partially cancel. In Proposition 1, the
canceled parts are still counted in the trajectory term while in Proposition 2 where gradients are
summed together before taking norms. The components canceled in the trajectory indeed cancel in
the trajectory term and do not contribute to the bound. This improvement is pushed further by the
omniscient trajectory and the optimization under flatness (∼ 10−2 v.s. ∼ 10−8 ). Since Theorem 2
can be seen as the combination of Proposition 2 and the omniscient trajectory (see Corollary B.1 and


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              Generalization error bound                      Estimated generalization error

                                                  lr=0.0005                    lr=0.001              lr=0.005                   lr=0.01            lr=0.02
                             60
                                                                         1.3 0.06                                         1.3                                   1.3 × 100
                                                                                                                                108
                             55                                                                                                                                 1.2 × 100


                                                                                                                                                                               Estimated Gen. Gap
           Gen. Gap Bound
                                                                         1.2                                              1.2


           (Cross Entropy)


                                                                                                                                                                                 (Cross Entropy)
                                                                               0.04
                             50                                          1.1                                              1.1                                   1.1 × 100
                                                                                                                                   7
                                                                         1.0 0.02                                         1.0 10                                100
                             45
                                  100     200 300            400
                                                                      0.9
                                                                    500                      200              400
                                                                                                                          0.9
                                                                                                                                             200        400     9 × 10 1
                                           Batch size                                         Batch size                                     Batch size

                                        (a) Bound                                     (b) Trajectory Term                               (c) Flatness Term

Figure C.1: the isotropic version of Proposition 2 for ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10 under varied flatness.


                                                       Generalization error bound                              Estimated generalization error

        lr=0.0001                        lr=0.0005                         lr=0.001                    lr=0.005                        lr=0.01                lr=0.02                               lr=0.04
                                                                         0.4                                              0.4                                       4 × 10 1
                                                                               1.5                                                                                  3 × 10 1
                             40


                                                                                                                                                                               Estimated Gen. Gap
           Gen. Gap Bound


                                                                         0.3                                              0.3
           (Cross Entropy)


                                                                                                                                                                    2 × 10 1


                                                                                                                                                                                 (Cross Entropy)
                                                                               1.0
                             20                                          0.2                                              0.2
                                                                               0.5                                              103                                 10 1
                                                                         0.1                                              0.1
                                                                               0.0                                                                                  6 × 10 2
                              0
                                        200           400          600                    200           400         600                    200       400      600
                                              Batch size                                        Batch size                                   Batch size

                                        (a) Bound                                     (b) Trajectory Term                               (c) Flatness Term

   Figure C.2: Wang & Mao (2022)’s bound for 2-layer MLP on MNIST under varied flatness.


how it connects to Proposition 2 by setting ∆G ≡ 0), the improved tightness of our bound compared
to Proposition 1 is two-folded, done by both Proposition 2 and the omniscient trajectory.

C.4.2      R ESULTS FOR 2-L AYER MLP ON MNIST
The numerical results on MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) with the 2-layer MLP are displayed in Fig-
ures C.2 to C.5.

C.5     E XPERIMENTS OF E XISTING B OUNDS WITH P OPULATION H ESSIAN

In Figures 1, 4 and C.3, we have displayed results of existing bounds without using population
Hessians. That is, we are computing the bounds whose (approximated) flatness term is
                                     σ2 T h              i
                                          E tr ĤS (WT )
                                      2

                                                       Generalization error bound                              Estimated generalization error

        lr=0.0001                        lr=0.0005                         lr=0.001                    lr=0.005                        lr=0.01                lr=0.02                               lr=0.04
                                                                         0.4 0.04                                         0.4                                       4 × 10 1
                             4                                                                                                                                      3 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                               Estimated Gen. Gap
           Gen. Gap Bound


                                                                         0.3 0.03                                         0.3
           (Cross Entropy)


                             3                                                                                                                                      2 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                 (Cross Entropy)


                             2                                           0.2 0.02                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                103                                 10 1
                                                                               0.01
                             1                                           0.1                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                    6 × 10 2
                                                                               0.00
                                        200            400         600                     200        400           600                    200       400      600
                                              Batch size                                      Batch size                                     Batch size

                                        (a) Bound                                     (b) Trajectory Term                               (c) Flatness Term

Figure C.3: the isotropic version of Proposition 2 for 2-layer MLP on MNIST under varied flatness.



                                                                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     Generalization error bound                  Estimated generalization error

                                            lr=0.0001                     lr=0.0005               lr=0.001                  lr=0.005                lr=0.01                     lr=0.02               lr=0.04
                   0.4                                              0.4           1e 8                                     0.4                                           0.4 105                                         4 × 10 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Estimated Gen. Gap
                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3 × 10 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Cross Entropy)
 Gen. Gap Bound
 (Cross Entropy)                                                           1.00
                   0.3                                              0.3                                              0.3 0.3                                             0.3                                             2 × 10 1
                                                                           0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                   0.2                                              0.2                                              0.2 0.2                                             0.2 10
                                                                           0.50                                                                                                                                          10 1
                   0.1                                              0.1                                              0.1 0.1                                             0.1                                             6 × 10 2
                                                                           0.25
                             200             400              600                        200        400        600                     200           400           600                    200       400            600
                                     Batch size                                             Batch size                                       Batch size                                     Batch size

                           (a) Bound                                          (b) Trajectory Term                            (c) Punishment Term                                      (d) Flatness Term

Figure C.4: Numerical results of Theorem 2 with λ = 109 on MNIST and a 2-layer MLP with
varied learning rate and batch size.
            Wang and Mao (2021)                    Prop. 8 of Neu et.al. (2021)           Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+00)           Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+03)           Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+06)                Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+09)             Generalization error
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                    10
                                             101
                          Gen. Gap/Bound
                          (Cross Entropy)


                                                                                                    100                                                    100
                                             100


                                                                                                                                                           10 1
                                                   0.0         0.2       0.4       0.6                         250         500       750         1000             0.00         0.01        0.10             1.00
                                                                 Label noise level                                    Hidden layer width                                          Weight decay             1e 3


Figure C.5: Numerical results for a 2-layer MLP on MNIST under varied label noise level, width,
and weight decay. The isotropic version of Neu et al. (2021)’s Proposition 8 is used.

             2
                   h                              i
instead of σ 2T E tr ĤS (WT ) − tr (Hµ (WT )) . In contrast, our bound depends heavily on pop-
ulation statistics like the mean gradient and Hessians. One may doubts whether this comparison is
unfair due to our extra dependence on population Hessians. This concern is amplified by the fact
that the population Hessian potentially improves the numerical tightness of existing bounds: If one
assumes as Wang & Mao (2022) that Lµ (WT ) ≤ Eξ∼N (0,σ2 I) [Lµ (WT + ξ)], one is essentially
assuming Hµ (WT ) is positive semi-definite, whose trace is non-negative. In Propositions 1 and 2,
the non-negative traces are subtracted from the bound, which is tighter than the case where it is not
subtracted.
To address this concern, we also allow the existing bounds to depend on the population statistics,
especially the population Hessian, and evaluate them in experiments. The results are surprising and
confusing: the population Hessians indeed have positive traces but their traces are orders of magni-
tude larger than the traces of the empirical Hessians. As a result, the flatness term becomes negative.
If one optimize the bound parameter σ, one would arrive at a −∞ bound of the generalization error,
which is obviously incorrect. We conjecture this is due to the second order approximation used in
the expectation, which becomes inaccurate for population loss changes under the SGLD-like noise
of variance σ 2 T I. This is also a drawback of existing bounds to require the large noises to de-
crease the impact of the trajectory term in the σ-optimized bound. In contrast, our bound has an
orders-of-magnitude smaller trajectory term and requires orders of magnitude smaller noises. This
                                                                              2
         P by2 empirical results in Table 1, where2 the value of (average) σ∗ (σ∗ is the optimal values
is supported
of σt in t σt of Proposition 1, the σ in Σ = σ T I of isotropic Proposition 2, or the σ in σ 2 T in
Corollary B.1 / Theorem 2) in different experiments are presented. Be noted that although σ∗2 values
themselves seem already small for all experiments, the actual noises in the flatness term has covari-
ance σ∗2 T I, where T is the number of training steps (∼ 104 for CIFAR10) and identity matrix I has
a size equal to the number of parameters (∼ 106 for ResNets). As a result, the magnitude of σ∗2 have
a significant impact on the second-order approximation in the flatness terms and the second-order
approximation is much more accurate for evaluating our bound.
To alleviate this problem, we take absolute values of the flatness terms to make them positive as in
the main results of Wang & Mao (2022) and Neu et al. (2021). That is, we now estimate the bound
with flatness term replaced by
                            σ2 T    h                                 i
                                  E tr ĤS (WT ) − tr (Hµ (WT )) .
                              2


                                                                                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              l.r. and b.s.                        label noise                                 width                                  weight decay
                                                                             −9                                  −9                                   −9
     Prop. 1 w/o pop. Hess.                    15381.627 × 10                        15372.131 × 10                      19904.060 × 10                         17674.105 × 10−9
     Prop. 2 w/o pop. Hess.                     1434.559 × 10−9                       1278.293 × 10−9                     1660.805 × 10−9                        1341.889 × 10−9
     Prop. 1 w/ pop. Hess.                      6659.479 × 10−9                        6572.998 × 10−9                         9175.748 × 10−9                     9149.648 × 10−9
     Prop. 2 w/ pop. Hess.                       676.226 × 10−9                         545.839 × 10−9                          767.169 × 10−9                      643.772 × 10−9
     Thm. 2 (λ = 1)                               291.674 × 10−9                           595.630 × 10−9                       303.843 × 10−9                           307.434 × 10−9
     Thm. 2 (λ = 103 )                              4.354 × 10−9                             6.269 × 10−9                         3.866 × 10−9                             3.167 × 10−9
     Thm. 2 (λ = 109 )                             0.193 × 10−9                             0.204 × 10−9                         0.244 × 10−9                             0.167 × 10−9

Table 1: The average value of σ∗2 across bounds and CIFAR-10 experiments varying different hy-
perparameters. It can be seen that our bound requires orders of magnitude smaller noises for the
SGLD-like trajectory’s Gaussian noises when λ is suitably selected. As a result, the distortion due
to the second-order approximation has less impact to our bound.


                                                        Generalization error bound                          Estimated generalization error

                                           lr=0.0005                   lr=0.001                    lr=0.005                    lr=0.01                lr=0.02
                                                                                                                                                        1.35 × 100 0
                                                                       1.3                                         1.3


                                                                                                                                                                       Estimated Gen. Gap
                Gen. Gap Bound


                                                                                                                                                        1.3 × 10 0
                (Cross Entropy)


                                  1000                                        3


                                                                                                                                                                         (Cross Entropy)
                                                                                                                                                        1.25 × 100
                                                                       1.2                                         1.2                                  1.2 × 10 0
                                   800                                                                                                                  1.15 × 100
                                                                              2                                          108
                                                                       1.1                                         1.1                                  1.1 × 10
                                   600                                                                                                                  1.05 × 100
                                                                       1.0 1                                       1.0                                  100
                                   400                                                                                                                  9.5 × 10 1
                                                200            400                   100    200 300        400   500                 200        400
                                                 Batch size                                  Batch size                              Batch size

                                           (a) Bound                              (b) Trajectory Term                          (c) Flatness Term

Figure C.6: Wang & Mao (2022)’s bound with population Hessians for ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10
under varied flatness.



The population Hessian is estimated on a new validation set. After this modification, we display the
numerical results for Propositions 1 and 2 in Figures C.6 and C.7.
Since the modification only involves the flatness term, the trajectory term is almost the same as those
in Figures 1b and C.1b of the existing bounds without the population Hessian. Therefore, we mainly
focus on the flatness term.
Since the subtracted population Hessian traces are orders of magnitude larger than the empirical
Hessian, the flatness terms with absolute value are dominated by the population Hessian traces and
are orders of magnitude larger than those in Figures 1c and C.1c. As a result, the existing bounds
even become looser if fed with validation sets.
When it comes to the tendency, the flatness terms’ tendencies w.r.t. batch size also become wrong
when batch size is large or learning rate is small. As a result, Proposition 2’s (Neu et al., 2021)
partial improvement of trajectory term w.r.t. batch size can not compensate the wrong tendency of
the flatness term, and the whole bound scales incorrectly w.r.t. batch size.


                                                        Generalization error bound                          Estimated generalization error

                                           lr=0.0005                   lr=0.001                    lr=0.005                    lr=0.01                lr=0.02
                                                                                                                                                        1.35 × 100 0
                                                                       1.3 0.06                                    1.3
                                                                                                                                                                       Estimated Gen. Gap
                Gen. Gap Bound


                                                                                                                                                        1.3 × 10 0
                (Cross Entropy)


                                  75
                                                                                                                                                                         (Cross Entropy)


                                                                                                                                                        1.25 × 100
                                                                       1.2                                         1.2                                  1.2 × 10 0
                                  70                                          0.04                                                                      1.15 × 100
                                                                                                                         108
                                                                       1.1                                         1.1                                  1.1 × 10
                                  65                                                                                                                    1.05 × 100
                                                                       1.0 0.02                                    1.0                                  100
                                  60                                                                                                                    9.5 × 10 1
                                         100   200 300         400   500                     200           400                       200        400
                                                Batch size                                    Batch size                             Batch size

                                           (a) Bound                              (b) Trajectory Term                          (c) Flatness Term

Figure C.7: The isotropic version of Proposition 2 with population Hessians for ResNet-18 on
CIFAR-10 under varied flatness.


                                                                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Wang and Mao (2021)                             Prop. 8 of Neu et.al. (2021)                   Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+00)                         Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+03)                          Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+09)                  Generalization error
                         3                                                                                          3                                                3                                              3
                    10                                              103                                        10                                               10                                             10



  Gen. Gap/Bound
  (Cross Entropy)
                    102                                                                                        102                                              102                                            102
                                                                    102
                         1                                                                                     10   1
                                                                                                                                                                10   1                                         101
                    10                                              101

                                                                                                               10   0                                                0                                         100
                    100                                             100                                                                                         10
                             0.2   0.4     0.6    0.8         1.0         0.0     0.2       0.4       0.6               0.5        1.0         1.5        2.0                  1               2           3            0.00   0.01        0.10       1.00
                                    Training data                                   Label noise level                         Channel scaling factor                                   Depth                                      Weight decay       1e 3



Figure C.8: Numerical results of existing bounds with population Hessians for ResNet-18 on
CIFAR-10 under varied training data usage, label noise level, width, depth, and weight decay. The
tendency w.r.t. weight scaling is also added. However, the results are taken from (unbiased) MLP on
MNIST because ResNets are more complicated models and it takes time to develop a weight scaling
scheme that does not essentially change the prediction. The isotropic version of Proposition 2 (Neu
et al. (2021)’s Prop. 8) is used. If a model has a channel scaling factor of c, it means the model has
c times the number of channels at each layer compared to a standard ResNet-18.
         Wang and Mao (2021)                          Prop. 8 of Neu et.al. (2021)              Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+00)              Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+03)                       Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+06)              Thm. 3 ( =1.0e+09)               Generalization error


                                                     101
                                   Gen. Gap/Bound
                                   (Cross Entropy)


                                                                                                                                             1.00
                                                     100                                                                                     0.10


                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                                                                 1             2                                  3                                          1            2                                    3
                                                                                Weight scaling factor                                                                       Weight scaling factor
                                                     (a) Generalization gap on all samples. (b) Gen. gap on correct classification.

Figure C.9: Cross Entropy generalization gap and bounds under weight scaling of MLPs on MNIST.
Figure C.9a displays the generalization gap on all testing samples. Figure C.9b displays the gener-
alization gap on only the correctly classified testing samples. Since Figure C.9b involves negative
values, we use log-scale above 10−4 and linear scale below 10−4 .


The correct tendency of the flatness term without population Hessians and the wrong tendency of
that with population Hessian indicate population Hessians have wrong tendencies when batch size
is large or the learning rate is small. This somehow points to the notion the generalization and
overfitting of higher order statistics, as the empirical Hessian has the correct tendency as shown in
Figures 1c and C.1c yet the population Hessian has the wrong tendency. Small batch size and large
learning rate seem also helpful for this higher-order generalization.
As shown in Figure C.8, when weight decay is used, the existing bounds with population Hessian
can better capture the tendency of generalization under regularization. However, when the hyper-
parameters in Figure C.8 are varied, the existing bounds with population Hessians are times looser
than those without the population Hessians.
To sum up, the existing bounds cannot fully exploit the population statistics even if we allow them
to access the validation set. Therefore, the comparison between our bound and the existing bounds
is still fair, at least for existing bounds in its current form estimated after the conventional (Wang &
Mao, 2022) second-order approximation.

C.6                   E XPERIMENTS ON W EIGHT S CALING

To test whether our flatness-related generalization bound captures the generalization under weight
scaling, we train homogenous two-layer MLPs, whose output layer has no bias, on MNIST and scale
the weight at the end as the last step of the training. The results are displayed in Figure C.9a, where
generalization gap is computed for clipped Cross Entropy losses. In this case, our bounds with large
λ can well capture the generalization.
However, the results in Figure C.9a out of expectation. One would expect the generalization im-
proves as the weight is scaled up because most MNIST samples would be correctly classified and the


                                                                                                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


generalization risk measured by Cross Entropy would be decreased by increasing the “confidence”.
However, in Figure C.9a, Cross Entropy increases when scaling up the weights. We conjecture it
is because we split the training set into k = 6 subsets, the generalization of these MLPs are in fact
harmed and about 4% of testing samples are misclassified. As a result, scaling the weight also in-
creases the generalization risk on the misclassified testing samples. The increase on misclassified
testing samples are arguably much faster than those on correctly classified samples, because weight
scaling on misclassification pushes the loss to infinity while weight scaling on correct classification
pushes the loss to zero. As a result, the generalization gap increases in Figure C.9a.
To see how our bound captures the improved generalization on fully correctly classified scenarios,
we filter the testing sets and only keep the correctly classified samples, simulating the cases where
all samples are correctly classified. We implement this simulation using the following loss:
                    I[arg max logitsi = y] · min(CrossEntropy(logits, y), 12 log c),
                          i                  |                  {z                }
                    |         {z         }             Clipped Cross Entropy
                    Filtering the correct samples

where c is the number of classes. It is bounded, thus sub-Gaussian and can be rigorously used in
the existing and our bounds, whose results can be found in Figure C.9b. In Figure C.9b, when
weights are scaled down, the training loss increases and increases faster (maybe the faster increase
is related to overfitting), decreasing the gap. However, when weights are sufficiently scaled up, the
generalization gap indeed decreases with the decreases of scaling (maybe because now the training
loss is almost zero and its decrease slows down). In the latter phase, the bound from Wang & Mao
(2022) and Neu et al. (2021) all have weak or wrong dependency w.r.t. weight scaling. In contrast,
our bound still well captures the improved generalization in both cases, if λ is suitably selected.
Our bounds even captures the strange negative generalization error. By inspecting the raw data, we
find the negative value mainly comes from the empirical part of the penalty term, indicating that the
negativeness of the bound value is not mainly due to the dependence on the validation set.
To sum up, our bounds can well capture the generalization under weight scaling in our experiments.

D     P ROOFS AND D ETAILS FOR S EC . 5 E XTENSIONS
In this section, we present and prove the combined results of the omniscient trajectory wth existing
results to demonstrate the flexibility of the technique. The proofs generally follow those of the
existing results. But note that the omniscient and the SGLD-like trajectories may depend on random
variables more than the training set S. Since the existing results often assume the trajectory solely
depends on S, we must re-prove some of them instead of directly applying them to handle the extra
dependence. Sometimes we must rearrange the order of the steps of the original proofs to insert the
omniscient trajectory. Setting the omniscient perturbation to zero will recover the existing results,
which we will not bother to restate.

D.1   C OMBINATION WITH THE I NDIVIDUAL -S AMPLE T ECHNIQUE

Corollary D.1 Assume ℓ(w, ·) is R-sub-Gaussian         on µ for any w ∈ W. Recall n is the number
                                              i       n
of training samples. Then for any family ∆g1:T        i=1
                                                           of omniscient perturbations and any σ1:T ∈
   >0 T

 R       , we have
                        n q                       n
                     RX                        1 X h Pt σt2                     P 2
                                                                                   σ
                                                                                              i
  gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤         2I(W̃Ti ; Zi ) +         E ∆Γi (WT , Zi ) − ∆Γi t t (WT , S ′ )
                     n i=1                     n i=1           T                 T

                        n                                 n
                     RX                               1 X h Pt σt2
                           q                                                          P 2           i
                                                                                         σ
                   ≤         2I(W̃Ti ; Zi | Z−i ) +          E ∆Γi (WT , Zi ) − ∆Γi t t (WT , S ′ )
                     n i=1                            n i=1         T                  T

                           v
                        n uX  T
                     R Xu         1 h                                 i 2
                                                                          i
                   ≤       t         E     g t − E [gt  | Z −i ] − ∆gt
                     n i=1 t=1 σt2
                                                           n
                                                        1 X h Pt σt2              P 2
                                                                                      σ
                                                                                                    i
                                                    +         E ∆Γi (WT , Zi ) − ∆Γi t t (WT , S ′ ) , (D.1)
                                                        n i=1     T                T


                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                             Pt
where ∆gti is a deterministic function of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T , Z−i ), and Γit :=                       i
                                                                                                τ =1 ∆gτ .

Remark D.1 The omniscient trajectory additionally depends on i and Z−i , the two featuring ran-
dom variables of the individual-sample bounds.

Proof The crux of the individual-sample technique is to first extract the summation in the empirical
risk and change its order with the expectation, before other things like using the MI bound or building
the auxiliary trajectories:
           gen(µn , PW |S )
            "           n
                                      #     n
                     1X                  1X
      :=E Lµ (WT ) −       ℓ(WT , Zi ) =       E [Lµ (WT ) − ℓ(WT , Zi )]
                     n i=1               n i=1
              n                                    n
           1X h                              i 1X      h                                  i
       =         E Lµ (W̆Ti ) − ℓ(W̆Ti , Zi ) +       E ∆ΓiT (WT , Zi ) − ∆ΓiT (WT , S ′ ) ,
           n i=1                                n i=1

where W̆ti := Wt + ΓiT is the i-th omniscient trajectory. It can be seen that the omniscient penalty
term has matched that in Eq. (D.1). Thus, we will then bound the individual-sample generalization
error of the omniscient trajectories. The process is similar to the proof of Theorem 1, i.e., adding
Gaussian noises to obtain the SGLD trajectories:
      n                                    n
   1X h                              i  1X h                               i
         E Lµ (W̆Ti ) − ℓ(W̆Ti , Zi ) =       E Lµ (W̃Ti ) − ℓ(W̃Ti , Zi )
   n i=1                                n i=1
                                                n
                                             1 X h Pt σt2                     P 2                    i
                                         +         E ∆    (WT + ΓiT , Zi ) − ∆ t σt (WT + ΓiT , S ′ ) ,
                                             n i=1
                       Pt
where W̃ti := W̆ti + τ =1 Nti , and Nti ∼ N (0, σt2 I) is an independent Gaussian noise. Again
we throw away the already matched penalty terms and focus on bounding the individual-sample
generalization error of the SGLD-like trajectory. To this end, we see each term in the error as the
generalization error of an algorithm that takes one sample (but stealthily samples n − 1 samples as
algorithm’s internal randomness) and apply Lemma 1:
       n                                    n                              n
                                                                              r
   1X h            i          i
                                    i    1X          n                  1 X 2R2
         E Lµ (W̃T ) − ℓ(W̃T , Zi ) =          gen(µ , PW̃ i |Zi , ℓ) ≤             I(W̃Ti ; Zi )
   n i=1                                n i=1             T             n i=1    1
                                                                           n q
                                                                        RX
                                                                      ≤         2I(W̃Ti ; Zi | Z−i ).
                                                                        n i=1
We proceed by a similar arguments as in Theorem 1 to bound the mutual information: for any
i ∈ [n], we have
                                                                T
                                                                X
                I(W̃ ; Zi | Z−i ) ≤I(W̃0i ; Zi | Z−i ) +              I(W̃ti ; Zi | W̃0:t−1
                                                                                      i
                                                                                            , Z−i )
                                                                t=1
                                         T
                                         X
                                                   i
                                     =         I(W̃t−1 − (gt − ∆gti ) + Nti ; Zi | W̃0:t−1
                                                                                     i
                                                                                           , Z−i ).
                                         t=1
                      i          i    i
By instantiating X = Zi , Y = W̃0:t−1     , ∆i = (W0:T , V, Z−i ), Oi = Z−i and

  f i (X i , Y i , ∆i ) = W̃t−1
                            i
                                − gt (Wt−1 , (Z1 , . . . , Zi−1 , Zi , Zi+1 , . . . , Zn ), V, W0:t−2 )

                                                                                − ∆gti (S, V, g1:T , W0:T , Z−i )

and applying Eq. (B.1) in Lemma B.1, for any deterministic function Ωi of solely (W̃0:t−1     i
                                                                                                    , Z−i ),
respectively, we have

                                                        1                                                      2
     i
I(W̃t−1  − (gt − ∆gti ) + Nti ; Zi | W̃0:t−1
                                       i
                                             , Z−i ) ≤      E   W̃ i
                                                                   t−1 − (gt − ∆gt
                                                                                  i
                                                                                    ) − Ω i
                                                                                            ( W̃ i
                                                                                                 0:t−1 , Z−i )     .
                                                       2σt2

                                                           32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Setting Ωi (w̃0:t−1
              i                 i
                    , z−i ) = w̃t−1 − E [gt | Z−i = z−i ] leads to
        i                                                 1    h                        2
                                                                                          i
  I(W̃t−1   − (gt − ∆gti ) + Nti ; Zi | W̃0:t−1
                                          i
                                                , Z−i ) ≤ 2 E gt − E [gt | Z−i ] − ∆gti     .
                                                         2σt
After putting everything together, the corollary is proved.



D.2    C OMBINATION WITH THE CMI F RAMEWORK

Conditional MI (CMI) framework (Steinke & Zakynthinou, 2020) is developed to fundamentally
solve the potential unboundedness of MI on some algorithms. CMI framework considers the fol-
lowing random process: Firstly, a supersample S̃ = Z̃1:n,0:1 ∈ Z n×2 of 2n samples are sampled
                                                                                      n
as an effective discrete “sample space”. Then, n independent indices U1:n ∈ {0, 1} are sampled
as the discrete “sample”. The training set is constructed by S := (Z̃i,Ui )ni=1 using the supersam-
ple and indices. CMI then bounds the generalization by how much the output reveals the indices
given the supersample. We can combine the omniscient trajectory with CMI framework and give
the following result:

Corollary D.2 Assume ℓ(w, ·) is R-sub-Gaussian on µ for any w ∈ W. Then for any omniscient
                                                                           T
trajectory ∆g1:T that additionally depends on (S̃, U ), and any σ1:T ∈ R>0 , we have
                       r
                         2R2                      h P 2
                                                            σ
                                                                        P 2
                                                                          σ
                                                                                         i
          n
    gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤2        I(W̃T ; U | S̃) + E ∆ΓTt t (WT , Zi ) − ∆ΓTt t (WT , S ′ )
                           n
                       v
                       u
                       u R2 X T
                                                                    2

                                   1              h         i
                    ≤2t              E    g t − E   gt | S̃   − ∆gt
                          n t=1 σt2
                                                  h P 2                 P 2             i
                                                           σ              σ
                                              + E ∆ΓTt t (WT , Zi ) − ∆ΓTt t (WT , S ′ ) ,

where ∆gt is a deterministic function of (S, V, g1:T , W0:T , S̃, U ).

Remark D.2 The omniscient perturbation additionally depends on (S̃, U ), which are the featuring
random variables of CMI bounds.

Proof After paying the penalties for changes of trajectories, we can focus on bounding the general-
ization error on the SGLD-like trajectory. With the omniscient trajectory depending on (S̃, U ), the
distribution of the SGLD-like trajectory is determined by PW̃0:T |S̃,U . We will apply the following
re-proved CMI bound that handles the extra dependence on (S̃, U ) of W̃T :
           h                      i        h                      i
        E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T ) = 2E L̂S̃ (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T )
              h h                            ii         h                        i
      =2ES̃ E L̂S̃ (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T ) | S̃ = 2ES̃ gen(PU , PW̃T |U,S̃ ) | S̃
              "r                                 #
                  2R2
      ≤2ES̃            I(W̃T ; U | S̃ = S̃) | S̃                                      (Lemma 1)
                   n
         r                                         r
             2R2     h                     i         2R2
      ≤2          ES̃ I(W̃T ; U | S̃ = S̃) = 2           I(W̃T ; U | S̃),
               n                                      n
where the first step is because
            h                       i
         E L̂S̃ (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T )
            " n                                                              n
                                                                                                #
              1X1                                                    1X
       =E               L̂Z2(i−1)+Ui (W̃T ) + L̂Z2(i−1)+1−Ui (W̃T ) −          L̂Z        (W̃T )
              n i=1 2                                                     n i=1 2(i−1)+Ui
              " n                                       #
          1      1X                                           1 h                      i
       = E            L̂Z2(i−1)+1−Ui (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T ) = E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂S (W̃T ) .
          2     n i=1                                         2


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The following steps are similar to the proof of Theorem 1 and Corollary D.1, including an
application of the chain rule to the conditional MI and anh application
                                                                 i      of Lemma B.1, where
X = S, Y = W̃0:t−1 O = (W0:T , V, S̃, U ) and Ω = W̃t − E gt | S̃ .



D.3    C OMBINATION WITH N EGREA ET AL .(2019)’ S DATA -D EPENDENT P RIOR

To state Corollary D.3, we need extra notations. For an array a1:l of length l and a list U ∈ [l]k of
indices, define aU := (aUi )ki=1 . For two lists of non-repeated indices U 1 ∈ Nk1 and U 2 ∈ Nk2 , let
U 1 \ U 2 be the list of indices that can be found in U 1 but not in U 2 , ordered as in U 1 . Let U 1 ∩ U 2
be their intersection ordered as in U 1 .

Corollary D.3 Assume ℓ(w, ·) is R-sub-Gaussian on µ for any w ∈ W. Assume the following
specific form for the algorithm:

       • The randomness V = B1:T , where Bt ∈ [n]b specifies the samples in the b-sized batch at
         step t with no repeated entries;
       • The update function can be written as
                                                               ¯ L̂S (Wt−1 ),
                                   gt (Wt−1 , S, V, W0:t−2 ) = ∇    Bt


         where ∇¯ stands for samplewisely clipped gradient operator (i.e., compute gradients for
         each sample, clip and then average).

Let U ∈ [n]m be the result of m uniform (over the remaining indices) sample indices without
replacement in [n], independent of previous random variables. Define
                           b − |U ∩ Bt |   ¯                  ¯ L̂S (Wt−1 )

                     ξt :=                ∇L̂SBt \U (Wt−1 ) − ∇    U
                                 b
to be the gradient incoherence (see it as the difference between the true update at step t and a
prediction of the update using only samples in U ). For omniscient trajectories defined by bounded
∆g1:T that additionally depends on U , then we have
                   v
                   u
                   u R2 X     T
                                   1 h              2
                                                      i   h P 2
                                                                 σ
                                                                                    P 2
                                                                                       σ
                                                                                                 i
      n
gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤ t                 2 E ∥ξt − ∆gt ∥ + E ∆ΓTt t (WT , SUc ) − ∆ΓTt t (WT , S ′ ) .
                      n − m t=1 σt

Corollary D.3 is an application of the following more general result:

Corollary D.4 Assume ℓ(w, ·) is R-sub-Gaussian on µ for any w ∈ W. Assume samples have no
interactions in updates in the following sense:

       • The randomness V in the update is V = B1:T , where Bt ∈ [n]b specifies the samples in
         the b-sized batch at step t with no repeated entries;
       • The update function can be written as
                            gt (Wt−1 , S, V, W0:t−2 ) = pt (Wt−1 , SBt , W0:t−2 ),
                          S∞
         where pt : W × i=0 Z i × W t−1 → W is defined by
                                              (
                                                0                                 |s| = 0,
                     pt (wt−1 , s, w0:t−2 ) := 1 P|s|
                                                |s|  i=1 ft (wt−1 , si , w0:t−2 ) |s| > 0,

         and ft : W × Z × W t−1 → W is a deterministic function.

Also, let U ∈ [n]m be the result of m uniform (over the remaining indices) sam-
ples without replacement in [n], independent of previous random variables. Lastly, as-
sume that given (U, SU , SUc , V, W̃0:t−1 ), then pt (Wt−1 , SBt , W0:t−2 ), pt (Wt−1 , SU , W0:t−2 ) and


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


pt (Wt−1 , SBt ∩U , W0:t−2 ) all have bounded second moments (e.g., by samplewise gradient clip-
ping).
Define
                   b − |U ∩ Bt |
                 ξt :=             pt (Wt−1 , SBt \U , W0:t−2 ) − pt (Wt−1 , SU , W0:t−2 )
                         b
to be the gradient incoherence. For omniscient trajectories defined by ∆g1:T that additionally de-
pend on U , if ∆gt also satisfies the above conditional bounded second moments (e.g., bounded in
value), then we have
                   v
                   u
                   u R2 X      T
       n                           1 h                  2
                                                          i     h P 2
                                                                     t σt          c
                                                                                           P 2
                                                                                             t σt          ′
                                                                                                               i
gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤ t                    E ∥ξt  − ∆g  t ∥     + E  ∆ ΓT     (W T , SU  ) − ∆ ΓT     (W T , S   )   .
                      n − m t=1 σt2

Remark D.3 The omniscient trajectory additionally depends on U and then ξt , the two featuring
random variables of Negrea et al. (2019)’s SGLD bound.

Proof In this proof, we combine Theorem 2.4 and Theorem 3.1 of Negrea et al. (2019) with our
technique. As Negrea et al. (2019), let SUc := S(1,2,...,n)\U . Due to extra dependence on (U, V )
of the omniscient trajectory, the SGLD-like trajectory is determined by PW̃0:T |(U,S,V ) , violating the
assumptions of Negrea et al. (2019)’s Theorem 2.4. Therefore we must re-prove this data-dependent
prior bound, during which we insert the auxiliary trajectories:
                         h                      i
   gen(µn , PW |S ) = E Lµ (WT ) − L̂SUc (WT )
                           h                      i     h P 2                    P 2               i
                                                                σ                    σ
                     = E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂SUc (W̃T ) + E ∆ΓTt t (WT , SUc ) − ∆ΓTt t (WT , S ′ ) ,

where the first equality is because given (S, WT ), L̂SUc (WT ) is an unbiased estimator on the em-
pirical loss. With the penalty term matching with the statement of the corollary, we focus on the
generalization error of the SGLD-like trajectory, which can be bounded by
              h                       i             h h                                  ii
            E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂SUc (W̃T ) = EU,SU ,V E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂SUc (W̃T ) | U, SU , V
                    h                              i
          =EU,SU ,V gen(µn−m , PW̃T |U,S c ,SU ,V )
                                           U
                    "r                                                  #
                          2R2            c
          ≤EU,SU ,V             I(W̃T ; SU | U = U, SU = SU , V = V ) . (Lemma 1)
                         n−m

By  the “golden formula”   of MI (Eq.(8.7)
                                               of Csiszár &   Körner (2011)) stating I(X; Y ) =
EY DKL PX|Y ∥ PX              ≤     EY DKL PX|Y ∥ QX , for any data-dependent prior
QW̃ ′ (u, su , v) over W T +1 under the Definition 2.1 of Negrea et al. (2019), we have
    0:T

   h                         i
  E Lµ (W̃T ) − L̂SUc (W̃T )
                       "r                                                                       #
                              2R2              h                                              i
          ≤ EU,SU ,V              ES c |U,SU ,V DKL PW̃0:T |U,SU ,S c ,V ∥ QW̃ ′ (U, SU , V )
                            n−m U                                  U          0:T


Now we turn to bound the KL divergence given any realization (u, su , scu , v) of the conditioned
variables. We restrict the data-dependent prior to have the same distribution as the real distribution
for W̃0 , i.e., PW̃0 |u,su ,sc ,v = PW̃0 = QW̃ ′ (u, su , v). By Proposition 2.6 of Negrea et al. (2019), we
                             u                0
have

   DKL PW̃0:T |u,su ,sc ,v ∥ QW̃T (u, su , v) ≤ DKL PW̃0:T |u,su ,sc ,v ∥ QW̃ ′ (u, su , v)
                          u                                                         u          0:T

          T
          X                                      h                                                               i
     ≤          EW̃0:t−1 ∼P                          DKL PW̃t |W̃0:t−1 ,u,su ,sc ,v ∥ QW̃ ′ |W̃0:t−1 (u, su , v)     (D.2)
                          W̃0:t−1 |u,su ,sc
                                          u ,v                                  u          t
          t=1



                                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We fix a condition c = (u, su , scu , v, w̃0:t−1 ) and turn to bound the KL divergences in the above
expectation. We also instantiate the data-dependent prior to the prior designed by Negrea et al.
(2019) for SGLD, which uses samples in SU to predict the update using Bt so that the error between
the predicted and the true update eventually becomes the trajectory term. The gradients and updates
depend on the model weight and so do the predictions. Therefore, the data-dependent prior must
somehow access the (t − 1)-th weight of the original trajectory to make predictions. In Negrea
et al. (2019)’s proof for SGLD, the data-dependent prior technique is directly applied to the original
trajectory and thus the (t − 1)-th original weight can be directly found in the condition c. However,
in our case where the technique is applied to the auxiliary SGLD-like trajectory, we only have
the latest step of the SGLD-like trajectory in the condition, which is not the original SGD weight
but corresponds to many Wt−1 or W̆t−1 on the SGD or the omniscient trajectory, given that the
SGLD-like trajectory is constructed by adding Gaussian noises to the omniscient trajectory. Directly
predicting and comparing gradients at the SGLD-like trajectory will make the final result related to
the SGLD-like trajectory. Switching back using local smoothness along the trajectory will result in
a “local gradient sensitivity” term as Neu et al. (2021) that accumulates very fast along the training
process (Wang & Mao, 2022). The ideal adapted proof would be somehow “tracing back” to the
SGD weight Wt−1 that leads to the SGLD weight in the condition, making predictions based on
the SGD weight Wt−1 , and comparing it with the update gt (Wt−1 ) on the SGD trajectory, followed
by averaging over the distribution of Wt−1 given the SGLD-like trajectory weight. This intuition
suggests a coupling between the true and the predicted update through Wt−1 , which reminds us of
a lemma by Neu et al. (2021):

Lemma D.1 (Lemma 4 of Neu et al. (2021)) Let X and Y be random variables taking values in
Rd with bounded second moments and let σ > 0. Letting ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 I) be independent of (X, Y ),
the KL divergence between the distributions of X + ϵ and Y + ϵ is bounded as

                                                                1     h
                                                                                2
                                                                                  i
                                DKL (PX+ϵ ∥ PY +ϵ ) ≤               E   ∥X − Y ∥    ,
                                                               2σ 2

where the expectation is taken over any joint distribution with any coupling between X and Y as
long as the marginals are still PX , PY , respectively.

The arbitrariness of the coupling allows a specific one through Wt−1 . Therefore, we turn to construct
the coupling of the data-dependent prior.
Since the coupling involves multiple random variables, it must start from a joint distribution. For
any condition (u, su , scu , v, w̃0:t−1 ), let QM0:T ,M̆t ,M̆ ′ ,M̃t ,M̃ ′ |u,su ,sc ,v,w̃0:t−1 be the joint distribution
                                                               t       t        u

over W 5 given by the Markov chain M0:T → (M̆t , M̆t′ ) → (M̃t , M̃t′ ), where M0:T is sampled from
PW0:T |u,su ,scu ,v,w̃0:t−1 and


           M̆t :=w̃t−1 − (gt (Mt−1 , s, v, M0:t−2 ) − ∆gt (s, v, g1:T , M0:T , u)),

             ′             |ut |                             b − |ut |
           M̆t :=w̃t−1 −         pt (Mt−1 , sut , M0:t−2 ) +           pt (Mt−1 , su , M0:t−2 ) ,                 (D.3)
                             b                                  b
            M̃t =M̆t + Nt′ , M̃t′ = M̆t′ + Nt′ ,


where jt := j ∩bt is the samples in j contained in the current batch, Nt′ ∼ N (0, σt2 I) is independent
of other random variables in the random process defining Q. By assumption, terms defining M̆t and
M̆t′ have bounded second moments, satisfying the assumption of Lemma D.1. It can be easily
verified that the marginal distribution QM̃t |c = PW̃t |c . Moreover, all used samples in Eq. (D.3)
are contained in SU . As a result, the marginal distribution of Mt′ is independent of SUc . Therefore,
by setting the data-dependent prior QW̃ ′ |W̃0:t−1 (u, su , v) = QM̃ ′ |u,su ,(sc )′ (u,w̃0:t−1 ,su ,v),v,w̃0:t−1 ,
                                               t                         t      u
where (scu )′ (·) is a function that outputs some (conditionally) supported realization of SUc , we have
QW̃ ′ |W̃0:t−1 (u, su , v) = QM̃ ′ |c . With the help of this coupling and Lemma D.1, we can bound the
    t                             t


                                                          36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


KL divergence in Eq. (D.2) by

 DKL PW̃t |c ∥ QW̃ ′ |W̃0:t−1 (u, su , v) = DKL QM̃t |c ∥ QM̃ ′ |c
                       t                                                  t

                                          1                                           2
                                                                                    ′
=DKL QM̆t +N ′ |c ∥ QM̆ ′ +N ′ |c ≤          E        ′                     M̆t − M̆t      (Lemma D.1)
                t           t  t         2σt2 (M̆t ,M̆t )∼QM̆t ,M̆t′ |c
         "
   1
= 2 EQ gt (Mt−1 , s, v, M0:t−2 ) − ∆gt (s, v, g1:T , M0:T , u)
  2σt
                                                                                           2 #
                 |ut |                              b − |ut |
           −           pt (Mt−1 , sut , M0:t−2 ) +            pt (Mt−1 , su , M0:t−2 )       |c  Eq. (D.3)
                  b                                      b
         "
   1
= 2 EP gt (Wt−1 , s, v, W0:t−2 ) − ∆gt (s, v, g1:T , W0:T , u)
  2σt
                                                                                           2 #
                 |ut |                              b − |ut |
           −           pt (Wt−1 , sut , W0:t−2 ) +            pt (Wt−1 , su , W0:t−2 )      |c
                  b                                      b
   1    h
                       2
                             i
= 2 E ∥ξt − ∆gt ∥ | c ,
  2σt
where the penultimate step is because, by construction, we have QM0:T |c = PW0:T |c .
After plugging everything together, interchanging the order of the expectation and the square root
by the latter’s concavity, and putting expectations together, the corollary is proved.


D.4    G ENERALIZATION OF S TABLE A LGORITHMS AND GD ON CLB P ROBLEMS

Theorem 3 Assume n, d ∈ N+ , L, D > 0 and η > 0, T ∈ N+ . Assume the algorithm starts from a
fixed initialization W0 := w0 ∈ W and the whole trajectory remains within W, i.e., W0:T ∈ W T +1 .
For any CLB problem (W, Z, ℓ) ∈ CL,D and any data distribution µ ∈ M1 (Z), we have the
following data-dependent and -agnostic bounds that recover stability bounds:
   gen(µn , PW |S )
                  n                                n
            LD X p                              1X
   ≤ inf1:n         2I (WT + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i ) +       E [∆∆Gi (WT , Zi ) − ∆∆Gi (WT , S ′ )]
     ∆G      n i=1                              n i=1
                                                                      n
                                                                  2L X
                                                              ≤          E [∥WT − E [WT | Z−i ]∥] .
                                                                   n i=1
If the algorithm is a GD algorithm using projected subgradients of step size η and step count T , we
have
                                                    √        8L2 T η
                              gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤ 8L2 T η +           .
                                                                n
 Therefore, we have the following worst-case generalization error bound for CLB and GD:
                                                  GD
                                                                  √        8L2 T η
                      sup        sup gen(µn , PW |Sn,η,T ) ≤ 8L2 T η +             .
                  (W,Z,ℓ)∈CL,D µ∈M1 (Z)                                       n

Proof Let (W, Z, ℓ) ∈ CL,D be an SCO problem and µ ∈ M1 (Z) be a distribution of samples.
Therefore, the sample loss ℓ, the empirical loss L̂S (·) and the population loss L̂S (·) are L-Lipschitz
w.r.t. the weight and W is bounded with a diameter D and convex. Let W0:T be the trajectory given
by GD, where Wt ∈ W.
The proof essentially resembles the uniform stability argument of Bassily et al. (2020) through the
superior expressivity added to the MI bounds by the omniscient trajectory. Since uniform stability


                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


considers replacing one sample in the training set, we need to focus on one sample instead of the
entire training set. To keep other samples “unchanged” in the replacement, we also need to condition
on other samples. Therefore, we will start from the “individual sample” technique (Bu et al., 2020).
This observation motivates us to use Corollary D.1. However, losses in CLB problems are not
sub-Gaussian in general. Therefore, we need variants similar to Theorem 11 of Haghifam et al.
(2023) that replaces sub-Gaussianity with Lipschitzness and boundedness. By repeating the proof
of Corollary D.1 but with Theorem 11 of Haghifam et al. (2023) instead of Lemma 1, we obtain
                                v                                !
                              n u              T
          n             LD  X   u             X
                                                     i
   gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤            t   2I WT +       ∆gt ; Zi | Z−i
                         n i=1                t=1
                                                   n
                                                1X h                                      i
                                              +       E ∆ΓiT (WT , Zi ) − ∆ΓiT (WT , S ′ ) , (D.4)
                                                n i=1
         i      n
where ∆g1:T     i=1
                    is a family of omniscient perturbations, which moves the terminal within W,
i.e., WT + ΓiT ∈ W.

Remark D.4 The SGLD-like trajectory is not used in this proof. This is because the SGLD-like
trajectory is used only to bound the MI of the omniscient trajectory. As one will see later, the
omniscient trajectory in this proof has a very special form (constant) with a trivial MI bound (0). As
a result, an MI bound through the SGLD-like trajectory is no longer needed.

This proof proceeds by bounding the penalty terms in Eq. (D.4) with the help of the inherited Lips-
chitzness of ℓ in the empirical and the population loss:
                 ∆ΓiT (WT , Zi ) := L̂Zi (WT + ΓiT ) − L̂Zi (WT ) ≤ L ΓiT ,
               h                i
              E ∆ΓiT (WT , S ′ ) := E Lµ (WT + ΓiT ) − Lµ (WT ) ≤ LE ΓiT .


Therefore, we have the following bound for the penalty terms:
                    n                                             n
                1X h                                       i  2L X   i
                       E ∆ΓiT (WT , Zi ) − ∆ΓiT (WT , S ′ ) ≤        E ΓT .
                n i=1                                          n i=1
Plugging this bound to Eq. (D.4) leads to
                                    n q                                 n
                              LD X                                  2L X   i
           gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤             I(WT + ΓiT ; Zi | Z−i ) +        E ΓT .
                               n i=1                                 n i=1

By setting ∆gti = gt − E [gt | Z−i ], we have WT + ΓiT = E [WT | Z−i ]. By convexity of W and
that WT ∈ W, we have WT + ΓiT ∈ W. Notably, given Z−i , WT + ΓiT is constant regardless of Zi .
Therefore, we have I(WT + ΓiT ; Zi | Z−i ) = 0 and
                                                     n
                                                 2L X   i
                              gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤        E ΓT .                           (D.5)
                                                  n i=1
Note that E [∥WT − E [WT | Z−i ]∥ | Z−i ] is the expected distance to the center given Z−i . By
Corollary A.1, this value is smaller than E [∥WT − WT′ ∥ | Z−i ], where WT′ is the terminal weight
trained by the same Z−i and an independently sampled i-th sample.
Now we turn to GD. By Theorem
                           √ 3.2 of Bassily et al. (2020), given Z−i , ∥WT − WT′ ∥ of GD has a
                                 4LT η
data-agnostic upperbound 4L T η + n . Plugging this bound, we obtain
                                          n
                                      2L X
                 gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤         EZ [E [∥WT − E [WT | Z−i ]∥ | Z−i ]]
                                       n i=1 −i
                                          n
                                      2L X
                                 ≤          EZ [E [∥WT − WT′ ∥ | Z−i ]]
                                       n i=1 −i
                                     √      8L2 T η
                                 ≤8L2 T η +         .
                                              n


                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark D.5 Although adding the omniscient trajectory can address the limitation of representative
information-theoretic bounds on CLB problems, we currently do not know whether it is exactly our
technique that makes it happen. This is because, between the Gaussian-perturbed individual-sample
(C)MI bound considered by Haghifam et al. (2023) and the omniscient bound, there exist bounds
derived by non-isotropic Gaussian perturbations, bounds by non-Gaussian but general independent
perturbations, and bounds by general weight-dependent perturbations (Rate-Distortion bounds (Se-
fidgaran et al., 2022)). It is possible some of these bounds can already address the limitation but
we have not obtained any positive or negative results for them before the submission deadline. Nev-
ertheless, our technique makes the proof extremely simple and without it the proof will be at least
much longer. For example, it will be harder to make the (conditional) MI diminish without knowing
Z−i .

D.5   E XTENSION TO ϵ-L EARNERS ON CLB P ROBLEMS

Attias et al. (2024) have found that any ϵ-learners have CMI of at least Ω(1/ϵ) on CLB problems,
indicating a CMI-accuracy trade-off. Here, a learning algorithm is an ϵ-learner is for CLB problem
(W, Z, ℓ) if fir every data distribution µ over Z, the excess generalization risk of the algorithm is at
most ϵ.
Our Theorem 3 and its proof have given an intuitive alternative to the trade-off: although GD or
stable learners have large CMI themselves, they are quite close to learners with low CMI. However,
Theorem 3 assumes GD or stable algorithms, yet Attias et al. (2024)’s trade-off covers more gen-
eral algorithms. Therefore, we explore whether our technique and alternative can extend to more
(expectation-)ϵ-learners in Theorem 4. It states our technique can indeed extends to more ϵ-learners
under some assumptions. It also states if one sees the omniscient trajectory augmented MI as a new
information measure, then the information-accuracy trade-off is penetrated because both can vanish
as n → ∞. However, the result is still partial and preliminary, because we only covers ϵ-learners
that are also O(ϵ)-optimizers, i.e., they are “well-behaved” in the sense that its excess optimization
error is not too large compared to the excess generalization error ϵ. Nevertheless, we believe this
assumption is rather gentle for well-behaved learners used practically, e.g., deep models.

Theorem 4 Assume d ∈ N+ , L, D > 0 and let (W, Z, ℓ) ∈ CL,D be a CLB problem. Assume for
any w ∈ W and z ∈ Z, we have ℓ(w, z) ∈ [−LD, +LD]. If not, shift the loss functions. This
shifting does not affect the excess generalization risks or the excess optimization errors, which this
theorem mainly assume on.
Let ϵ > 0 be a function of sample number n. Let {An : Z n → W} be a family of expectation-ϵ-
learners for (W, Z, ℓ). That is, for every sufficiently large n, for every distribution µ over Z, one
has ES∼µn [Lµ (An (S))] − inf w∈W Lµ (w) ≤ ϵ.
Assumeh{An } is also an O(ϵ)-optimizer.
                                  i     That is, An has an excess optimization error satisfying
ES∼µn L̂S (An (S)) − inf w L̂S (w) ≤ O(ϵ) for any sufficiently large n.

Assume n ∈ N+ is large enough so that ϵ bounds the excess generalization risk and O(ϵ) bounds
the excess optimization error. Then, we have
                                   n                                  n
                            LD X p                                 1X
gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤    inf               2I (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i ) +       E [∆∆Gi (W, Zi ) − ∆∆Gi (W, S ′ )]
                   {∆G }i=1 n
                       i n                                         n
                                  i=1                                i=1

                               LD
                ≤O(ϵ) + O √           ,
                                 n
                                                                n
where W := An (S) is the output of the algorithm, and ∆Gi i=1 is a family of (one-step) omni-
scient perturbations that additionally depend on i and Z−i .

Remark D.6 We assume the algorithm {An } is deterministic but the extension to random ones is
straightforward.


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof After repeating the initial steps of the proof and obtaining Eq. (D.4), we have

                                 n
                            LD X p
    gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤             2I (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i )
                             n i=1
                                         n
                                      1X
                                  +         E [∆∆Gi (W, Zi ) − ∆∆Gi (W, S ′ )]
                                      n i=1
                      n                                n
                  LD X p                            1X h                              i
              ≤          2I (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i ) +       E L̂S (W + ∆Gi ) − L̂S (W )
                   n i=1                            n i=1
                                                                    n
                                                                  1X
                                                                        E Lµ (W + ∆Gi ) − Lµ (W ) ,

                                                              +
                                                                  n i=1


After applying a similar omniscient perturbation ∆Gi := E [W | Z−i ] − W as in the proof of
Theorem 3, we have

                             n                                     n
                         LD X p                                 1X h                                  i
gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤              2I (E [W | Z−i ] ; Zi | Z−i ) +       E L̂S (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂S (W )
                          n i=1                                 n i=1
                                                                          n
                                                                       1X
                                                                   +         E [|Lµ (E [W | Z−i ]) − Lµ (W )|]
                                                                       n i=1
                            n                                       n
                         1X h                                 i 1X
                     =         E L̂S (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂S (W ) +       E [|Lµ (E [W | Z−i ]) − Lµ (W )|] .
                         n i=1                                   n i=1
                                                                                                (D.6)


We first bound the population loss difference by applying Lemma A.3 to the difference with convex
f (w) = Lµ (w) − Lµ (w∗ ) ≥ 0, where w∗ is the weight with optimal generalization risk:

E [|Lµ (E [W | Z−i ]) − Lµ (W )|] =EZ−i [E [|(Lµ (E [W | Z−i ]) − Lµ (w∗ )) − (Lµ (W ) − Lµ (w∗ ))| | Z−i ]]
                                        ≤2EZ−i [E [f (W ) | Z−i ]] = 2(E [Lµ (W )] − Lµ (w∗ )) ≤ 2ϵ.


Now we bound the empirical loss difference. Let ws∗ be the empirical risk minimizer of training set
s. The main difficulty is that different W corresponds to different S, and one cannot find an f to be
L̂S (·)− L̂S (wS∗ ) and L̂S ′ (·)− L̂S ′ (wS∗ ′ ) at the same time. Fortunately, with the individual technique,
we can put weights corresponding to Z−i together. Most of their training set is the same, while the
only different sample only contributes 1/n of the loss, which vanishes as n → ∞. Therefore, we
have
         h                                   i        h h                                   ii
    E        L̂S (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂S (W )       =EZ−i E L̂S (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂S (W ) | Z−i ,

where
    h                                      i n−1 h                                            i
E       L̂S (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂S (W ) | Z−i ≤       E L̂Z−i (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂Z−i (W ) | Z−i
                                                 n
                                                  1 h                                     i
                                               + E L̂Zi (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂Zi (W ) | Z−i
                                                  n
                            (Lipschitzness and boundedness of CLB problems)
                                               n−1 h                                          i LD
                                             ≤      E L̂Z−i (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂Z−i (W ) | Z−i +    .
                                                 n                                               n

                                                         40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            ∗
Applying Lemma A.3 with convex f (w) := L̂Z−i (w) − L̂Z−i (wZ −i
                                                                 ) ≥ 0 leads to
                h                                   i
              E L̂S (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂S (W ) | Z−i
                 n−1                            LD
               ≤       · 2E [f (W ) | Z−i ] +
                  n                               n
                 n−1        h
                                                      ∗
                                                                  i LD
               ≤       · 2E L̂Z−i (W ) − L̂Z−i (wZ      −i
                                                           ) | Z−i +
                  n                                                    n
               1 h                                 i
                                       ∗
                 E L̂Zi (W ) − L̂Zi (wZ    ) | Z−i ≥ 0
               n
                                         i

                                  n−1               ∗         1      ∗         LD
               ≤2E L̂S (W ) −              L̂Z−i (wZ−i ) + L̂Zi (wZi ) | Z−i +
                                     n                        n                 n


Taking expectation over Z−i leads to
      h                               i
   E L̂S (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂S (W )
                                                                                        i  LD
                      h        i        n−1 h                       i 1 h
                ≤ 2E L̂S (W ) − 2              E L̂Sn−1 (wS∗ n−1 ) + E L̂Z (wZ      ∗
                                                                                      ) +      , (D.7)
                                           n                               n                 n
                                                    h                 i        h         i   h        i
                                                               ∗                      ∗            ∗
where Sn−1 ∼ µn−1 . We need to relate n−1                                   1
                                              n E L̂Sn−1 (wSn−1 ) + n E L̂Z (wZ ) to E L̂S (wS ) .
                       h         i
                              ∗
We can bound n1 E L̂Z (wZ       ) by LD   n again by the assumption that losses are bounded in
                                h                  i        h           i
                                            ∗                        ∗
[−LD, +LD], leaving n−1     n E   L̂Sn−1 (w S n−1
                                                  )   and E   L̂S (w S )  , which somehow forms the sta-
bility of the empirical risk minimizer. Since (projected) GD with fixed initialization has been proved
to be stable and has been proved to approximate the empirical minimizer, we use (projected) GD to
bridge the empirical minimizers.
According to Orabona (2020) and Eq.(1) of Haghifam et al. (2023), on CLB problems, (projected)
GD algorithm GDη,T : Z ∗ → W with step size η and step count T and a fixed initialization has
                                               2
                              D2
an excess optimization error 2ηT + (log T +2)ηL
                                          2      . As a result, we can approximate the empirical
minimizers using GDs with errors
    h                i    h                             i         D2        (log Tn−1 + 2)ηn−1 L2
  E L̂Sn−1 (wS∗ n−1 ) − E L̂Sn−1 (GDηn−1 ,Tn−1 (Sn−1 )) ≤                 +                       ,
                                                              2ηn−1 Tn−1              2
                      h        i   h                    i       D2     (log Tn + 2)ηn L2
                   E L̂S (wS∗ ) − E L̂Sn (GDηn ,Tn (S)) ≤            +                   ,
                                                              2ηn Tn           2
for any (ηn−1 , Tn−1 ) and any (ηn , Tn ). We assign ηn−1 = ηn , Tn−1 = Tn and select them√ suitably
as in Haghifam et al. (2023)’s Eq.(3), which bounds the approximation errors by O(LD/ n) at the
same time:

                   h                 i     h                        i       LD
                 E L̂Sn−1 (wS∗ n−1 ) − E L̂Sn−1 (GDηn ,Tn (Sn−1 )) ≤O √             ,
                                                                              n

                                h          i     h                  i       LD
                               E L̂S (wS∗ ) − E L̂Sn (GDηn ,Tn (S)) ≤O √            .
                                                                              n
                             h                         i        h                   i
We then need to relate E L̂Sn−1 (GDηn ,Tn (Sn−1 )) and E L̂Sn (GDηn ,Tn (S)) , which is the
removal-based stability of GD. To this end, for each sn−1 , we construct an artificial sample zSn−1
such that
                                     ℓ(w, zSn−1 ) := L̂Sn−1 (w),
            +

and denote Sn−1 := Sn−1 ∪ zSn−1 . By construction, we have L̂S + (w) = L̂Sn−1 (w) for any
                                                                         n−1
                                                  +
w ∈ W, i.e., the optimizations using Sn−1 and Sn−1     happen on the same loss landscape. Since
GD relies on (sub-)gradients and thus only relies on loss landscape, we have GDηn ,Tn (Sn−1 ) =


                                                  41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            +                                     +
GDηn ,Tn (Sn−1  ). If we pair Sn−1 and Sn , then Sn−1 and Sn only differs by one sample, allowing
us to apply the replacement-based uniform stability for GD on CLB from Bassily et al. (2020):
                    h                         i     h                  i
                  E L̂Sn−1 (GDηn ,Tn (Sn−1 )) − E L̂Sn (GDηn ,Tn (S))
                       h h                                                        ii
              ≤ESn−1 E L̂Sn−1 (GDηn ,Tn (Sn−1 )) − L̂Sn (GDηn ,Tn (S)) | Sn−1
             ≤L · ESn−1 [E [∥GDηn ,Tn (Sn−1 ) − GDηn ,Tn (S)∥ | Sn−1 ]]
                                         +

             =L · ESn−1 E GDηn ,Tn (Sn−1     ) − GDηn ,Tn (S) | Sn−1
                               L2 Tn ηn
                  p
             ≤O L2 Tn ηn +                .
                                   n

                                                                                      LD
With the same selection of (Tn , ηn ), the above difference can be bounded by O       √
                                                                                        n
                                                                                                .

As a result, Eq. (D.7) can be bounded by
                    h                             i
                  E L̂S (E [W | Z−i ]) − L̂S (W )
                     h          i n−1 h               i
                                                              LD        LD
                ≤2 E L̂S (W ) −           E L̂S (wS∗ ) + O         +O √
                                       n                       n         n

                     h          i     h        i         LD        LD
                ≤2 E L̂S (W ) − E L̂S (wS∗ ) + O              +O √
                                                          n         n

                                  LD          LD
                ≤2 · O(ϵ) + O           +O √        .
                                   n            n

Plugging everything back to Eq. (D.6) finishes the proof.



D.6   E XTENSION TO SGD AND S MOOTH L OSSES

In this subsection, we apply our technique to SGD under smooth losses. We will prove an omniscient
information-theoretic bound and then show it recovers some existing stability-based bounds.
To prove the omniscient bound, we need a basic form of information-theoretic bounds like Lemma 1
and Theorem 11 of Haghifam et al. (2023). This is done by results from Lemma D.2 to Corol-
lary D.5. After that, we make the basic bound omniscient in Theorem 5. Finally, we bound the
omniscient bound by the stability-based bound in Proposition 3.

Lemma D.2 (2-Wasserstain Distance Generalization Bound under Smoothness) Assume for
any sample z ∈ Z, ℓ(·, z) is non-negative, differentiable in Rd and β-smooth, i.e., for any
w, w′ ∈ Rd

                             ∥∇ℓ(w, z) − ∇ℓ(w′ , z)∥ ≤ β ∥w − w′ ∥ .

Then we have the following 2-Wasserstain-based information-theoretic (individual-sample) bound:
                                                 n
                               β h        i β+γ X
             gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤ E L̂S (W ) +

                                                    EZi W2 PW |Zi , PW ,
                               γ             2n i=1

where γ > 0 is a constant, and W2 (·, ·) denotes 2-Wasserstein distance, the optimal transport under
squared L2 norm.

Proof Let constant γ > 0. Given any index i and any instance of the i-th training sample      zi ,
let πzϵi be the coupling that approximates the 2-Wasserstein distance W2 PW |Zi =zi , PW between


                                                42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PW |Zi =zi and PW by an error at most ϵ > 0. Then for any ϵ > 0, we have
                         n
                      1X
 gen(µn , PW |S ) =         E(W,Zi ),W ′ [ℓ(W ′ , Zi ) − ℓ(W, Zi )]
                      n i=1
                        n
                     1X       h                                        i
                   =       EZi E(W,W ′ )∼πZϵ [ℓ(W ′ , Zi ) − ℓ(W, Zi )]
                     n i=1                  i


                        n
                     1X                          ′          ⊤            β ′ 2
                   ≤       EZ E(W,W ′ )∼πZϵ (W − W ) ∇ℓ(W, Zi ) + ∥W − W ∥        .
                     n i=1 i                i                            2
We then follow Lei & Ying (2020) to handle the inner product as in their Appendix B:
                   (W ′ − W )⊤ ∇ℓ(W, Zi ) ≤ ∥W ′ − W ∥ · ∥∇ℓ(W, Zi )∥
                                            γ            2   1             2
                                          ≤ ∥W ′ − W ∥ +       ∥∇ℓ(W, Zi )∥ .
                                            2               2γ
Thanks to the self-bounding property of positive smooth functions (Lemma A.1 of Lei & Ying
                             2
(2020)), we have ∥∇ℓ(W, Zi )∥ ≤ 2β · ℓ(W, Zi ) and
                                               γ          2 β
                       (W ′ − W )⊤ ∇ℓ(W, Zi ) ≤ ∥W ′ − W ∥ + ℓ(W, Zi ).
                                               2            γ
Plugging this back leads to
                             n
               n          1X                        β             β+γ   ′     2
        gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤      EZ E(W,W ′ )∼πZϵ       ℓ(W, Zi ) +     ∥W − W ∥
                          n i=1 i               i   γ              2
                                                n
                              β h        i β+γ X
                             ≤ E L̂S (W ) +        EZi W2 PW |Zi , PW + ϵ .
                              γ             2n i=1
By arbitrariness of ϵ > 0, we have
                                                 n
                               β h        i β+γ X
             gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤ E L̂S (W ) +

                                                    EZi W2 PW |Zi , PW .
                               γ             2n i=1


Lemma D.3 For any random variables (X, Y, Z) such that Y is independent of Z, we have

             EY W2 PX|Y , PX ≤ EZ EY ∼PY |Z W2 PX|Y,Z , PX|Z                .

           ϵ

Proof Let πy,z be the coupling that approximates the 2-Wasserstein distance W2 PX|y,z , PX|y
between PX|y,z and PX|y by an error at most ϵ > 0. Then for any ϵ > 0, we have

EZ EY ∼PY |Z W2 PX|Y,Z , PX|Z        =EY EZ W2 PX|Y,Z , PX|Z                 (Independence between Y, Z)
                                          h h                  h             i    ii
                                                                           2
                                     ≥EY EZ E(X,X ′ )∼πY,Z ϵ     ∥X − X ′ ∥ − ϵ
                                          h                     h             ii
                                                                            2
                                     =EY E(Z,X,X ′ )∼PZ ◦πY,Zϵ    ∥X − X ′ ∥     −ϵ

                                     ≥EY W2 PX|Y , PX − ϵ.
The lemma follows the arbitrariness of ϵ > 0.


Lemma D.2 is very similar to the fact that I(X; Y ) ≤ I(X; Y | Z) if Y is independent of Z. Follow-
ing this similarity, we write (conditional) expected 2-Wasserstain distances similar to (conditional)
MI, or equivalently, replace the KL-divergence in MI with the Wasserstain distance to compare the
prior and posterior:


                                                     43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 3 For any random variables (X, Y, Z), let

                       IW2 (X; Y ) :=EY W2 PX|Y , PX ,

                   IW2 (X; Y | Z) :=EZ EY ∼PY |Z W2 PX|Y,Z , PX|Z     .

Lemma D.4 If X and Y are independent given Z, then IW2 (X; Y | Z) = 0.

It leads to the following corollary:

Corollary D.5 (Stability-Style 2-Wasserstain Generalization Bound) Under the same assump-
tions as Lemma D.2, we have
                                                         n
                                  β h         i β+γ X
                gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤ E L̂S (W ) +             IW (W ; Zi )
                                  γ               2n i=1 2
                                                       n
                                     β h        i β+γ X
                                    ≤ E L̂S (W ) +       IW (W ; Zi | Z−i )
                                     γ             2n i=1 2


Proof Zi is independent of Z−i .


Theorem 5 (Omniscient 2-Wasserstain Bound under        Smoothness)    Assume ℓ is non-negative,
                                                            n
differentiable and β-smooth. Let γ1 > 0, γ2 > β. Let ∆Gi i=1 be a family of omniscient (output-
weight) perturbations, each of which additionally depends on Z−i . Then we have
                              n                                 n
                        β 1X                          β + γ1 X
     gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤          E ℓ(W + ∆Gi , Zi ) +               IW (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i )
                        γ1 n i=1                          2n i=1 2
                                           n
                                        1X
                                    +         E [∆∆Gi (W, Zi ) − ∆∆Gi (W, Z ′ )] ,
                                        n i=1
and
                                      n                             n
      n              1           β X                i
                                                            β + γ1 X
gen(µ , PW |S ) ≤                        E ℓ(W + ∆G , Zi ) +            IW (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i )
                  1 − γβ2       γ1 n i=1                      2n i=1 2
                                                           n
                                    2β h         i β+γ X
                                                         2       i 2
                                 +     E L̂S (W ) +           ∆G       .                  (D.8)
                                    γ2                n i=1

Proof This proof is very similar to the proof of Theorem 3. By repeating the proof of Corollary D.1
but with Corollary D.5 instead of Lemma 1, we obtain the first inequality in the theorem statement:
                              n                             n
                        β 1X                         β + γ1 X
   gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤            E ℓ(W + ∆Gi , Zi ) +         IW (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i )
                        γ1 n i=1                       2n i=1 2
                                                                n
                                                             1X
                                                         +         E [∆∆Gi (W, Zi ) − ∆∆Gi (W, Z ′ )] .
                                                             n i=1
The penalty terms can be bounded the same way as in Lemma D.2:
                                                         β       2
                    |∆∆Gi (W, z)| ≤ (∆Gi )⊤ ∇ℓ(W, z) +      ∆Gi
                                                         2
                                         i               β        2
                                  ≤ ∆G ∥∇ℓ(W, z)∥ +         ∆Gi
                                                         2
                                    γ2      i 2    β           β     2
                                  ≤     ∆G      + ℓ(W, z) +      ∆Gi
                                     2             γ2          2
                                     β           β + γ2        2
                                  = ℓ(W, z) +           ∆Gi .
                                    γ2              2


                                                    44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, we have
                            n                             n
                      β 1X                         β + γ1 X
 gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤            E ℓ(W + ∆Gi , Zi ) +         IW (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i )
                      γ1 n i=1                       2n i=1 2
                                                                           n
                                β   h        i                          1X h        2
                                                                                      i
                            +      E L̂S (W ) + E [Lµ (W )] + (β + γ2 )       E ∆Gi     .
                                γ2                                      n i=1

Population loss E [Lµ (W )] appears at the right of the inequality. To move it to the left, we pair it
with a virtual empirical loss term and moving the consequent gen(µn , PW |S ) to the left:
                                       n                             n
                                 β 1X                         β + γ1 X
          gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤              E ℓ(W + ∆Gi , Zi ) +         IW (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i )
                                 γ1 n i=1                       2n i=1 2
                                                                                  n
                                          β   h         i                    β+γ X
                                                                                2
                                                                                     h    2
                                                                                            i
                                      +      2E L̂S (W ) + gen(µn , PW |S ) +       E ∆Gi     ,
                                          γ2                                  n i=1
                                     n                             n
       β                       β 1X                         β + γ1 X
(1 −      ) gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤          E ℓ(W + ∆Gi , Zi ) +         IW (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i )
       γ2                      γ1 n i=1                       2n i=1 2
                                                                                           n
                                                                       2β h         i β+γ X
                                                                                         2
                                                                                              h    2
                                                                                                     i
                                                                   +      E L̂S (W ) +       E ∆Gi     .
                                                                       γ2              n i=1

Restricting γ2 > β allows us to divide the inequality by 1 − γβ2 without changing the direction of
the inequality:
                                 n                                    n
                      1     β X                                β + γ1 X
gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤                  E   ℓ(W  + ∆G   i
                                                      , Z i ) +          IW (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i )
                   1 − γβ2 γ1 n i=1                              2n i=1 2
                                                                                n               i
                                                       2β h         i β+γ X
                                                                             2
                                                                                     h
                                                                                            i 2
                                                   + E L̂S (W ) +                  E ∆G            .
                                                        γ2                n i=1


Now that we have proved the omniscient bound for smooth losses, we turn to recovering some
existing stability-based bounds.

Proposition 3 Under the same setting as Theorem 5, we have
             gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤               inf             [RHS of Eq. (D.8)]
                                       {∆Gi },γ1 >0,γ2 >β

                                                1            2β h         i β+γ
                                                                                2
                                  ≤ inf                         E L̂S (W ) +      · ϵstability ,
                                       γ2 >β 1 − β           γ2              2
                                                  γ2

where
                                                    "      n
                                                                                    #
                          stability                     1X h      ′     2
                                                                                   i
                      ϵ               := EZ−i ,V              E ∥W − W ∥ | Z−i , V
                                                        n i=1

(rephrased in our notation) is exactly the ℓ2 on-average model stability in Definition 4 of Lei & Ying
(2020).

Remark D.7 Proposition 3 recovers the relationship between stability and generalization in Lei &
Ying (2020)’s Theorem 2(b) up to constants.

Proof After setting ∆Gi = −W +E [W | Z−i , V ] as a function of Z−i and V , we have W +∆Gi =
E [W | Z−i , V ], which is a function of Zi -independent Z−i and V . As a result, W + ∆Gi is


                                                              45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


independent of Zi and IW2 (W + ∆Gi ; Zi | Z−i ) = 0 according to Lemma D.4. Therefore, we have
gen(µn , PW |S ) ≤          inf            [RHS of Eq. (D.8)]
                     {∆Gi },γ1 >0,γ2 >0
                                                 n                                                 n            i
                                 1          β X               i
                                                                       2β h           i β+γ X
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                            i 2
                ≤     inf                           E ℓ(W + ∆G , Zi ) +    E L̂S (W ) +              E ∆G
                  γ1 >0,γ2 >β 1 − β        γ1 n i=1                     γ2                    n i=1
                                   γ2
                                                              n
                                                                                               !
                              1        2β h          i β+γ X
                                                            2
                                                                    h
                                                                                           2
                                                                                             i
                ≤ inf                     E L̂S (W ) +           E ∥E [W | Z−i , V ] − W ∥              (γ1 → +∞)
                     γ2 >β 1 − β       γ2                 n i=1
                                γ2



With a closer look, one can find on-average model stability (Lei & Ying, 2020) term at RHS:
     n                                   n
  1X h                            2
                                    i 1X            h h
                                                                               2
                                                                                          ii
         E ∥E [W | Z−i , V ] − W ∥ =        EZ−i ,V E ∥E [W ′ | Z−i , V ] − W ∥ | Z−i , V
  n i=1                               n i=1
       n
                                                            " n                             #
   1 X          h h
                                2
                                        ii 1                 1X                           2
                         ′                                                       (i)
=         EZ ,V E ∥W − W ∥ | Z−i , V =            ES,S ′ ,V        A(S, V ) − A(S , V )       ,
  2n i=1 −i                                   2              n i=1
                                                  |                  {z                     }
                                                                  ℓ2 on-average model stability in Definition 4 of Lei & Ying (2020)

where the second step follows Lemma A.2, A(·, v) denotes the SGD when the random seed is v and
S (i) means replacing the i-th sample of S with the i-th sample from S ′ .


Now that we have recovered stability arguments, we can directly borrow stability of SGD to derive
excess risk bounds. The following results are based on the on-average model stability bound derived
by Lei & Ying (2020).

Proposition 4 Assume the loss is non-negative, convex and β-smooth. Assume the training algo-
rithm is projected SGD that starts from a fixed W0 := w0 ∈ W and runs T steps with non-increasing
                T +1
step sizes {ηt }t=1 such that ηt ≤ 1/2β. Then for any γ > β, we have the following excess risk
bound:
 E [Lµ (W acc ) − Lµ (w∗ )]
                                                                                      T            t−1
                                                                                                                           !       T
                                                                                                                                                  !
    2β              1 + T /n 4eγ2 β(β + γ2 )                        ∗ 2
                                                                                      X            X                               X
≤        Lµ (w∗ ) +                                         η1 ∥w ∥ + 2                     ηt+1          ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ )       /          ητ +1
  γ2 − β               n        γ2 − β                                                t=0          τ =0                            τ =0
                                                  T
                                                                          !       T
    γ2 + β                           ∗ 2
                                                  X                               X
  +           (1/2 + βη1 ) ∥w ∥ + 2β                     2
                                                        ηt+1 Lµ (w∗ )         /          ητ +1 ,
    γ2 − β                                        t=0                             τ =0

where W acc is the accumulated weight
                                                            PT
                                                 acc         t=0 ηt+1 Wt
                                             W         :=   PT                    .
                                                                 t=0 ηt+1

Remark D.8 In separable settings, i.e., when Lµ (w∗ ) = 0, the excess risk bound simplifies to
   E [Lµ (W acc ) − Lµ (w∗ )]
    1 + T /n 4eγ2 β(β + γ2 )           2
                                                 γ2 + β
                                                                                  2

  ≤                            η1 ∥w∗ ∥ +          PT           (1/2 + βη1 ) ∥w∗ ∥ .
       n          γ2 − β                   (γ2 − β) τ =0 ητ +1
After setting ηt = η ≤ 1/2β and reparameterizing γ2 = kβ for k > 1, we have
                                4ekβ 2 η

             acc         ∗                 T        2    1/2 + βη      k+1    ∗ 2
   E [Lµ (W ) − Lµ (w )] ≤               + 2 · 4ekβ η +                     ∥w ∥ .
                                   n      n                  Tη        k−1


                                                            46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By minimizing over T , we can obtain the following:
                                 4ekβ 2 η

                                             2 p                    k+1      2
  E [Lµ (W acc ) − Lµ (w∗ )] ≤            + · 4ekβ 2 · (1/2 + βη)       ∥w∗ ∥ .
                                    n        n                      k−1
Now set η = 1/2β to obtain the following:
                                             √   k+1

                       ∗           2β                    ∗ 2           2
           acc
  E [Lµ (W ) − Lµ (w )] ≤ inf          ek + 2 ek       ∥w ∥ = O(β ∥w∗ ∥ /n),
                              k>1 n                k−1
which indicates an O(1/n) sample complexity for smooth, convex and separable settings. This result
recovers the Theorem 5 and the O(1/n) rate in Lei & Ying (2020) up to constants.

Proof This proof is adapted from Appendix C.2 of Lei & Ying (2020). The excess risk can be
decomposed into (excess) optimization error and generalization error. The optimization error bound
is directly borrowed from Lei & Ying (2020).The generalization error is bounded by combining the
recovered stability bound Proposition 3 and the stability of SGD from Lei & Ying (2020).
Let w∗ be the weight that achieves the optimal population loss.

D.6.1      E XCESS O PTIMIZATION E RROR
According to Lemma A.2(c) of Lei & Ying (2020), if the loss is non-negative, convex and β-smooth,
and ηt ≤ 1/2L and non-increasing, then for any constant w̄ and constant s, one has
    t
    X             h                            i                         t
                                                                         X
                                                                   2
           ητ +1 E L̂s (Wτ ) − L̂s (w̄) | S = s ≤ (1/2 + βη1 ) ∥w̄∥ + 2β   ητ2+1 L̂s (w̄).
    τ =0                                                                   τ =0
After setting w̄ to w∗ and taking expectation over training sets, we have
       Xt           h                   i                              Xt
                                      ∗                      ∗ 2
            ητ +1 E L̂S (Wτ ) − L̂S (w ) ≤ (1/2 + βη1 ) ∥w ∥ + 2β         ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ ).    (D.9)
        τ =0                                                            τ =0

Since the excess training error bound is only given after summing over steps, one has to sum the
generalization error bound over steps as well.

D.6.2      S TABILITY AND G ENERALIZATION E RROR
Theorem 3 of Lei & Ying (2020) states that if the loss is non-negative, convex and β-smooth, and
SGD has step size ηt ≤ 2/L, the for any p > 0 one has
                                              t−1
                                  8(1 + 1/p)β X                         h         i
                   ϵstability
                    t         ≤                   (1 + p/n)t−1−τ ητ2+1 E L̂S (Wτ ) ,
                                       n      τ =0

where ϵstability
       t         is the ℓ2 on-average model stability at step t:
                                             " n                             #
                                              1 X     h
                                                                 2
                                                                            i
                       ϵstability
                         t        := EZ−i ,V        E ∥Wt′ − Wt ∥ | Z−i , V
                                              n i=1
Let γ2 > 0 be a constant. Plugging this stability bound into Proposition 3 leads to
   gen(µn , PWt |S )

       1       2β h           i β+γ
                                     2 stability
 ≤                 E L̂S (Wt ) +       ϵt
   1 − β/γ2 γ2                    2
                                                     t−1
                                                                                            !
       1       2β h           i β + γ 8(1 + 1/p)β X
                                     2                            t−1−τ 2
                                                                                 h        i
 ≤                 E L̂S (Wt ) +                         (1 + p/n)       ητ +1 E L̂S (Wτ )
   1 − β/γ2 γ2                     2         n       τ =0
                                                                   t−1
                                                                                           !
       1       2β h           i 4(1 + 1/p)(β + γ )β(1 + p/n)t−1 X               h        i
                                                   2                     2
 ≤                 E L̂S (Wt ) +                                        ητ +1 E L̂S (Wτ )
   1 − β/γ2 γ2                                    n                τ =0


                                                    47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


There are empirical losses on the trajectory at RHS of the above inequality. They can be bounded
by Eq. (A.5) of Lei & Ying (2020), which states given any training set s and any constant w̄ ∈ W,
one has
                      t−1
                      X             h                 i              t−1
                                                                     X
                                                                2
                             ητ2+1 E L̂s (Wτ ) | S = s ≤ η1 ∥w̄∥ + 2     ητ2+1 L̂s (w̄).
                      τ =0                                                   τ =0


Setting w̄ to w∗ and taking expectation over training sets, we have

                           t−1
                           X            h         i               t−1
                                                                  X
                                                             2
                                 ητ2+1 E L̂S (Wτ ) ≤ η1 ∥w∗ ∥ + 2     ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ ).
                         τ =0                                         τ =0


Plugging it back leads to

                                                                                                                                 t−1
                                                                                                                                                         !!
                       1                 2β h          i 4(1 + 1/p)(β + γ )β(1 + p/n)t−1
                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                 X
                                                                                                                       ∗ 2
        n
gen(µ , PWt |S ) ≤                          E L̂S (Wt ) +                                                        η1 ∥w ∥ + 2            ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ )
                   1 − β/γ2              γ2                             n                                                        τ =0


As in Lei & Ying (2020), one can choose p = n/T to have (1 + p/n)t−1 ≤ (1 + p/n)T −1 =
(1 + 1/T )T −1 < e. As a result, we have

                                                                                                                  t−1
                                                                                                                                          !!
                       1                 2β h          i 4(1 + T /n)(β + γ )βe
                                                                          2                              ∗ 2
                                                                                                                  X
        n
gen(µ , PWt |S ) ≤                          E L̂S (Wt ) +                                    η1 ∥w ∥ + 2                 ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ )
                   1 − β/γ2              γ2                        n                                              τ =0


To align the generalization error bounds with the weighted summation form of the optimization
error, we weight them by ηt+1 and sum over steps the above inequality:

  T
  X
        ηt+1 gen(µn , PWt |S )
  t=0
  T                                                                                               t−1
                                                                                                                          !!
  X     ηt+1           2β h          i 4(1 + T /n)(β + γ )βe
                                                        2                            ∗ 2
                                                                                                  X
≤                         E L̂S (Wt ) +                                      η1 ∥w ∥ + 2                 ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ )
  t=0
      1 − β/γ2         γ2                        n                                                τ =0
                     T                                            T                                                 t−1
                                                                                                                                          !!
      1           2β X               h   i 4(1 + T /n)(β + γ )βe X
                                                            2                                             ∗ 2
                                                                                                                    X
=                        ηt+1 E L̂S (Wt ) +                          ηt+1                        η1 ∥w ∥ + 2               ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ )
  1 − β/γ2        γ2 t=0                             n           t=0                                                τ =0



                                          PT           h            i
To get rid of the empirical losses          t=0 ηt+1 E  L̂ S (W t )  , we apply Eq. (D.9) again and obtain

        T
        X
              ηt+1 gen(µn , PWt |S )
        t=0
                                                          T                         T
                                                                                                             !
          1           2β                        ∗ 2
                                                          X                         X
    ≤                         (1/2 + βη1 ) ∥w ∥ + 2β             2
                                                                ηt+1 Lµ (w∗ ) +           ηt+1 Lµ (w )   ∗
      1 − β/γ2        γ2                                  t=0                       t=0
                                                          T                               t−1
                                                                                                                  !!
                             4(1 + T /n)(β + γ2 )βe X                        ∗ 2
                                                                                          X
                           +                            ηt+1         η1 ∥w ∥ + 2                 ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ )       .
                                       n            t=0                                   τ =0


                                                         48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


After obtaining the above generalization error bound, the bound for excess risks can be obtained by
summing up it and the optimization error bound Eq. (D.9):
    T
    X
          ηt+1 E [Lµ (Wt ) − Lµ (w∗ )]
    t=0
                                                  T                        T
                                                                                               !
      1    2β                            ∗ 2
                                                  X                        X
≤                    (1/2 + βη1 ) ∥w ∥ + 2β               2
                                                         ηt+1 Lµ (w∗ ) +                   ∗
                                                                                 ηt+1 Lµ (w )
  1 − β/γ2 γ2                                     t=0                      t=0
                                                        T                                      t−1
                                                                                                                       !
                           1    4(1 + T /n)(β + γ2 )βe X                            ∗ 2
                                                                                               X
                     +                                     ηt+1             η1 ∥w ∥ + 2               ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ )
                       1 − β/γ2           n            t=0                                     τ =0
                                  T
                                  X
                           2
    + (1/2 + βη1 ) ∥w∗ ∥ + 2β             2
                                         ηt+1 Lµ (w∗ )
                                   t=0
             T                                                   T                              t−1
                                                                                                                        !
    2β       X               1 + T /n 4eγ2 β(β + γ2 ) X                              ∗ 2
                                                                                                X
≤            ηt+1 Lµ (w∗ ) +                              ηt+1               η1 ∥w ∥ + 2               ητ2+1 Lµ (w∗ )
  γ2 − β t=0                    n         γ2 − β      t=0                                       τ =0
                                        T
                                                        !
     γ2 + β                   ∗ 2
                                       X
                                             2        ∗
  +           (1/2 + βη1 ) ∥w ∥ + 2β       ηt+1 Lµ (w )
     γ2 − β                            t=0
                                                           PT
The stated inequality can be obtained by dividing             t=0 ηt+1 and applying the Jensen’s inequality
to the convex L̂S (·).



E     D ISCUSSION ON THE L IMITATION
The major limitation of our bound is that our bound still relies on population gradients and Hessians.
This limitation harms the applicability of our bound to self-certified algorithms (Pérez-Ortiz et al.,
2021).
However, the limitation is not unique to our bound, but is an inherent limitation of the auxiliary tra-
jectory technique. The most essential step of this technique is to switch from the original trajectory
to the auxiliary trajectory with better properties. However, one must relate the auxiliary trajectory
back to the original trajectory by adding their differences into the bound. In this process, the loss
differences are used to measure such differences, resulting in the population loss difference and pop-
ulation statistics. As a result, previous representative works all have explicit reliance on population
statistics. See S ′ in Propositions 1 and 2. This reliance can be alleviated through some assumptions
like Lµ (WT ) ≤ Eξ∼N (0,σI) [Lµ (WT + ξ)] of Wang & Mao (2022). Nevertheless, one still must
verify this assumptions on the population set to rigorously apply them, especially when the model
is under-fitted or the generalization is bad so that the output weight is far from local minima of the
population loss. To sum up, existing representative results based on auxiliary trajectory must rely
on population statistics at least implicitly.
In terms of dependence to population/validation statistics, we also optimize the omniscient trajectory
using validation statistics, which is a heavier dependence. This may forms unfair comparison with
existing bounds. However, we have tried to make the comparison fair by allowing the existing
bounds to rely on the validation statistics (see Appendix C.5). Even with full access to validation
sets, the existing bounds cannot exploit them and are still much numerically looser than ours. Lastly,
the results of the existing and our bounds can be seen as not only competitors, but also different
trade-offs between the dependence on validation set and bound tightness. Our bound demonstrates
how tight a bound can be if one allows heavy dependence on validation sets, while previous works
show the looseness when one controls the access to validation sets. Future works can start from
these two extremes to achieve a better trade-off or even break it.


                                                         49
