Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING FROM I MPERFECT H UMAN F EEDBACK : A
TALE FROM C ORRUPTION -ROBUST D UELING
 Yuwei Cheng                                                        Fan Yao∗
 Department of Statistics                                           Department of Computer Science
 University of Chicago                                              University of Virginia
 Chicago, IL 60637, USA                                             Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA
 yuweicheng@uchicago.edu                                            fy4bc@virginia.edu

 Xuefeng Liu∗                                                       Haifeng Xu
 Department of Computer Science                                     Department of Computer Science
 University of Chicago                                              University of Chicago
 Chicago, IL 60637, USA                                             Chicago, IL 60637, USA
 xuefeng@uchicago.edu                                               haifengxu@uchicago.edu



                                              A BSTRACT
             This paper studies Learning from Imperfect Human Feedback (LIHF), addressing
             the potential irrationality or imperfect perception when learning from comparative
             human feedback. Building on evidences that human’s imperfection decays over
             time (i.e., humans learn to improve), we cast this problem as a concave-utility
             continuous-action dueling bandit but under a restricted form of corruption: i.e.,
             the corruption scale is decaying over time as tρ−1 for some “imperfection rate”
             ρ ∈ [0, 1]. With T√as the total number of iterations, we establish a regret lower
             bound of Ω(max{ T , T ρ }) for LIHF, even when ρ is known. For the same set-
             ting, we develop the Robustified Stochastic Mirror Descent for Imperfect√ Dueling
             (RoSMID) algorithm, which achieves nearly optimal regret Õ(max{ T , T ρ }).
             Core to our analysis is a novel framework for analyzing gradient-based algorithms
             for dueling bandit under corruption, and we demonstrate its general applicability
             by showing how this framework can be easily applied to obtain corruption-robust
             guarantees for other popular gradient-based dueling bandit algorithms. Our theo-
             retical results are validated by extensive experiments.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Many real-world problems, such as personalized recommendation (Yue & Joachims, 2009; Immor-
lica et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2022) and fine-tuning generative models (Bai et al., 2022; Casper et al.,
2023; Han et al., 2024), require learning from human feedback. Expressing preferences as numer-
ical values or concrete functions is generally challenging for humans. Therefore, an approach that
has achieved significant real-world success is to learn humans’ preferences by eliciting their com-
parative feedback between two options (Bai et al., 2022). A natural theoretical framework capturing
such learning task is the seminal dueling bandits framework introduced by Yue & Joachims (2009).
The dueling bandit problem features a sequential online learning problem, during which a pair of
actions are selected at each round and only their comparison result is revealed to the learner. The
comparison outcome between two actions is modeled using a utility function of actions, alongside
a link function that determines the probability of each action winning based on their utility differ-
ence. This modeling approach is termed as utility-based dueling bandit and achieves great success
in generating summaries closely aligned with human preferences (Stiennon et al., 2020). However,
human feedback is often imperfect, a crucial factor that has been largely overlooked in previous
studies of dueling bandit. As we are all aware of, humans are not always rational (Posner, 1997)
neither perfectly know our preferences (Pu et al., 2012). A powerful framework that can capture
this problem is robust bandit learning under adversarial corruption (Bogunovic et al., 2020; Saha &
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gaillard, 2022; Di et al., 2024). However, assuming fully adversarial feedback from a regular human
seems over-pessimistic at the first glance, hence might make our algorithm development overly con-
servative. Indeed, ample behavioral studies show that humans often refine their preferences through
interactions with the system, navigating a complex tradeoff between exploration and exploitation
(Cohen et al., 2007; Wilson et al., 2014). Furthermore, their response errors may exhibit systematic
patterns that depend on their past consumption history, rather than merely random noise. Though the
sources of imperfections vary a lot in human feedback, one common finding in these studies is that
the feedback’s imperfection tends to decrease over time, as humans interact more with the system
(Cohen et al., 2007; Wilson et al., 2014; Immorlica et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2022). This premise is
the core motivation of this work, which studies dueling bandit learning under corruption that can be
arbitrary but have decaying scales.
Our Model and Contributions. We cast Learning from Imperfect Human Feedback (LIHF) as a
concave-utility continuous-action dueling bandit learning problem under adversarial utility corrup-
tion yet with decaying scale, upper bounded by O(tρ−1 ) at round t, for some ρ ∈ [0, 1] (hence the
total amount of attack within time T is O(T ρ )). A fundamental research question that motivates our
study is whether LIHF is fundamentally easier than learning under arbitrarily corrupted feedback.
Our first main technical result hints on a potentially
                                             √         negative answer to the above question. We prove
a strong regret lower bound of Ω(d max{ T , T ρ }) under LIHF, where d is the action’s dimension.
This bound holds even when the decaying rate of imperfection index ρ is known. This lower bound
has the same order as recent lower bounds of dueling bandits under (the harder) arbitrary corruption
(Agarwal et al., 2021; Di et al., 2024), thus hinting that learning from imperfect human feedback
may be no easier than learning from arbitrary adversarial corruption. Notably, however, we use the
phrase “hint”, while not an affirmative claim, because our setting with continuous action space and
concave utility function is different from the K-armed bandits setting of Agarwal et al. (2021) and
linear utility function case of Di et al. (2024). Therefore, neither their lower bounds nor their proof
techniques are directly applicable to our setting with corruption to strictly concave utilities; see more
discussions and comparisons below.
                                                                                         √
Our second main result is an efficient algorithm with regret upper bound Õ(d max{ T , T ρ }) that
matches the above lower bound, up to logarithmic terms, in the same setting (i.e., decaying corrup-
tion level tρ−1 with known ρ). Unlike previous corruption-robust dueling bandit algorithms based
on robust K-armed bandits (Agarwal et al., 2021) or robustified LinUCB (Di et al., 2024), our algo-
rithm is a gradient-based algorithm that is built upon the recent Noisy Comparison-based Stochastic
Mirror Descent (NC-SMD) of Kumagai (2017). This is natural for our setup with continuous ac-
tions and strictly concave utility. While our algorithm itself can be viewed a natural generalization
of Kumagai (2017), its analysis is highly non-trivial and much more complex, due to the necessity
of accounting for corruption.
Our main technical contribution is a new framework for analyzing the regret of gradient-based algo-
rithms under arbitrary corruption. This framework introduces a novel regret decomposition lemma
for dueling bandits, which upper bounds total regret by combining decision regret and feedback error
due to corruption, based on quantifying bias in gradient estimation. It yields a tight analysis of our
new algorithm and implies regret bounds for popular existing algorithms in (even fully) adversarial
corruption settings, such as the dueling bandit gradient descent (DBGD, Yue & Joachims (2009)).
These upper bounds are looser than our lower bound for the LIHF setting. It is an intriguing open
question to understand whether these upper bounds under arbitrary corruption are tight, or the lower
bound under arbitrary corruption may be stronger than our lower bound under LIHF. Finally, we
conduct simulations which validate our theory.
Comparisons with Related Works. Since multiple recent works (Agarwal et al., 2021; Saha &
Gaillard, 2022; Di et al., 2024) study dueling bandits under arbitrarily adversarial corruption , it is
worthwhile to discuss the key difference between these works and ours. The first key difference
is the setting, which leads to fundamentally different algorithms hence analysis. Specifically, our
setting with continuous action space and a completely unknown concave utility function is motivated
by addressing problems from modern recommender systems where the action (i.e., contents) space
is extremely large, not enumerable, thus often embedded as high-dimensional continuous vectors
(Chen et al., 2019; 2021). This setting and our techniques are crucially different from earlier works.
Agarwal et al. (2021); Saha & Gaillard (2022) consider the K-arm dueling bandit setting and utilizes


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the reduction of Ailon et al. (2014) from dueling bandits to multi-K-armed bandits (MAB); (Di
et al., 2024) considers linear utility setting where the unknowns is a parameter vector θ, and utilizes
techniques from linear contextual bandits based on the optimism principle. The methods all rely
on parameter estimation which are not applicable to our setting with arbitrary concave utilities.
Moreover, they often need to enumerate all actions to identify the best one under optimism, which
are not computationally efficient for our setting with continuous action space. This is why our
algorithm is gradient-based and falls within the family of stochastic mirror descent. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first time a corruption-robust algorithm is developed for dueling bandits with
continuous actions and strictly concave utilities, which is also why it is necessary for us to develop
a new analysis framework. Additionally, we also note that dueling bandits with strictly concave
utility and linear utility are generally not comparable, both in terms of their problem difficulties and
methodologies. A strictly more general situation is the concave utility case (no need to be strongly
concave), however the best upper bound so far for general concave utility is O(T 3/4 ) (Flaxman
et al., 2005; Yue & Joachims, 2009), which are considerably worse than the O(T 1/2 ) for linear and
for strongly concave utility.
The second main difference between our work and previous is the more restricted class of adversar-
ial environments. Our model is motivated by imperfect human feedback whereas previous studies
are motivated by arbitrarily adversarial adversaries. Finally, a more subtle difference is that the cor-
ruption in our model is on utility with motivations from learning from imperfect human feedback,
whereas corruption in all previous settings directly flip the comparison outcome. These two dif-
ferences lead to a very different proof techniques of our lower bound. Our proof is more involved
because the adversary has limited capability to alter the comparison outcomes. Specifically, the
corruption are decaying; moreover, a constant amount of utility corruption only slightly shifts the
outcome probability whereas in previous settings each corruption completely changes the outcome.

2       T HE P ROBLEM OF L EARNING FROM I MPERFECT H UMAN F EEDBACK
Notation. For a positive integer T , we use [T ] to denote {1, 2, . . . , T }. We use standard asymptotic
notations including O(·), Ω(·), Θ(·). We use Õ(·), Ω̃(·), Θ̃(·) to hide logarithmic factors. We use
∥ · ∥2 to define L2 norm, ∥ · ∥∞ to define infinity norm, and λmax (·) to denote maximum eigenvalue.
Motivated by alignment of machine learning models with human preferences (Bai et al., 2022), we
study learning from comparative human feedback within the seminal dueling bandit framework (Yue
& Joachims, 2009) but account for “imperfections” in human feedback, as described below.
Basics of Continuous Dueling Bandits. We consider the dueling bandit framework with continuous
action set A ⊂ Rd (Yue & Joachims, 2009). At each round t ∈ [T ], the learner chooses two actions
at , a′t to present to some human agent, henceforth denoted as the “user”. The user receives utility
µ(at ), µ(a′t ) from the two actions respectively, and will pick one of these actions following a link
function σ(·). In the absence of corruption, the user selects action at with probability σ(µ(at ) −
µ(a′t )) and chooses action a′t otherwise. Since the comparison outcome has less errors compared
to the exact utility value while still carries useful information about the underlying utility function
µ, this form of human feedback has been widely used for learning human preferences (Ailon et al.,
2014; Maystre & Grossglauser, 2017; Bengs et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022). Following standard
assumptions in this field (Yue & Joachims, 2009; Kumagai, 2017), we also assume

         1. the action set A is a convex compact set that contains the origin, has non-empty interior,
            and is contained in a d-dimensional ball of radius R;
         2. the utility function µ : A → R is strongly concave and twice-differentiable. The following
            constants are useful for our algorithm analysis: µ is Lµ -Lipschitz, α-strongly concave,1
            κ-smooth, bounded, Rµ := supa,a′ ∈A µ(a) − µ(a′ ), and a∗ := arg maxa∈A µ(a) is the
            unique optimal within A;
         3. the link function σ : R → [0, 1] is smooth, rotation-symmetric (i.e. σ(x) = 1 − σ(−x)),
            and concave for R+ . Since Rµ is finite, there exists positive l1σ , Lσ1 and R2σ such that
            l1σ ≤ σ ′ ≤ Lσ1 on [−Rµ , Rµ ], and the second derivative is bounded above by R2σ and Lσ2 -
            Lipschitz on [−Rµ , Rµ ]. For a more detailed discussion on the generality of the modeling
            assumptions, please refer to Appendix A.
    1
        µ is α-strongly concave for some α > 0 if µ(x) ≥ µ(y) + ⟨∇µ(x), x − y⟩ + α2 ∥y − x∥22 for any x, y ∈ A.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A broad range of natural link functions satisfy our assumptions, including the standard logistic
distribution function, the cumulative standard Gaussian distribution function, and the linear function.
This distinguishes our work from some prior studies, working with concrete link function formats
such as logistic function (Maystre & Grossglauser, 2017; Saha, 2021; Xu et al., 2024) or the linear
function (Ailon et al., 2014; Chen & Frazier, 2017; Zimmert & Seldin, 2018; Lin & Lu, 2018).
Modeling Imperfect Human Feedback as a Restricted Form of Adversarial Corruption. To
incorporate imperfect human feedback, we study a generalization of the dueling bandit framework
above, by introducing a corruption term, c(a, a′ ), to the utility difference. Formally, let a ≻ a′
represent the event where the user chooses a over a′ . The probability of this event in the presence of
corruption c(a, a′ ) is denoted by P̂(a ≻ a′ ), expressed as P̂(a ≻ a′ ) := σ(µ(a) − µ(a′ ) + c(a, a′ )).
We denote the user’s preferential feedback under corruption as F̂(a, a′ ), referred to as imperfect
dueling feedback. Mathematically, F̂(a, a′ ) follows a binomial distribution with mean P̂(a ≻ a′ ),
as expressed by the following equation.
                                              (
                                                1 w.p. P̂(a ≻ a′ )
                                F̂(a, a′ ) :=
                                                0 w.p. 1 − P̂(a ≻ a′ )

The “hat” notation in F̂ and P̂ is to emphasize the presence of corruption. When there is no corrup-
tion, we use P(a ≻ a′ ) := σ(µ(a) − µ(a′ )) to represent the probability of the event a ≻ a′ , and
F(a, a′ ) to denote the corresponding dueling feedback.
We remark that the term c(a, a′ ) above is often called “strong corruption” in the literature of adver-
sarial corruption because it can be introduced after observing actions a and a′ and the corruption
function, c(·), can depend on µ and past actions (Bogunovic et al., 2020; He et al., 2022; Di et al.,
2024). The only difference between our model and the above works on adversarial corruption is a
natural restriction to the scale of the corrupted term c(a, a′ ). Our motivation is that human feedback,
while imperfect, should not be arbitrarily adversarial and tends to improve as human agent interact
with the learner. This motivates our following definition of imperfect human feedback.
Definition 2.1 (ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback). The human feedback is said to be ρ-imperfect for
some ρ ∈ [0, 1] if there exists a constant Cκ such that corruption ct (at , a′t ) satisfies |ct (at , a′t )| ≤
Cκ tρ−1 , ∀t ∈ [T ].2

The definition shows that ρ-imperfect human feedback is mathematically equivalent to a restricted
form of strong adversarial corruption to user utility functions. The total corruption is bounded by
PT                ′          ρ
   t=1 |ct (at , at )| ≤ Cκ T , which is a key parameter influencing the intrinsic difficulty of the learn-
ing problem. We thus cast the Learning from Imperfect Human Feedback (LIHF) problem as dueling
bandits under strong corruption but with decaying scales. For clarity, we use “arbitrary adversarial
corruption” as corruption without decaying constraints and “ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback” as cor-
ruption with decaying constraints, as described in Definition 2.1. Through this modeling, we aim to:
first create a more optimistic framework for LIHF compared to arbitrary adversarial corruption, and
second, explore LIHF’s intrinsic difficulty to achieve more efficient learning guarantees than those
possible under arbitrary adversarial corruption. We direct readers to Appendix B for a more com-
prehensive discussion on challenges in developing robust algorithms for continuous dueling bandits
with generally concave utility under arbitrary adversarial corruption.
Several points are worth noting about Definition 2.1. While we are not the first to model imperfect
human feedback, we are the first to apply it to dueling bandits with strictly concave utilities. Recent
works, motivated by recommendation systems, have explored learning user preferences from imper-
fect feedback (Immorlica et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). These studies assume
that users do not know their true expected reward θi for each choice i (i.e., arm) and instead behave
based on an estimated reward θ̂t,i at time t. The utility difference |θi − θ̂t,i | = ct is modeled as
a decreasing function of time, tρ−1 , indicating that users improve their preference estimates over
time. By viewing the human utility µ(a) as the average reward, our modeling of ρ-Imperfect Hu-
man Feedback shares the same spirit; it captures imperfect yet gradually improving human feedback
(e.g., due to inaccuracies in utility perception or initial ignorance of true preferences). As one of our
motivations, when generative models like ChatGPT learn to create personalized content, the user
   2
     All our results naturally applies to ρ < 0, which is a significantly easier situation since accumulated
corruption is a constant in that case. Therefore, we will not explicitly consider it in this paper.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


could undergo a process of preference refinement during interactions with the model. Additionally,
our model differs from recent corruption-robust dueling bandit studies (Komiyama et al., 2015; Saha
& Gaillard, 2022; Di et al., 2024), which corrupt realized outcomes (e.g., flipping a′ ≻ a to a ≻ a′ )
and are motivated by adversaries like malicious users or fraudulent clicks (Deshpande & Montanari,
2013; Lykouris et al., 2018). In contrast, our model focuses on utility corruption caused by imperfect
perception of true utility, not outcome manipulation.
Learning goal: regret minimization by Learning from ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback (ρ-
LIHF). The goal of the learner is to optimize her sequential actions to minimize the following
dueling regret in the ρ-LIHF problem:
                                T
                                                                            !
                               X
                                        ∗                   ∗       ′
                   RegT := E       σ(µ(a ) − µ(at )) + σ(µ(a ) − µ(at )) − 1 .             (1)
                                     t=1

This regret measure has been extensively studied in prior literature (Yue & Joachims, 2009;
Komiyama et al., 2015; Kumagai, 2017; Saha & Gaillard, 2022). Other regret measures, such as
the cumulative difference between optimal and obtained utility, are also considered. We discuss the
equivalence of various regret measures in Lemma D.1.

3       T HE I NTRINSIC L IMIT OF LIHF
In this section, we study the intrinsic limit of learning from ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback. We are
particularly interested in understanding whether learning from this restricted version of corrupted
feedback is fundamentally “easier” than learning from arbitrarily adversarial corruption. Somewhat
surprisingly, the answer seems to be no, as illustrated by the following lower bound result.
Theorem 3.1. There exists a ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback (see Definition 2.1), strongly con-
     utility√function  µ, and link function σ such that any learner has to suffer RegT ≥
cave
Ω d max{ T , T ρ } , even with the knowledge of ρ.
Notably, similar lower bound results have appeared in recent studies on adversarial corruption in
bandits (Bogunovic et al., 2022), including√dueling bandits (Agarwal et al., 2021; Di et al., 2024),
showing the same lower bound Ω(d max{ T , T ρ }) (though they often use C := Θ(T ρ ) to denote
total corruption budget). However, a few key distinctions are worth noting. First, Theorem 3.1
presents a stronger result, showing that even when corruption decays over time, this structure (which
defines our LIHF problem) does not make learning easier. Second, our corruption targets utility
values, which is quite different from the corruption of comparison outcomes studied in (Agarwal
et al., 2021; Di et al., 2024). In their case, corruption can fully flip comparison outcomes, which
is critical for promoting sub-optimal arms in their lower bound proofs. However, such full control
of the outcome is infeasible in our corruption of only the utility, which only slightly shifts the
comparison probabilities since the scale of the corruption is also upper bounded by O(tρ−1 ).
The aforementioned difference from previous works (Agarwal et al., 2021; Di et al., 2024) also
render our proof of Theorem 3.1 fundamentally different from (and much more involved than)
their proofs. Specifically, due to limited and diminishing corruption power, the corruption in our
LIHF problem are insufficient to completely “mask” the instance as one with a different sub-optimal
arm, which is the key strategy in previous lower bound proofs. Thus, our proof has to leverage
information-theoretic lower bounds of statistical distributions to understand how small-scale cor-
ruption at each round could influence the overall function estimation errors. Core of our proof is
the follow lower bound result for a different, and intuitively easier, problem: the standard bandit
setup with direct reward feedback shown in Lemma 3.1 below. We then convert this lower bound
for direct reward feedback to dueling feedback through a linear link function, i.e. σ(x) = 1+x 2 .
Lemma 3.1 (Lower Bound under Direct Reward Feedback). Consider bandit learning with direct
reward feedback, where reward r(a) := µ(a) + ϵ, ϵ follows standard normal distribution. The
action space A is contained in a d-dimensional unit ball, and µ is µθ (a) := θ⊤ a − 12 ∥a∥22 , with
θ ∈ Rd , ∥θ∥2 ≤ 1 . Under ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback (Definition 2.1), for any T , d ≤ C1κ T 1−ρ ,
and for any learner, there exists a θ such that under direct reward feedback, even with the knowledge
                                        PT
of ρ3 , has to suffer regret RegT := E{ t=1 µθ (a∗ ) − µθ (at )} ≥ d4 Cκ T ρ .
    3
                                                                                √
        We only consider ρ ≥ 12 . If ρ < 12 , the lower bound degenerates to Ω(d T ) (Kumagai, 2017).


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof Sketch of Lemma 3.1. We aim to show that there exists a corruption strategy such that the
regret incurred by any learner with direct reward feedback is no less than Ω(dT ρ ). The formulation
of such a corruption strategy hinges on the observation that the regret incurred by the learner is
bounded below by the sum of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the distribution of the
corrupted reward feedback v̂t conditioned on different values of θ. Specifically, let θ be uniformly
drawn from {−β, β}d , for some constant β > 0. Given an action at and index i, conditioned on the
value of the i-th coordinate of θ, θi , if θi > 0, then v̂t is
                                                  1            X
  v̂t = µθ (at ) + ct (at |θi > 0) + ξat = − ∥at ∥2 +            θj at,j + βat,i + ct (at |θi > 0) + ξ.
                                                  2
                                                          j̸=i

Conditioned on θi < 0, the corrupted reward
                                             feedback v̂t′ is
                                            1          X
 v̂t′ = µθ (at ) + ct (at |θi < 0) + ξat = − ∥at ∥2 +        θj at,j − βat,i + ct (at |θi < 0) + ξ.
                                            2
                                                          j̸=i

The noise ξ follows standard normal distribution. Consider the following corruption strategy
which sets ct (at |θi > 0) := −βat,i and ct (at |θi < 0) := βat,i to minimizes the KL
                                  ′
divergence
  nP         between v̂t and  o v̂t . Together
                                            nP with 1-strongly      concavityo of µθ , we can establish
                                                                           2
      T         ∗                    1          T     Cκ T ρ−1      2 dT β
E     t=1 θµ  (a  ) − µ  (a
                        θ t )   ≥    2 max      t=1 (    β     − β)  ,  2     . Since d ≤ C1κ T 1−ρ , we
              √       ρ−1
can set β := n Cκ T 2 to satisfy ∥θ∥o     2 ≤ 1 and to optimize the aforementioned lower bound. Then
                PT          ∗
we obtain E        t=1 µθ (a ) − µθ (at )   ≥ dCκ T ρ /4. Notice that the corruption level each round
is bounded by β∥at ∥∞ . In the scenario when the radius of A is upper bounded by β, the corrup-
tion budget each round is bounded by Cκ tρ−1 . It implies that the corruption is ρ-Imperfect Human
Feedback, completing the proof.

Theorem 3.1 can be proved by converting the lower bound in Lemma 3.1 for direct reward feedback
to dueling feedback (see Lemma C.1). Before concluding this section, we note that the strongly
concave utility function in the lower bound of Theorem 3.1 is not necessary. In particular, Proposi-
tion 1 below shows that similar lower bound applies to linear utilities as well. This result happens to
resolve an open problem posed by Yao et al. (2022) which studies a similar learning from imperfect
user problem with linear utility and dueling feedback (they termed it the “learning from a learning
user” problem), develops a no-regret learning algorithm for that setting, but left the lower bound as
an open problem. Proposition 1 implies that their upper bound’s dependence on T is tight. We direct
readers to Appendix C.1 and C.2 for proof details of Lemma 3.1 and Proposition 1.
Proposition 1. There exists an LIHF instance with ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback (Definition
           √ user utility µ, and link function σ, such that any learner has to suffer RegT ≥
2.1), linear
Ω(d max{ T , T ρ }), even with the knowledge of ρ.

4   A N E FFICIENT AND T IGHT ρ-LIHF A LGORITHM
In this section,
           √      we present a learning algorithm with a regret upper bound that matches the
Ω(d max{ T , T ρ }) lower bound, up to a logarithmic term, for the ρ-LIHF setting discussed in
Section 3. Our algorithm, Robustified Stochastic Mirror Descent for Imperfect Dueling (RoS-
MID), outlined in Algorithm 1, generalizes the Noisy Comparison-Based Stochastic Mirror De-
scent (NC-SMD)
       √           from Kumagai (2017). RoSMID employs a corruption-aware learning rate,
ηρ := log T /(dT max{0.5,ρ} ), to slow down the learning when the imperfection level ρ is large,
with NC-SMD being the special case with ρ = 0. Although RoSMID may initially seem like a
pretty natural extension of NC-SMD, the choice of optimal ηρ is in fact through careful derivation
from a novel framework for analyzing continuous bandits under utility corruption. We conclude by
demonstrating the applicability of this new framework to analyzing other gradient-based algorithms.
                                                    √
Theorem 4.1. RoSMID satisfies RegT ≤ Õ(d max{ T , T ρ }) for any ρ-LIHF problem.
The main technical contribution underlying this theorem is a novel framework for analyzing contin-
uous dueling bandits with arbitrary strongly concave, yet possibly imperfect or corrupted utilities,
which we believe has independent value. This framework not only enables a tight regret upper
bound analysis, as shown in Theorem 4.1, but also allows us to easily derive regret guarantees for
other dueling bandit algorithms under adversarial corruption, as demonstrated in Subsection 4.1.
While recent works have explored corruption-robust regret analysis for dueling bandits with K arms


                                                   6
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Algorithm 1: Robustified Stochastic Mirror Descent for Imperfect Dueling (RoSMID)
                                √
  Input: Learning rate ηρ := log T / dT max{0.5,ρ} , ν-self-concordant function R 4 , time
                                                lσ α
           horizon T , tuning parameters λ ≤ 12 , ϕ ≥ ((Lσ1 )3 Lσ2 /λ)2
1 Initialize a1 = arg mina∈A R(a)
2 for t ∈ [T ] do
                                                         λη Pt
3      Update concordant function Rt (a) = R(a) + 2 ρ i=1 ∥a − ai ∥2 + ϕ∥a∥2
4      Sample direction ut uniformly at random from a unit sphere Sd
5      Obtain corrupted feedback F̂(a′t , at ) ∈ {0, 1}, for at and a′t = at + ∇2 Rt (at )−1/2 ut
6      Compute the corrupted gradient: ĝt = F̂(a′t , at )d · ∇2 Rt (at )1/2 · ut
7      Set at+1 = ∇R−1  t (∇Rt (at ) − ηρ ĝt )
  Output: aT +1


  (Saha & Gaillard, 2022) or linear utilities (Di et al., 2024), neither their algorithms nor analysis can
  be applied to our setting with arbitrary concave utilities in continuous action space.
  The full proof of Theorem 4.1 is quite involved and is deferred to Appendix D. Here, we outline the
  main ideas, divided into four key steps. Step 1-3 are applicable for analyzing continuous dueling
  bandits under any form of corruption, whereas last Step 4 is the only step that hinges on the decaying
  corruption level assumptions of ρ-LIHF and is also the most involved and novel step.

  Proof Sketch. The proof of Theorem 4.1 is divided into four major steps.
  Step 1: quantifying bias of gradient estimation in ρ-LIHF
  Our proof starts from quantifying the bias of the gradient ĝt caused by ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback,
  as shown in the following Lemma 4.1.
  Lemma 4.1 (Corrupted Gradients Estimation). The gradient ĝt in Line 6 of Algorithm 1 satisfies
                                   E (ĝt |at ) = ∇|a=at P̄t (a) − E (bt |at ) .
                         h                            1
                                                           i
  where P̄t (a) := Ex∈B P(at ≻ a + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 x) (with B as the unit ball) is the smoothed proba-
                                                                                                      1
  bility that at is preferred over any action a , and bt = d P(at ≻ a′t ) − P̂(at ≻ a′t ) ∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut .
  Step 2: decomposing regret for dueling bandits into regret of decision and feedback error
  Core to our proof is a “regret decomposion” lemma below that upper bounds the regret by two parts:
  regret of sub-optimal decision making under uncertainty, referred as regret of decision (first term in
  equation 2), and regret due to corruption, referred as feedback error (second term in equation 2).
  Lemma 4.2 (Regret Decomposition for Dueling Bandits). The RegT of Algorithm 1 satisfies:
                                                            ( T                )
                      C0             2         µ σ
                                                             X
                                                                   ⊤        ∗
              RegT ≤     log(T ) + 8d ηρ T + 2L L1 R + 2E         bt (at − aT ) ,                       (2)
                      ηρ                                      t=1
                      |              {z              } |            {z         }
                                   Regret of Decision                  F eedback Error

  where C0 := (2ν + 4Lσ1 κ + 4R2σ (Lµ )2 + Lµ Lσ1 κ)/λ, and a∗T := T1 a1 + (1 − T1 )a∗ .

  Similar regret decomposition has been shown to be useful for reinforcement learning which has di-
  rect reward feedback (Foster et al., 2023). However, to the best of our knowledge, Lemma 4.2 is
  the first to exhibit such a decomposition for dueling feedback, which contains much sparser infor-
  mation than direct reward feedback as in classic RL or online learning. Hence the lemma may be of
  independent interest for future research on dueling bandits under corruption or erroneous feedback.
  Step 3: upper bounding the regret from feedback error
  Bounding the regret of decision term in equation 2 is standard. Thus, this step develops a novel
  upper bound for bounding the regret from feedback error, as shown below.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 4.3 (Feedback Error). The feedback error term in equation 2 can be bounded as follows:
  ( T              )             ( T                                    )
   X
       ⊤        ∗          √       X√
                                                     ′
                                                         p                             √ p
E     bt (at − aT ) ≤ C1 d ηρ E          t|ct (at , at )| µ(a ) − µ(at ) + C2 dT ρ + 2d λ ηρ T ,
                                                             ∗

         t=1                                t=1
               q
                   2λ(Lσ )2                  p
where C1 :=           α     , and C2 := 2Lσ R supa∈A λmax (∇2 R(a)) + 2ϕ.

Top
  our knowledge, such a bound is new for dueling bandits. The less common term in the bound
is µ(a∗ ) − µ(at ). It comes from the strong
                                       q     concavity of the utility function µ, which implies
⟨bt , at − a∗ ⟩ ≤ ∥bt ∥2 ∥at − a∗ ∥2 ≤ ∥bt ∥2       2     ∗
                                                    α (µ(a ) − µ(at )).

Step 4: The iterative regret refinement analysis and resultant optimal learning rate
Our last and also the most intriguing step is to pin down the regret upper bound.
Given
  nP the√ bounds from       previous steps,   the only remaining term to upper bound is
      T             ′
                        p                o                                 √
E     t=1 t|c (a ,
             t t t a  )|  µ(a ∗ ) − µ(a ) in Lemma 4.3. We can upper bound
                                       t                                     t|ct (at , a′t )| by
           1
Cκ tρ− 2 under ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback assumption (this is the point where we start to need
the decaying structure in Definition 2.1). This is a tricky question, since this term involving optimal
action a∗ closely connects to the regret RegT itself (see equation 1). This is precisely the motivation
for our analysis approach of “iterative regret refinement”.
                                                             Concretely, it turns out that a good upper
                              PT           ∗
bound for the term A := E          t=1 µ(a ) − µ(at ) can be leveraged to derive a good upper bound
                   nP                               o
                       T     ρ− 21
                                   p
for term B := E            t         µ(a ∗ ) − µ(a ) , which can then be leveraged to derive a good
                       t=1                        t
upper bound for the regret RegT , which can be used to refine the original upper bound of term A, at
which point we can re-apply the above refinement process.
Two key factors are essential for the iterative regret refinement mentioned above to result in a tight
bound. The first step is to derive a good upper bound for term B using term A, which is shown in
Lemma 4.4. The second step is to prove that this iterative refinement consistently improves the regret
bound, eventually
          √
                   reaching a limit. This is demonstrated by Lemma 4.5. The choice of learning rate
            log T
ηρ = dT max{1/2,ρ}  is crucial in the second step; in a sense, it is the only choice that converges to the
                                        √
tight regret upper bound Õ d max{ T , T ρ } in the limit, rather than exploding the bound.
                         P
                             T        ∗                        1                       1
                                                               2 +ψ ) for some ψ ∈ [0,
Lemma 4.4. If A = E          t=1 [µ(a ) − µ(at )] ≤ O(T                                2 ), then we must
              P                                               ψ
                 T    ρ− 21                               1
                            p                           −   +   +ρ
have B = E       t=1 t       µ(a∗ ) − µ(at ) ≤ O(T 4 2 ).
                                                     PT              p
To prove Lemma 4.4, we first bound term B by t=1 tρ−1/2 E[µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )] using the con-
cavity of the square root function. The key novelty of      p our proof is to use the Abel’s equation
                                             PT
(Williams, 1963) to re-arrange the term t=1 tρ−1/2 E[µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )] and establish its con-
                                      PT p
nection with another term C =           t=1     E[µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )]. We finally connect term C with
                                                         PT p                                    3 ψ
the  term A in the lemma      statement, by proving         t=1     E[µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )] ≤ O(T 4 + 2 ) if
    PT        ∗                     1
                                    2 +ψ ) via concavity of square root. Together with the decay scale
E      t=1 µ(a ) − µ(at ) ≤ O(T
                                                                                              1   ψ
tρ−1 , which allows tρ−1 − (t + 1)ρ−1 ≤ tρ−2 , we obtain the tight bound O(T − 4 + 2 +ρ ).5
Armed with Lemma 4.4, we can use it to prove the induction claim (Lemma 4.5). The challenge in
this proof lies in identifying the constant K, which must hold across all iterations, k, of the analysis
to ensure the bound remains stable and does not explode.
                                                                                              √
                                                                                                log T
                                                          p
Lemma 4.5 (Induction Claim). Consider T >                    2Lµ Lσ1 R and ηρ = dT max{1/2,ρ}          .
                                         3 −ρ
                            √        ρ+ 2 k
If RegT       ≤ 144dK log T T             2   for some integer k, then we must also have
                                                    √                                               2ρ
   If corruption ct was arbitrary, then tρ−1/2 is
     5
                                                     t|ct |, and the bound could deteriorate to O(T 3 ) in the first
 ρ
T rounds.


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                    3 −ρ
                    √               2
RegT n ≤   144dK log T T ρ+ 2k+1 .            Ko is a instance-dependent constant, where K :=
                                  √
max C0 , √Clog
            2 Cκ
               T
                 , (L σ
                        Cκ ) 2
                               , 2  λRC  κ L σ
                                                , C0 and C2 defined in Lemma 4.2 and 4.3 respectively,


4.1 A DDITIONAL A PPLICATIONS OF O UR R EGRET A NALYSIS F RAMEWORK
To showcase useful applications of the new regret analysis framework above for proving Theorem
4.1, in this subsection we employ the framework to study continuous dueling bandits under arbi-
trary and agnostic corruption — i.e., remove decaying constraints on ct and ρ is unknown to the
learner. We analyze natural variants of RoSIMD, which apply to strongly concave utilities, and the
well-known algorithm Dueling Bandit Gradient Descent (DBGD) (Yue & Joachims, 2009), which
apply to general concave utilities. The proofs of these results are direct applications of the analysis
from Steps 1-3 outlined above (without Step 4, since it is the only one requiring knowledge of ρ
and decaying corruption). Additionally, we present these results to offer a set of principled bench-
mark algorithms for the experiments in Section 5. One thing to highlight is that our robustified
algorithms retain the same computational complexity as the originals, ensuring added robustness
without compromising efficiency. For further details, see Appendix G.1.
Proposition 2 (Efficiency-Robustness Tradeoff in RoSMID). If the total corruption level satisfies
PT                ′         ρ                      1
   t=1 |ct (at , at )| ≤ O(T ), then for any α ∈ [ 2 , 1), if the √
                                                                  utility function is strongly concave, for a
sufficiently large round T , by choosing learning rate η = log         T −α
                                                                    2d T
                                                                 √ 1
       1. (Robustness) RoSMID incurs RegT ≤ Õ(dT α + dT 2 (1−α)+ρ + dT ρ ).
      2. (Efficiency) There exists a strongly concave utility function µ and a link function σ such
         that RegT suffered by RoSMID is at least Ω (T α ) in scenario without corruption.

Proposition 3 (Efficiency-Robustness Tradeoff in DBGD). If the total corruption level satisfies
PT               ′         ρ                        1
  t=1 |ct (at , at )| ≤ O(T ), then for any α ∈ (0, 4 ], if utility function µ is generally concave, for a
                                                               √
sufficiently large round T , choosing γ = √RT and δ = √13L2Rd
                                                          σ Lµ T α
                                                                   for DBGD
                                                               √        √
      1. (Robustness) RegT incurred by DBGD satisfies RegT ≤ O( dT 1−α + dT α+ρ ).

                                                   function µ and a link function σ such that RegT
      2. (Efficiency) There exists a linear utility
         suffered by DBGD is at least Ω T 1−α in scenario without corruption.
Both propositions illustrate the tradeoff between learning efficiency and robustness to adversarial
corruption, achieved through their tunable learning rate ηρ , γ, δ (learning rate in DBGD is γδ d ; we
direct reader to Algorithm 3 for detail). Specifically, greater tolerance for agnostic corruption (i.e.,
larger α in Proposition 2) results in worse regret in non-corrupt settings. A similar robustness-
accuracy trade-off has been studied in classification problems with adversarial examples, both em-
pirically (Tsipras et al., 2018) and theoretically (Zhang et al., 2019). However, to our knowledge,
this is the first formal analysis of such a trade-off in online learning. While expanding the confi-
dence region for UCB-type algorithms to handle agnostic corruption in linear contextual dueling
bandits increases tolerance for corruption but worsens regret—sharing a similar idea of a trade-off
(Di et al., 2023)—it’s unclear if this approach necessarily reduces efficiency. In contrast, our work
demonstrates that adjusting learning rates in gradient-based algorithms to enhance robustness against
agnostic corruption inevitably decreases efficiency when no corruption is present. In particular, the
efficiency statements in both propositions can be interpreted as algorithm-dependent lower bounds,
concretely demonstrating that for certain problem instances, increasing robustness necessarily de-
creases the learning efficiency of the algorithm. In fact, the “efficiency-robustness tradeoff” is
inherent under unknown adversarial attacks. Lemma E.1 in the appendix shows that algorithms that
learn faster tend to be more vulnerable to unknown corruption. However, the nature of this tradeoff
varies across different algorithms. It is a very intriguing and fundamental open question to study
what the optimal tradeoff is under unknown adversarial corruption and how to achieve it.

5 E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate our theoretical analysis of RoSMID and DBGD under ρ-Imperfect Hu-
man Feedback through simulations. We also compare their performance against two baseline algo-


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rithms: Doubler and the heuristic algorithm, Sparring, proposed by Ailon et al. (2014). For Sparring,
we use bandit gradient descent (Flaxman et al., 2005) as the black-box bandit algorithm. We direct
readers to Appendix G for implementation details.
Experiment Setup. We consider a standard experiment setup, which adopts a strongly concave
utility µθ (a) := θ⊤ a − 21 ∥a∥22 , and a logistic link function σ(x) = 1+exp(−x)
                                                                            1
                                                                                  . We choose d = 5,
and T = 105 . Our action space A is a d-dimensional ball with radius R = 10. The preference
parameter θ is randomly sampled from the surface of A. In our problem setting, the optimal action
a∗ = θ and µθ (a∗ ) = 50. We simulate ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback for ρ ∈ [0.5, 1].
Results and Discussion. Figure 1 presents a log-log plot of regret
versus iteration, t, which the order of regret in T is represented by
the slope of the line. Each line represents the average over five trials
with different random seeds, and each line corresponds to a distinct
value of ρ. The shaded region indicates ± one standard deviation.
In the legend, “o” denotes the estimated order of regret. We estimate
it using least squares on the last 1% of the data. Figure 1 supports
Theorem 4.1, as for ρ ∈ [0.5, 1), the estimated
                                        √
                                                  slope is less than ρ,
                                          log T
suggesting that the choice of ηρ = dT max{1/2,ρ} for RoSMID results
in a regret bound of at most Õ(T ρ ).
Figure 2 compares the performance of our proposed algorithms,
variants of DBGD and RoSMID, with two baseline algorithms,
Sparring and Doubler, in the setting when ct is arbitrary and ag- Figure 1: Robustness of RoS-
nostic. We set the parameter α = 1/4 for DBGD and α = 1/2 MID for ρ-LIHF
for RoSMID. When ρ is unknown to the algorithms, these parameter choices enable DBGD and
RoSMID to tolerate O(T 3/4 ) levels of unknown corruption, since the slope estimates are less than
1, implying sublinear regret, aligning with our theoretical predictions. Experimentally, RoSMID
demonstrates the best performance under strongly concave utility functions. Sparring performs com-
parably to RoSMID, despite being a heuristic approach without theoretical guarantees. In contrast,
Doubler exhibits the worst performance, likely because its theoretical guarantees are only applicable
to linear link functions, which differs from our experimental setup. We direct readers to Appendix
G for experiment results with other choice of α for efficiency-robustness tradeoff.


Figure 2: For each algorithm, we tested its performance under ρ-Imperfect Human feedback with
ρ = 0.5, 0.6, 0.75. For each ρ, we presented a line plot of the average regret over five simulations,
accompanied by ± one standard deviation shown by the shaded region. In the legend, o denotes the
estimated line slope, calculated using least squares on the last 1% of the data.

6    C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, this paper enhances the understanding of continuous dueling bandits by addressing ρ-
Imperfect Human Feedback with concave utilities. We established fundamental regret lower bounds,
introduced the RoSMID algorithm with nearly optimal performance, and developed a novel regret
analysis framework that highlights the inherent efficiency-robustness trade-off in gradient-based
algorithms. Our experimental results corroborate the theoretical√predictions. A promising future
direction is the development of an algorithm that achieves Õ(d T + dT ρ ) regret for continuous
dueling bandits with strongly concave utilities under arbitrary adversarial corruption. Additionally,
incorporating contextual information to better model real-world scenarios could further enhance the
applicability and robustness of these algorithms. We left these directions for future research.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgment. This work is supported by the AI2050 program at Schmidt Sciences (Grant
G-24-66104), Army Research Office Award W911NF23-1-0030, and NSF Award CCF-2303372.
Fan Yao conducted this research while he is visiting the University of Chicago.

R EFERENCES
Arpit Agarwal, Shivani Agarwal, and Prathamesh Patil. Stochastic dueling bandits with adver-
  sarial corruption. In Vitaly Feldman, Katrina Ligett, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 32nd International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, volume 132 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 217–248. PMLR, 16–19 Mar 2021. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v132/agarwal21a.html.
Nir Ailon, Thorsten Joachims, and Zohar Karnin. Reducing dueling bandits to cardinal bandits,
  2014.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.
Viktor Bengs, Róbert Busa-Fekete, Adil El Mesaoudi-Paul, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Preference-based
  online learning with dueling bandits: A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(7):
  1–108, 2021.
Ilija Bogunovic, Arpan Losalka, Andreas Krause, and Jonathan Scarlett. Stochastic linear bandits
   robust to adversarial attacks, 2020.
Ilija Bogunovic, Zihan Li, Andreas Krause, and Jonathan Scarlett. A robust phased elimination
   algorithm for corruption-tolerant gaussian process bandits, 2022.
Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier
  Rando, Rachel Freedman, Tomasz Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, et al. Open problems
  and fundamental limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback. Transactions on
  Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Bangrui Chen and Peter I Frazier. Dueling bandits with weak regret. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 731–739. PMLR, 2017.
Haokun Chen, Xinyi Dai, Han Cai, Weinan Zhang, Xuejian Wang, Ruiming Tang, Yuzhou Zhang,
  and Yong Yu. Large-scale interactive recommendation with tree-structured policy gradient. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3312–3320, 2019.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.
Jonathan D Cohen, Samuel M McClure, and Angela J Yu. Should i stay or should i go? how the
  human brain manages the trade-off between exploitation and exploration. Philosophical Trans-
  actions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 362(1481):933–942, 2007.
Varsha Dani, Thomas P. Hayes, and Sham M. Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit
  feedback. In Annual Conference Computational Learning Theory, 2008. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9134969.
Yash Deshpande and Andrea Montanari. Linear bandits in high dimension and recommendation
  systems, 2013.
Qiwei Di, Tao Jin, Yue Wu, Heyang Zhao, Farzad Farnoud, and Quanquan Gu. Variance-aware
  regret bounds for stochastic contextual dueling bandits, 2023.
Qiwei Di, Jiafan He, and Quanquan Gu. Nearly optimal algorithms for contextual dueling bandits
  from adversarial feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10776, 2024.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Abraham D Flaxman, Adam Tauman Kalai, and H Brendan McMahan. Online convex optimization
  in the bandit setting: gradient descent without a gradient. arXiv preprint cs/0408007, 2004.
Abraham D. Flaxman, Adam Tauman Kalai, and H. Brendan McMahan. Online convex optimization
  in the bandit setting: gradient descent without a gradient. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
  ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’05, pp. 385–394, USA, 2005. Society
  for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. ISBN 0898715857.
Dylan J. Foster, Sham M. Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making, 2023.
Anupam Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Kunal Talwar. Better algorithms for stochastic bandits with
  adversarial corruptions. In Alina Beygelzimer and Daniel Hsu (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-
  Second Conference on Learning Theory, volume 99 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 1562–1578. PMLR, 25–28 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v99/gupta19a.html.
Zeyu Han, Chao Gao, Jinyang Liu, Jeff Zhang, and Sai Qian Zhang. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning
  for large models: A comprehensive survey, 2024.
Elad Hazan and Kfir Levy.     Bandit convex optimization: Towards tight bounds.    In
  Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2014. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2014/
  file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.
Jiafan He, Dongruo Zhou, Tong Zhang, and Quanquan Gu. Nearly optimal algorithms for linear
   contextual bandits with adversarial corruptions, 2022.
Nicole Immorlica, Jieming Mao, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Incentivizing explo-
  ration with selective data disclosure. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics
  and Computation, pp. 647–648, 2020.
Yue Kang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Thomas Chun Man Lee. Robust lipschitz bandits to adversarial
  corruptions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Junpei Komiyama, Junya Honda, Hisashi Kashima, and Hiroshi Nakagawa. Regret lower bound and
  optimal algorithm in dueling bandit problem. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 1141–1154.
  PMLR, 2015.
Wataru Kumagai. Regret analysis for continuous dueling bandit. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Chuang-Chieh Lin and Chi-Jen Lu. Efficient mechanisms for peer grading and dueling bandits. In
  Asian Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 740–755. PMLR, 2018.
Thodoris Lykouris, Vahab Mirrokni, and Renato Paes Leme. Stochastic bandits robust to adversarial
  corruptions, 2018.
Lucas Maystre and Matthias Grossglauser. Just sort it! a simple and effective approach to active
  preference learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2344–2353. PMLR,
  2017.
Luigi Montrucchio. Lipschitz continuous policy functions for strongly concave optimization prob-
  lems. Journal of mathematical economics, 16(3):259–273, 1987.
Richard A Posner. Rational choice, behavioral economics, and the law. StAn. l. reV., 50:1551, 1997.
Pearl Pu, Li Chen, and Rong Hu. Evaluating recommender systems from the user’s perspective:
  survey of the state of the art. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 22:317–355, 2012.
Aadirupa Saha. Optimal algorithms for stochastic contextual preference bandits. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:30050–30062, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aadirupa Saha and Pierre Gaillard. Versatile dueling bandits: Best-of-both world analyses for learn-
  ing from relative preferences. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepes-
  vari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 19011–19026.
  PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/saha22a.
  html.
Aadirupa Saha, Tomer Koren, and Yishay Mansour. Dueling convex optimization with general
  preferences, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02562.
Ohad Shamir. On the complexity of bandit and derivative-free stochastic convex optimization, 2013.
Gerhard Sorger. On the sensitivity of optimal growth paths. Journal of Mathematical Economics,
  24(4):353–369, 1995.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Dimitris Tsipras, Shibani Santurkar, Logan Engstrom, Alexander Turner, and Aleksander Madry.
  Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2018.
Alain Venditti. Strong concavity properties of indirect utility functions in multisector optimal growth
  models. Journal of Economic Theory, 74(2):349–367, 1997. ISSN 0022-0531. doi: https://
  doi.org/10.1006/jeth.1996.2267. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S002205319692267X.
Yuanyu Wan, Wei-Wei Tu, and Lijun Zhang. Online strongly convex optimization with unknown
  delays. Machine Learning, 111(3):871–893, 2022.
Chaoqi Wang, Ziyu Ye, Zhe Feng, Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, and Haifeng Xu. Follow-ups also
  matter: Improving contextual bandits via post-serving contexts, 2023.
Chen-Yu Wei, Christoph Dann, and Julian Zimmert. A model selection approach for corruption
  robust reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp.
  1043–1096. PMLR, 2022.
WE Williams. A class of integral equations. In Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philo-
 sophical Society, volume 59, pp. 589–597. Cambridge University Press, 1963.
Robert C Wilson, Andra Geana, John M White, Elliot A Ludvig, and Jonathan D Cohen. Humans use
  directed and random exploration to solve the explore–exploit dilemma. Journal of experimental
  psychology: General, 143(6):2074, 2014.
Wenjie Xu, Wenbin Wang, Yuning Jiang, Bratislav Svetozarevic, and Colin N Jones. Principled
 preferential bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05367, 2024.
Fan Yao, Chuanhao Li, Denis Nekipelov, Hongning Wang, and Haifeng Xu. Learning from a learn-
  ing user for optimal recommendations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  25382–25406. PMLR, 2022.
Yisong Yue and Thorsten Joachims. Interactively optimizing information retrieval systems as a
  dueling bandits problem. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2009. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13141692.
Hongyang Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Jiantao Jiao, Eric Xing, Laurent El Ghaoui, and Michael Jordan.
  Theoretically principled trade-off between robustness and accuracy. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 7472–7482. PMLR, 2019.
Julian Zimmert and Yevgeny Seldin. Factored bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 31, 2018.
Julian Zimmert and Yevgeny Seldin. Tsallis-inf: An optimal algorithm for stochastic and adversarial
  bandits. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(28):1–49, 2021. URL http://jmlr.
  org/papers/v22/19-753.html.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Appendix to Learning from Imperfect Human Feedback: A Tale
               from Corruption-Robust Dueling

A    D ISCUSSION ON THE G ENERALITY OF M ODELING A SSUMPTIONS

The assumptions of a continuous action space are standard in the online convex optimization litera-
ture (Flaxman et al., 2004; Yue & Joachims, 2009; Shamir, 2013; Kumagai, 2017). Moreover, they
are particularly natural for today’s preference learning for recommendation systems since languages,
texts, videos are mostly processed as embedding vectors which are continuous by nature. We as-
sumed strong concave utility functions. This is standard due to at least two reasons. First, there is
already a rich literature studying online optimization of strongly convex or concave functions, and
our work subscribes to that rich literature (Shamir, 2013; Kumagai, 2017; Wan et al., 2022; Saha
et al., 2022). Second, strongly concave utilities functions capture essential properties like diminish-
ing marginal returns and risk-averse behavior. These characteristics align closely with real-world
scenarios in economics, behavioral studies, and decision-making processes. Strongly concave func-
tions are frequently utilized in economic literature for modeling utility functions such as the “indirect
utility function” (Montrucchio, 1987; Sorger, 1995; Venditti, 1997), which represents the maximum
utility a consumer can achieve based on a specific income level and set of prices. Our assumption
on the link function aligns with those in Kumagai (2017) but is slightly stronger than those in Yue &
Joachims (2009). Nevertheless, it encompasses many natural link functions, including the sigmoid
function, the cumulative Gaussian distribution function, and the linear function, more general than
merely sigmoid link functions (Maystre & Grossglauser, 2017; Saha, 2021; Xu et al., 2024) or linear
link function (Ailon et al., 2014; Chen & Frazier, 2017; Zimmert & Seldin, 2018; Lin & Lu, 2018),
as assumed in some earlier works.

B    C HALLENGES IN D EVELOPING ROBUST A LGORITHMS FOR C ONTINUOUS
     D UELING BANDITS WITH G ENERALLY C ONCAVE U TILITY UNDER
     C ORRUPTION I NDUCED BY S TRONG A DVERSARY

There is a line of work that studies bandits under corruption by a weak adversary (Lykouris et al.,
2018; Gupta et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2021; Zimmert & Seldin, 2021; Saha & Gaillard, 2022; Wei
et al., 2022), where the corruption is introduced before observing the agent’s actions. This research
develops efficient algorithms that achieve sublinear regret without requiring prior knowledge of
the total corruption. Specifically, for corruption induced by a weak adversary, Wei et al. (2022)
adopts the idea of model selection and introduces a robust framework called Corruption-Robustness
through Balancing and Elimination (COBE). This framework allows an algorithm designed for a
known corruption level to be adapted for scenarios with an unknown corruption level. Notably, in the
case of weak adversaries, Zimmert & Seldin (2021); Saha & Gaillard (2022) develop “best-of-both-
world’ algorithms, which achieve optimal performance under both begin and corrupted settings.
However, for corruption induced by a strong adversary—where the corruption occurs after observing
the agent’s actions (the scenario considered in our setting)—it may not be possible to develop a best-
of-both-world algorithm. This limitation arises because, for any algorithm that does not know the
total corruption, there exists a problem instance where the algorithm suffers linear regret (Bogunovic
et al., 2020; Kang et al., 2024). To achieve sublinear regret in such settings, it is crucial for the
algorithm to have precise knowledge of the total corruption or at least an accurate estimation of its
upper bound.
For cases with known corruption, nearly optimal algorithms are proposed for various settings, in-
cluding stochastic linear bandits in discrete action spaces (Bogunovic et al., 2020), Gaussian process
bandits (Bogunovic et al., 2022), linear contextual bandits (He et al., 2022), Lipschitz bandits (Kang
et al., 2024), and linear contextual dueling bandits (Di et al., 2024). These approaches typically rely
on phase elimination techniques to eliminate suboptimal arms or Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)-
based algorithms to pull optimal arms with high probability. The success of these methods heavily
depends on constructing precise utility estimates to guide decision-making.
However, for learning from nonlinear utility, constructing utility estimates under dueling feedback is
a very challenging problem, as only preferential (directional) information is available. This limited


                                                   14
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  information motivates the exploration of a new approach: robust gradient-based algorithms. Zim-
  mert & Seldin (2021) and Saha & Gaillard (2022) utilize robust stochastic mirror descent algorithms
  to update the probability distribution for sampling K arms. However, it is difficult to efficiently gen-
  eralize this design to continuous action spaces, as it requires transforming the probability vector into
  a probability density function and efficiently managing its updates and approximations. While Yue
  & Joachims (2009) and Kumagai (2017) exploits dueling bandit gradient descent and stochastic mir-
  ror descent and achieves sublinear regret for continuous dueling bandits, their performance under
  corruption remains unexplored. It is a nontrivial question and still remains an interesting open prob-
  lem of developing robust and computationally efficient algorithms for continuous dueling bandits
  with generally concave utility functions under corruption induced by strong adversaries.

  C    P ROOFS FOR T HEOREM 3.1
  Theorem (Theorem 3.1 restated). There exists a ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback (see Definition 2.1),
  strongly
                        function µ, and link function σ such that any learner has to suffer RegT ≥
           concave utility
             √     ρ
  Ω d max{ T , T } , even with the knowledge of ρ.

  Proof. Before showing the regret lower bound proof for Theorem 3.1, let’s first establish the follow-
  ing Lemma C.1, which builds the connection between regret incurred under bandit reward feedback
  and dueling feedback. This proof is inspired by Theorem 6 in Yao et al. (2022). To prove Lemma
  C.1, in addition to RegT , we introduce a new metric to measure the performance of algorithm under
  dueling feedback, which we coin functional regret RegFO T , defined as follows.
                                      ( T                                     )
                                        X
                         RegFOT := E        µ(a∗ ) − µ(at ) + µ(a∗ ) − µ(a′t ) .                     (3)
                                          t=1

  Lemma C.1. Given a utility function µ, if the regret lower bound for algorithm with bandit reward
  feedback is Reg, then any learner with dueling feedback has to suffer regret RegFO
                                                                                  T ≥ 2Reg.


  Proof. We prove our claim by contradiction. Let (a0,t , a1,t ) be the pair of recommendation at round
  t. Suppose RegFO
                T < 2Reg. As a result, at least one of the following inequality must hold:
                                   ( T                      )
                                     X
                                             ∗
                                 E       µ(a ) − µ(a0,t ) ≤ Reg;
                                         t=1
                                        ( T                        )                                  (4)
                                         X
                                    E          µ(a∗ ) − µ(a1,t )       ≤ Reg.
                                         t=1

  Consider a principal who can observe the interaction between a user and the learner L, then we can
  construct two algorithms L0 and L1 as follows.

  Algorithm 2: Algorithm Li
  Input: the time horizon T
1 for t ≤ T do
2     Call the learner L to generate two candidates (a0,t , a1,t ).
3     Present (a0,t , a1,t ) to user and received the feedback.
4     Return user feedback to the learner L and update L.
  Output: the sequential decision {ai,t }Tt=1

  From equation 4, we know that at least one of {L0 , L1 } achieves an expected regret lower than Reg.
  However, we know all algorithm with bandit feedback with utility function µ has to occur regret at
  least Reg, contradiction. Therefore, Lemma C.1 must hold, which completes the proof.

  Next, we prove Theorem 3.1. First, consider the case ρ ≤ 0.5. Given that
                                                                       √ the utility function is
  strongly concave, by applying Lemma C.2, we have Reg = 0.02 min{T, d T }. From Lemma C.1,


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                     √
we also obtain RegFO
                   T ≥ 0.04 min{T,  d T }. Using the linear link function σ(x) = 21 + 21 x, it
                                 √               √
follows that RegT ≥ 0.02 min{T, d T } ≥ Ω(d max{ T , T ρ }), completing the proof.
Lemma C.2 (Theorem 6 in (Shamir, 2013)). Let the number of rounds T be fixed. Then for any
learner, there exists a quadratic function of the form µθ (a) := θ⊤ a − 21 ∥a∥2 which is minimized at
θ and ∥θ∥2 ≤ 0.5 such that
                              T
                                                   !
                             X
                                      ∗
                                                                 n     √ o
                         E       µθ (a ) − µθ (at ) ≥ 0.02 min T, d T .
                             t=1


Now, let’s focus on the scenario when ρ > 0.5. In essence, we want to extend Lemma C.2 to the
scenario in presence of adversarial corruption induced by ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback. If we can
show the regret lower bound can be generalized to Ω(dT ρ ), then applying the same technique which
uses Lemma C.1 to connect regret suffered under bandit reward feedback and regret suffered under
dueling feedback and choose linear link function to connect RegFO
                                                                T and RegT , we will get the desired
regret lower bound. The extension of Lemma C.2 is proven at section C.1.

C.1   P ROOF FOR L EMMA 3.1

Lemma (Lemma 3.1 restated). Consider bandit learning with direct reward feedback, where reward
r(a) := µ(a) + ϵ, ϵ follows standard normal distribution. The action space A is contained in a
d-dimensional unit ball, and µ is µθ (a) := θ⊤ a − 21 ∥a∥22 , with θ ∈ Rd , ∥θ∥2 ≤ 1 . Under ρ-
Imperfect Human Feedback (Definition 2.1), for any T , d ≤ C1κ T 1−ρ , and for any learner, there
exists a θ such that under direct reward feedback, even with the knowledge of ρ, has to suffer regret
             PT
RegT := E{ t=1 µθ (a∗ ) − µθ (at )} ≥ d4 Cκ T ρ .

Proof. To prove Lemma 3.1, we aim to prove that there exists a corruption strategy such that the
regret incurred by any learner with imperfect dueling feedback is not less than Ω(dT ρ ). The for-
mulation of such a corruption strategy hinges on the observation that when the utility function µθ
adopts the quadratic form parameterized by θ, specifically µθ (a) = θ⊤ a − 21 ∥a∥22 , which is both
smooth and strongly concave, then the regret incurred by the learner is bounded below by the sum
of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the distribution of the corrupted reward feedback
obtained at round t, denoted v̂t , t ∈ [T ], conditioned on different possible values of θ. (see Lemma
C.4). Assume that θ is uniformly drawn from {−β, β}d , given an action at , conditioned on θi > 0,
the corrupted reward feedback v̂t is
                                                                     
                                               1         X
  v̂t = µθ (at ) + ct (at |θi > 0) + ξ = − ∥at ∥2 +          θj at,j  + βat,i + ct (at |θi > 0) +ξ. (5)
                                               2
                                                         j̸=i
                                         |                           {z                         }
                                                                      µ1

Conditioned on θi < 0, the corrupted reward feedback v̂t is
                                                                
                                          1         X
 v̂t = µθ (at ) + ct (at |θi < 0) + ξ = − ∥at ∥2 +      θj at,j  − βat,i + ct (at |θi < 0) +ξ. (6)
                                          2
                                                    j̸=i
                                        |                       {z                         }
                                                                      µ2

We use ct (at |θi > 0) and ct (at |θi < 0) to empathize the fact that the magnitude and sign of
corruption can be dependent on θ. ξ follows a standard Gaussian distribution. Therefore, v̂t in
Equation 5 follows N(µ1 , 1). v̂t in Equation 6 follows N(µ2 , 1). By using Lemma C.3, we have
                               DKL (N(µ1 , 1)||N(µ2 , 1)) = (µ1 − µ2 )2 .
Lemma C.3 (KL Divergence for Normal Distribution). Let N (µ, σ 2 ) represent a Gaussian distri-
bution variable with mean µ and variance σ 2 . Then
                                                                   (µ1 − µ2 )2
                            DKL (N (µ1 , σ 2 )||N (µ2 , σ 2 )) =               .
                                                                      2σ 2

                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To optimize the lower bound in Lemma C.4, the adversary selects ct (at |θi > 0) and ct (at |θi < 0)
to minimize the difference between µ1 and µ2 . Consider the following corruption strategy: when
θi > 0, set ct (at |θi > 0) = −βat,i ; when θi < 0, set ct (at |θi < 0) = βat,i . This strategy ensures
that µ1 = µ2 .
Next step is to determine the value of β. Notice that the corruption budget is Cκ T ρ . To execute the
corruption strategy described above, it requires
                                    T
                                    X                      T
                                                           X
                                          |ct (at )| ≤ β         ∥at ∥∞ ≤ Cκ T ρ .                                (7)
                                    t=1                    t=1

Therefore, by exploiting the fact that µθ is 1-strongly concave, we establish another lower bound for
the regret by
                        ( T                      )        ( T              )
                          X
                                    ∗                  1    X
                                                                         2
                      E       µθ (a ) − µθ (at ) ≥ E            ∥at − θ∥2
                          t=1
                                                       2    t=1
                                                          ( T                  )
                                                       1    X
                                                                             2
                                                    ≥ E         (∥at ∥∞ − β)
                                                       2    t=1
                                                                    T
                                                                 1X
                                                            ≥          (Cκ T ρ−1 /β − β)2 .
                                                                 2 t=1

Since |at,i − θi | ≥ ||at,i | − β| for all i, we obtain the second inequality. By utilizing the corruption
                                                                                                   ρ−1
constraint equation 7, we derive the last inequality, which is minimized when ∥at ∥∞ = Cκ Tβ           for
all t. Together with Lemma C.4, we have:
                ( T                         )            ( T                              )
                                                                                        2
                   X
                              ∗                  1         X
                                                                     ρ−1        2 dT β
              E        µθ (a ) − µθ (at ) ≥ max                (Cκ T     /β − β) ,          .          (8)
                   t=1
                                                 2         t=1
                                                                                     2

We select β to optimize the lower bound in Equation equation 8. Since d ≤ C1κ T 1−ρ , we can set β =
√      ρ   1
                                                   nP
                                                       T
                                                                             o
  Cκ T 2 − 2 to satisfy ∥θ∥2 ≤ 1. Then we obtain E              ∗                       ρ
                                                       t=1 µθ (a ) − µθ (at ) ≥ dCκ T /4. Notice
that the corruption level each round is bounded by β∥at ∥∞ . Consider the scenario when the radius
of the action space A is upper bounded by β, then the corruption budget each round is bounded
by Cκ t−1+ρ , which satisfies the definition of ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback, which completes the
proof.
Lemma C.4. Let’s consider the utility function µθ (a) := θ⊤ a − 21 ∥a∥22 . Let v̂1 , v̂2 , . . . , v̂T be a
sequence of corrupted reward feedback obtained by a learner. Then there exists a θ ∈ Rd , ∥θ∥2 ≤ 1,
uniformly drawn from {−β, β}d , such that the regret suffered by the learner is
                   ( T                      )               v                  
                                                             u d T
                                                     2
                     X                          dT β         u1 XX
                 E       µθ (a∗ ) − µθ (at ) ≥         1 − t              Dt,i  .
                     t=1
                                                  4             d  i=1 t=1

Dt,i := sup{θj }j̸=i DKL P(v̂t |θi > 0, {θj }j̸=i , {v̂l }t−l                                     t−l

                                                          l=1 )||P(v̂t |θi < 0, {θj }j̸=i , {v̂l }l=1 ) . DKL is
the KL divergence between two distributions.

Proof. Using the similar argument in Shamir (2013), assume that the learner is deterministic: at is a
deterministic function of the realized corrupted reward feedback v̂1 , v̂2 , . . . , v̂t−1 at a1 , a2 , . . . , at−1 .
This assumption is without loss of generality, since any random learners can be seen as a random-
ization over deterministic learning algorithms. Thus a lower bound which holds uniformly for any
deterministic learner would also hold over a randomization. To lower bound equation 9, we use
Lemma C.5, which relates this to the question of how informative are the query values (as measured
by Kullback-Leibler divergence) for determining the sign of θ’s coordinates. Intuitively, the more
similar the query values are, the smaller is the KL divergence and the harder it is to distinguish the
true sign of θi , leading to a larger lower bound. In addition, we are facing a powerful adversary who


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


has the complete knowledge of the problem and is able to add corruption on the query value to make
they are even more similar, which resulting a even smaller KL divergence, consequently, an even
                                  PT
larger lower bound. Let āT := T1 t=1 at represent the average action, we have
                   ( T                      )      (     T
                                                                              )
                     X
                               ∗                     1X          ∗
                 E        µθ (a ) − µθ (at ) = T E          µθ (a ) − µθ (at )
                     t=1
                                                     T t=1
                                                  ≥ T E (µθ (a∗ ) − µθ (āT ))

                                                           1             2
                                                  ≥ TE       ∥āT − θ∥
                                                           2
                                                               d
                                                                               !
                                                           1X                2
                                                  = TE            (āi − θi )
                                                           2 i=1
                                                                 d
                                                                             !
                                                        β2T X
                                                  ≥E                Iā θ <0                              (9)
                                                           2 i=1 i i
                                                                   v                  
                                                                    u d T
                                                         2
                                                    dT β           u   1 X    X
                                                  ≥           1−t                 Dt,i  .
                                                      4                 d i=1 t=1

We get the second inequality by using the fact that µθ is 1-strongly concave. We get the last inequal-
ity by using Lemma C.5, which completes the proof.
Lemma C.5 (Lemma 4 in (Shamir, 2013)). Let θ be a random vector, none of those coordinates
is supported on 0. Let v̂1 , v̂2 , . . . , v̂T be a sequence of values obtained by a deterministic learner
returning a point āT (so that the action at is a deterministic function of v̂1 , . . . , v̂t−1 and āT is a
deterministic function of v̂1 , . . . , v̂T ). Then we have
                                                 !         v                  
                                     d                      u d T
                                   X                 d      u   1 X   X
                            E             Iāi θi ≥ 1 − t                Dt,i  ,
                                   i=1
                                                     2          d i=1 t=1

                                                               t−l                                     t−l

where Dt,i = sup{θj }j̸=i DKL P(v̂t |θi > 0, {θj }j̸=i , {v̂l }l=1 )||P(v̂t |θi < 0, {θj }j̸=i , {v̂l }l=1 ) ,
DKL represents the KL divergence between two distributions.


C.2    P ROOF FOR P ROPOSITION 1:

Proposition (Proposition 1 restated). There exists an LIHF instance with ρ-Imperfect Human Feed-
                   √ linear user utility µ, and link function σ, such that any learner has to suffer
back (Definition 2.1),
RegT ≥ Ω(d max{ T , T ρ }), even with the knowledge of ρ.

Proof. The proof structure is very similar to the lower bound proof in Theorem 3.1. We start by
discussing the value of ρ. Consider the scenario when ρ ≤ 0.5.√Applying Lemma C.6 and C.1
together with linear link function, we have RegT ≥ Ω(d max{ T , T ρ }), which completes the
proof.
                                                                            1      1
Lemma C.6 ((Dani et al., 2008)). Let A = [−1, 1]d and Θ = [−T − 2 , T − 2 ]d . Consider the linear
reward function rt = θ⊤ At + ϵt , ϵt is independent standard Gaussian noise. Then for any learner,
there exists a vector θ ∈ Θ such that
                                                 exp(−2) √
                                   RegT (A, θ) ≥           d T.
                                                      8
Now, let’s focus on the scenario when ρ > 0.5 and the essence is to extend Lemma C.6 to the
scenario in presence of ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback, which is shown in Lemma C.7


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma C.7. Assume that the action space A ⊂ [−1, 1]d . Given ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback
(Definition 2.1), for stochastic linear bandit, there exists a θ ∈ [−Cκ T ρ−1 , Cκ T ρ−1 ]d such that any
learner even with the knowledge of ρ has to suffer regret no less than d8 Cκ T ρ .

Proof. The proof extends Lemma C.6 to a scenario in presence of corruption. We want to construct
a parameter family and a corruption strategy such that for all algorithm, it will occur at least Ω(dT ρ )
regret. Consider the action set A ∈ [−1, 1]d and Θ = {−β, β}d . For any learner, we can lower
bound its regret by
                                    " T d                          #
                                      XX
                  RegT (A, θ) = Eθ            (sign(θi ) − ati )θi
                                          t=1 i=1
                                       d
                                                   " T                                #
                                       X            X
                                ≥β            Eθ          I{sign(ati ) ̸= sign(θi )}
                                       i=1          t=1
                                      d                T
                                                                                            !
                                  Tβ X                 X                                T
                                ≥        Pθ                I{sign(ati ) ̸= sign(θi )} ≥
                                   2 i=1               t=1
                                                                                        2
Let’s denote                                                                          !
                                          T
                                          X                                T
                            pθi = Pθ          I{sign(ati ) ̸= sign(θi )} ≥
                                          t=1
                                                                           2
Let i ∈ [d] and θ ∈ Θ be fixed, and let θj′ = θj , for j ̸= i and θi′ = −θi . Then using Lemma C.8,
we have                                             " T                      #!
                                     1               X
                       pθi + pθi′ ≥ exp −E                DKL (Pat , Pa′ t )    .
                                     2               t=1
Pat is the distribution of corrupted reward observed by the learner after playing action at when
reward parameter is θ. Similarly, Pa′ t is the distribution of corrupted observed by the learner after
playing action at when the reward parameter is θ′ .
Lemma C.8 (Bretagnolle-Huber inequality). Let P and Q be probability measures on the same
measurable space (Ω, F). Let A ∈ F be any arbitrary event and Ac is the complement of A. Then
we have
                                            1
                           P(A) + Q(Ac ) ≥ exp (−DKL (P, Q)) .                            (10)
                                            2
In presence of adversarial corruption, for θ, the corrupted reward is
                                     X
                               r̂t =    atj θj + ati θi + ct (at |θ) + ϵt .                          (11)
                                       j̸=i

For θ′ , we have                       X
                               r̂t =          atj θj − ati θi + ct (at |θ′ ) + ϵt .                  (12)
                                       j̸=i
Consider the corruption strategy such that ct (at |θ) = −at,i θi in equation 11 and ct (at |θ′ ) = at,i θi
in equation 12. This is achievable since we assume the adversary has complete knowledge of the
problem instance. By doing so, the corrupted reward r̂t are from the same distribution regardless
whether the preference parameter is θ or θ′ . This is because θ and θ′ only differs in the i-th co-
ordinate
  hP with the magnitude   i β, and this difference could be masked by the corruption, resulting in
      T               ′
E     t=1 DKL (Pat , Pat ) = 0, which makes it indistinguishable by the learner. Notice that execut-
ing such a corruption strategy requires total corruption budget
                                 T
                                 X                        T
                                                          X
                                       |ct (at )| ≤ β           ∥at ∥∞ ≤ Cκ T ρ .                    (13)
                                 t=1                      t=1

Choose β = Cκ T ρ−1 , Equation equation 13 holds. Therefore, we have
                                                                   1
                                                   pθi + pθi′ ≥      .
                                                                   2

                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Applying an ”averaging hammer” over all θ ∈ Θ, which satisfies |Θ| = 2d , we get
                              X 1 X d              d
                                               1 XX         d
                                       p θi =         p θi ≥ .
                               |Θ| i=1        |Θ| i=1       4
                              θ∈Θ                          θ∈Θ
                                                   Pd         d
This implies that there exists a θ ∈ Θ such that    i=1 pθi ≥ 4 . Therefore we have

                                                        dCκ ρ
                                       RegT (A, θ) ≥       T ,
                                                         8
which completes the proof. We want to highlight that the corruption level each round |ct (at )| is
bounded by β∥at ∥∞ ≤ Cκ T ρ−1 ≤ Cκ tρ−1 , ∀t, satisfying definition of ρ-Imperfect Human Feed-
back.


D    P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 4.1
                                                                 √
Theorem (Theorem 4.1 restated). RoSMID satisfies RegT ≤ Õ(d max{ T , T ρ }) for any ρ-LIHF
problem.

Proof. At the beginning of the proof, we formally define self-concordance (see Definition D.1). The
input, ν-self-concordant function R, serves as a regularizor in RoSMID (see Algorithm 1).
Definition D.1. (Self-concordance.) A function R : int(A) → R is self-concordant if it satisfies

      1. R is three times continuously differentiable, convex, and approaches infinity along any
         sequence of points approaching the boundary of int(A).
                                                                                     3
      2. For every h ∈ Rd and x ∈ int(A), |∇3 R(x)[h, h, h]| ≤ 2 h⊤ ∇2 R(x)h 2 holds, where
                                   3
         |∇3 R(x)[h, h, h] := ∂t1∂∂tR2 ∂t3
                                           (x + t1 h + t2 h + t3 h)|t1 =t2 =t3 =0 .

In addition to these two conditions, if for every h ∈ Rd and x ∈ int(A), |∇R(x)⊤ h ≤
  1               1
ν 2 (h⊤ ∇2 R(x)h) 2 | for a positive real number ν, R is ν-self-concordant.

Additionally, we remind the reader of the standard assumptions (Yue & Joachims, 2009; Kumagai,
2017) used in our analysis.

      1. the action set A is a convex compact set that contains the origin, has non-empty interior,
         and is contained in a d-dimensional ball of radius R;
      2. the utility function µ : A → R is strongly concave and twice-differentiable. The following
         constants are useful for our algorithm analysis: µ is Lµ -Lipschitz, α-strongly concave, κ-
         smooth, bounded Rµ := supa,a′ µ(a) − µ(a′ ), and a∗ := arg maxa∈A µ(a) is the unique
         optimal within A;
      3. the link function σ : R → [0, 1] is smooth, rotation-symmetric (i.e. σ(x) = 1 − σ(−x)),
         and concave for any x ≥ 0. For the ease of analysis: let l1σ [resp. Lσ1 ] denote the lower
         [resp. upper] bound of the first-order derivative of σ. σ is Lσ -Lipschitz and its second-order
         derivative σ ′′ is Lσ2 -Lipschitz and upper bounded by R2σ .

Under these assumption, Lemma D.1 implies RegT defined in equation 1 and RegFO
                                                                            T defined in
equation 3 has the same order.
Lemma D.1 (Lemma 12 in Kumagai (2017)). With RegFO
                                                T defined in equation 3, we have

                                      RegT          RegT
                                        σ  ≤ RegFO
                                                T ≤      .                                         (14)
                                       L1            l1σ

                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the following, we show the proof. The main proof can be divided into four key steps. Step 1 is
natural, which quantifies the bias in gradient estimation by RoSMID due imperfect feedback from
corrupted utilities. Building on this, Step 2 develops a regret decomposition lemma for dueling
bandits under corruption, decomposing the regret into two components: regret from sub-optimal
decisions and regret from feedback error. Techniques from previous analyses of continuous dueling
bandits handle the sub-optimal decision regret, thus in Step 3, we focus on deriving new techniques
to bound the regret from feedback error, a unique challenge in our setting. We identify a tight upper
bound for this error. Finally, Step 4, the only step relying on the decaying corruption level in ρ-
imperfect human feedback, uses this assumption, along with the carefully chosen learning rate ηρ
and an iterative regret refinement process, to ensure the tightness of the analysis in Step 3, thus
completing the proof.
Step 1: quantifying bias of gradient estimation in ρ-LIHF
Our proof starts from quantifying the bias of the gradient ĝt caused by ρ-imperfect human feedback,
as shown in the following Lemma 4.1.
Lemma (Lemma 4.1 restated). The gradient ĝt in Line 6 of Algorithm 1 satisfies
                                 E (ĝt |at ) = ∇|a=at P̄t (a) − E (bt |at ) .
                       h                            1
                                                         i
where P̄t (a) := Ex∈B P(at ≻ a + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 x) (with B as the unit ball) is the smoothed prob-
                                                                                                    1
ability that at is preferred over any action a, and bt = d P(at ≻ a′t ) − P̂(at ≻ a′t ) ∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut .

Proof. If we do not have corruption (i.e. the probability for observing noisy comparative feedback
F(a, a′ ) = 1 is based on true cost difference µ(a) − µ(a′ )), then the uncorrupted gradient gt :=
F(a′t , at )d∇2 Rt (at )1/2 ut should be an unbiased estimate of ∇P̄t (at ), i.e.
                                           E(gt |at ) = ∇P̄t (at ).
We use ∇P̄t (at ) as a shorthand of ∇|a=at P̄t (a). We use Pt (a) as a shorthand of Pt (a) := σ(µ(at )−
µ(a)) equivalent to P(at ≻ a), and P̂t (a) := σ(µ(at ) − µ(a) + ct (at , a′t )), equivalent to P̂(at ≻ a)
under our modelling assumption. The proof is similar to Lemma 2.1 in Flaxman et al. (2005). Using
the Law of total expectation, we have
               E(gt |at ) = Eut [E(gt |at , ut )]
                                                         1                 1

                          = Eut dE(Pt (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut )∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut |at , ut )
                                                          1              1
                           = dE(Pt (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut )∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut |at )
                                                            1

                           = ∇Ex∈B Pt (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 x|at )
                           = ∇P̄t (at ).
We get the second inequality by using the definition of F(a′t , at ). We use the Stroke’s Theorem to
get the second last equality. The gradient which we get to perform gradient descent ĝt is corrupted.
                                  1
If we let a′t = at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut , we have
 E(ĝt |at ) = Eut (E(ĝt |at , ut ))
                                              1

             = Eut dE(P̂t (a′t )∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut |at , ut )
                                        1

             = dE P̂t (a′t )∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut |at
                   h                                 i           1

             = dE Pt (a′t ) + P̂t (a′t ) − Pt (a′t ) ∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut |at
                                                   1
                                                                  h                         1
                                                                                                     i
             = ∇Ex∈B Pt (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 x|at ) + dE P̂t (a′t ) − Pt (a′t ) ∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut |at
                                 h                                  1
                                                                            i
             = ∇P̄t (at ) + dE P̂t (a′t ) − Pt (a′t ) ∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut |at
                                 h                                  1
                                                                            i
             = E(gt |at ) + dE P̂t (a′t ) − Pt (a′t ) ∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut |at .


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We get the second last equality by using the fact that gt is unbiased, which we proved earlier. If we
defined bt as
                                        1                               1
                                                                                           1
          bt := d Pt (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut ) − P̂t (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut ) ∇2 Rt (at ) 2 ut ,

we get
                                    E(gt |at ) = E(ĝt |at ) + E [bt |at ] .


Step 2: decomposing regret for dueling bandits into regret of decision and feedback error
Core to our proof is a “regret decomposion” lemma below that upper bounds the regret by two parts:
regret of sub-optimal decision making under uncertainty, referred as regret of decision (first term in
equation 2), and feedback error (second term in equation 2).
Lemma (Lemma 4.2 restated). The RegT of Algorithm 1 satisfies:
                                                           ( T                )
                   C0              2         µ σ
                                                             X
                                                                  ⊤        ∗
          RegT ≤       log(T ) + 8d ηρ T + 2L L1 R + 2E          bt (at − aT ) ,
                   ηρ                                        t=1
                   |               {z             } |              {z         }
                                  Regret of Decision                      F eedback Error

where C0 := (2ν + 4Lσ1 κ + 4R2σ (Lµ )2 + Lµ Lσ1 κ)/λ, and a∗T := T1 a1 + (1 − T1 )a∗ .

Proof. The cornerstone of the analysis below is to separate the impact of bt from the total regret.
            " T                         #
              X
                                      ∗      Lµ Lσ1 κ
RegT ≤ 2E         (Pt (at ) − Pt (aT ) +              + 2Lµ Lσ1 R
              t=1
                                               λη ρ
        ( T                            )      ( T                         )      ( T                           )!
          X                                     X                                 X                                 Lµ Lσ1 κ
≤2 E           (P̄t (at ) − P̄t (a∗T )) + E         (Pt (at ) − P̄t (at )) + E        (P̄t (a∗T ) − Pt (a∗T ))    +          + 2Lµ Lσ1 R
          t=1                                   t=1                               t=1
                                                                                                                     ληρ
      ( T                           )
        X
                               ∗         4Lσ1 κ + 4R2σ (Lµ )2 + Lµ Lσ1 κ
≤ 2E        (P̄t (at ) − P̄t (aT )) +                                       log T + 2Lµ Lσ1 R.
        t=1
                                                       λη ρ

We get the first inequality by using Lemma D.2. We get the last inequality by because
                                 Lσ1 κ + R2σ (Lµ )2               1        Lσ κ + R2σ (Lµ )2
            P̄t (a) − Pt (a) ≤                      ∥∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut ∥2 ≤ 1                ,
                                         2                                       ληρ t
and
        ( T                        )    ( T                          )
         X                               X                               Lσ κ + R2σ (Lµ )2
      E      (Pt (at ) − Pt (a∗T )) ≤ E      (P̄t (at ) − P̄t (a∗T )) + 2 1                log T.
         t=1                             t=1
                                                                               ληρ
Lemma D.2 (Lemma 5 in Kumagai (2017)).
                         " T                      #
                          X
                                               ∗     Lµ Lσ1 κ
              RegT ≤ 2E       (Pt (at ) − Pt (aT ) +          + 2Lµ Lσ1 R.
                          t=1
                                                      λη ρ

                                PT
Then it remains to bound E{ t=1 P̄t (at ) − P̄t (a∗T )}. And we have the following.
                                                              Lσ1 α

                            ∗             ⊤            ∗                   ∗ 2
        E{P̄t (at ) − P̄t (aT )} ≤ E ∇P̂t (at )(at − aT ) −         ∥at − aT ∥
                                                                4
                                                      Lσ1 α

                                       ⊤         ∗                   ∗ 2
                                 = E gt (at − aT ) −        ∥at − aT ∥
                                                        4
                                                              Lσ1 α

                                                ⊤       ∗                   ∗ 2
                                 = E (ĝt + bt ) (at − aT ) −        ∥at − aT ∥
                                                                 4
                                                      Lσ1 α

                                       ⊤         ∗
                                 = E ĝt (at − aT ) −       ∥at − aT ∥ + E{b⊤
                                                                     ∗ 2                   ∗
                                                                                  t (at − aT )},
                                                        4


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the first and second equality is resulted from Lemma 4.1. Using the definition of at+1 in
Algorithm 1, we have
                                  ∇Rt (at+1 ) − ∇Rt (at ) = ηρ ĝt .
Therefore we have
                    Lσ1 α                                                              Lσ1 αηρ

    ⊤         ∗                  ∗ 2      1                             ⊤       ∗                      ∗ 2
E ĝt (at − aT ) −        ∥at − aT ∥ = E (∇Rt (at+1 ) − ∇Rt (at )) (at − aT ) −                 ∥at − aT ∥
                      4                  ηρ                                                4
                                                                                                   Lσ αηρ

                                          1
                                       = E DRt (a∗T , at ) + DR (at , at+1 ) − DRt (a∗T , at+1 ) − 1      ∥at − a∗T ∥2 .
                                         ηρ                                                          4

DR (a, b) is the Bregman divergence associated with R, defined by
                            DR (a, b) = R(a) − R(b) − ∇R(b)⊤ (a − b).
Then we can get equation 15 by using Lemma D.3, D.4, D.5.
            ( T                          )                             T
              X
                                     ∗      ν log(T )                X
          E       (P̄t (at ) − P̄t (aT )) ≤           + 4d2 ηρ T + E{     b⊤        ∗
                                                                           t (at − aT )}.            (15)
              t=1
                                                η ρ                   t=1

Lemma D.3 (Lemma 10 in Kumagai (2017)). Let R∗t (a) = supx∈Rd x⊤ a − Rt (a) denote the
Frenchel dual of Rt . Then we have
 T
                                                                  " T                                        #!
                        Lσ1 α

X
         ⊤        ∗                  ∗ 2   1     ∗
                                                                   X
    E ĝt (at − aT ) −        ∥at − aT ∥ ≤    R(aT ) − R(a1 ) + E      DR∗t (∇Rt (at ) − ηρ ĝt , ∇Rt (at ))    .
t=1
                          4                ηρ                      t=1
                                                   1
Lemma D.4 (Lemma 11 in Kumagai (2017)). When ηρ ≤ 2d , we have
                             DR∗t (∇Rt (at ) − ηρ ĝt , ∇Rt (at )) ≤ 4d2 ηρ2 .
Lemma D.5 (Lemma 4 in Hazan & Levy (2014)). R(a∗T ) − R(a1 ) ≤ ν log(T ).

If we let C0 := (2ν + 4Lσ1 κ + 4R2σ (Lµ )2 + Lµ Lσ1 κ)/λ, we have
                                     ( T                 )
          2ν log(T )      2
                                       X
                                            ⊤         ∗       4Lσ1 κ + 4R2σ (Lµ )2 + Lµ Lσ1 κ
RegT ≤                + 8d ηρ T + 2E       bt (at − aT ) +                                    log T + 2Lµ Lσ1 R
              ηρ                       t=1
                                                                           λη ρ
                                                  ( T                )
          C0              2          µ σ
                                                    X
                                                         ⊤         ∗
       =      log(T ) + 8d ηρ T + 2L L1 R + 2E          bt (at − aT ) ,
          ηρ                                        t=1
          |               {z              } |             {z          }
                  Regret of Decision                  F eedback Error
which completes the proof.

Step 3: upper bounding the regret from feedback error
Bounding the regret of decision term in equation 2 is standard. Thus, this step develops a novel
upper bound for bounding the regret from feedback error, as shown below.
Lemma (Lemma 4.3 restated). The feedback error term in equation 2 can be bounded as follows:
  ( T              )             ( T                                     )
   X                       √       X√                    p                              √ p
E     b⊤        ∗
       t (at − aT )  ≤ C1 d ηρ E        t|ct (at , a′t )| µ(a∗ ) − µ(at ) + C2 dT ρ + 2d λ ηρ T ,
    t=1                                  t=1
              q
                  2λ(Lσ )2                  p
where C1 :=          α     , and C2 := 2Lσ R supa∈A λmax (∇2 R(a)) + 2ϕ.

Proof. In the following,
                       nPwe will analyze theo expected cumulative sum of the bias bt on the to-
                          T    ⊤         ∗
tal regret, which is E       b
                          t=1 t  (at − a T ) . By Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, b⊤         ∗
                                                                               t (at − aT ) ≤
∥bt ∥2 ∥(at − a∗T )∥2 . We can bound the ∥bt ∥2 by the following.
                                           1                               1
                                                                                  2
       b⊤
        t bt = d
                 2
                     Pt (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut ) − P̂t (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut ) u⊤   2
                                                                                    t ∇ Rt (at )ut
                                        1                               1
                                                                              2
             ≤ Pt (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut ) − P̂t (at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut ) d2 λmax (∇2 Rt (at )).


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We get the first equality by Lemma 4.1. We get the inequality by using the fact ∥ut ∥2 = 1. If we let
                        1
a′t = at + ∇2 Rt (at )− 2 ut , then we have
                |Pt (a′t ) − P̂t (a′t )| = |σ(f (at ) − f (a′t )) − σ(f (at ) − f (a′t ) + ct (at , a′t ))|
                                      ≤ min (2, Lσ |ct (at , a′t )|) .

We get the first equality by using the definition of Pt (at ) and P̂t (at ). We get the first inequality by
using the Lipschitz property of σ. Therefore, we have
                                 p
                       ∥bt ∥2 ≤ d λmax (∇2 Rt (at )) min {2, Lσ |ct (at , a′t )|} .
If we use λ∗R := supa∈A λmax ∇2 R(a) , then we have


                λmax (∇2 Rt (at )) = λmax (∇2 R(at )) + ληρ t + 2ϕ ≤ λ∗R + 2ϕ + ληρ t.

Therefore we have
  ( T               )    ( T                    )
   X                      X
        ⊤        ∗                         ∗
E      bt (at − aT ) ≤ E     ∥bt ∥2 ∥at − aT ∥2
    t=1                              t=1
   ( T                                                              )
    X p
                                      σ           ′            ∗
≤E     (d λmax (∇2 Rt (at )) min (2, L |ct (at , at )|))∥at − aT ∥2
          t=1
   ( T                                                           )
    X p
           ∗                       σ           ′            ∗
≤E     (d λR + 2ϕ + ληρ t min (2, L |ct (at , at )|))∥at − aT ∥2
          t=1
   ( T                                                      )    ( T                                                    )
    X p                                                           X p
≤E     (d λ∗R + 2ϕ min (2, Lσ |ct (at , a′t )|) ∥at − a∗T ∥2 + E     (d ληρ t min (2, Lσ |ct (at , a′t )|) ∥at − a∗T ∥2
          t=1                                                                        t=1
                            ( T                                          )
                             X√
      σ          ρ                                     ′            ∗
        p            p                     σ
≤ 2RdL    ∗
         λR + 2ϕT + d ληρ E     t min (2, L |ct (at , at )|) ∥at − aT ∥2                                      (16)
                                                 t=1
                                      ( T                                         )
                                       X√
           σ    ρ                                                ′            ∗
       p             p         p                     σ
≤ 2RdL   ∗
        λR + 2ϕT + 2d ληρ T + d ληρ E     t min (2, L |ct (at , at )|) ∥at − a ∥2
                                                                  t=1
                                                                                                (17)
                                                                ( T                                                  !)
                                                                 X√
                                                                                                r
         σ
           p
              ∗         ρ
                               p             p                        σ           ′                2     ∗
 ≤ 2RdL      λR + 2ϕT + 2d ληρ T + d ληρ E                 t min (2, L |ct (at , at )|) min 2R,      (µ(a ) − µ(at ))   .
                                                      t=1
                                                                                                   α
                                                                                                (18)
                                                                   T
We get equation 16 by using the fact that ∥at − a∗T ∥2 ≤ 2R, √ t=1 |ct (at , a′t )| ≤ T ρ . We get
                                                                P
                                                √         √
equation 17 the definition of a∗T , and the q
                                            fact a + b ≤ a + b. Using the α-strong convexity

of µ, we have ∥at − a∗ ∥2 ≤ min 2R, α2 (µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )) we get the last inequality, which
completes the proof.

Step 4: The iterative regret refinement analysis and resultant optimal learning rate
                                              P
                                                  T       ∗                     1
Lemma (Lemma 4.4 restated). If A = E              t=1 [µ(a  ) − µ(a t )]  ≤ O(T 2 +ψ ) for some ψ ∈
                                   P                                           ψ
                                     T     ρ− 21                             1
                                                 p
[0, 12 ), then we must have B = E    t=1 t         µ(a∗ ) − µ(at ) ≤ O(T − 4 + 2 +ρ ).

Proof. To provepLemma 4.4, it is equivalent to prove the following Lemma D.6. If Lemma D.6
holds, let nt = E(µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )), mt = min (2, Lσ |ct (at , a′t )|), proves Lemma 4.4.
                        PT              1
Lemma D.6. Consider t=1 n2t ≤ C ′ T 2 +α , with constants α ≥ 0, C ′ > 0. In addition, nt is
uniformly upper bounded by a constant K.√Specifically,√we have 0 ≤ nt ≤ K, ∀t. mt ≤ ck tρ−1
                                   PT                                1   α
with constant ck ≥ 0. Then we have t=1 tmt nt ≤ 5 C ′ ck T − 4 + 2 +ρ .


                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Using Abel’s equality (Lemma D.7), we have
                                            T                                  T
                                                                                                !
                                            X √                      √         X
                                                      tmt nt ≤           T              mt nt
                                            t=1                                t=1
               PT                1                                      PT           √  3 α
Since we have t=1 n2t ≤ C ′ T 2 +α and 0 ≤ nt ≤ K, ∀t, we have t=1 nt ≤ C ′ T 4 + 2 , ∀t.
                       −1+ρ           −1+ρ    ρ−2
Moreover, for t ≥ 1, t      − (t + 1)      ≤t      holds for all t ≥ 1. This is because

                                                 1            1
                            f (t) = t−1+ρ (1 + )−1+ρ + − 1 .
                                                  t           t
is decreasing over t ≥ 1 and limt→∞ f (t) = 0. Consequently, applying Abel’s Summation Equation
again, we have
                                        −1 X
         T               T
                              !       T       t
                                                  !
        X              X              X
            mt nt =        nt mT +              ni (mt − mt+1 )
        t=1                t=1                       t=1       i=1
                                                                              −1
                                                                            T        t
                                                                                                   !
                       √               3  α
                                                    −1+ρ
                                                               √            X        X
                                       4+ 2                                                            t−1+ρ − (t + 1)−1+ρ

                   ≤       C ′c   kT            T          +       C ′ ck                     ni
                                                                             t=1        i=1
                                                                              −1
                                                                            T        t
                                                                                                   !
                       √               3  α
                                                    −1+ρ
                                                               √            X        X
                   ≤       C ′c   kT   4+ 2     T          +       C ′ ck                     ni       t−2+ρ
                                                                             t=1        i=1
                                                                            T −1
                       √               3    α                  √            X       3    α
                   ≤       C ′ ck T 4 + 2 T −1+ρ +                 C ′ ck          t 4 + 2 t−2+ρ
                                                                             t=1
                      √           1   α
                   ≤ 5 C ′ ck T − 4 + 2 +ρ .
                      Pt
Since 0 ≤ nt ≤ K, i=1 ni is increasing and the increasing  rate is upper bound by t. Together
                    PT           √       3   α PT −1    Pt           − 21 +ρ
                                                                                              Pt
with the constraint t=1 nt ≤ C ′ T 4 + 2 , t=1              i=1 ni t         is optimized when i=1 ni
                          √      3   α
increasing in the speed of C ′ t 4 + 2 . Because of this, the second last inequality holds.
Lemma D.7. (Abel’s Summation Equation (Williams, 1963)). For any numbers ak , bk , we have
                   n          n
                                   !       n−1    k
                                                      !
                  X           X            X X
                     a k bk =    bk a n +           bi (ak − ak+1 ).
                       k=1                      k=1                    k=1         i=1


After establishing Lemma 4.4, we can use it to prove the induction claim (Lemma 4.5). The chal-
lenge in this proof lies in identifying the constant K, which must hold across all iterations of the
analysis to ensure the bound remains stable and does not diverge. This requires careful refinement
of the analysis and calculations.
                                                                                             √
                                                                                               log T
                                                              p
Lemma (Lemma 4.5 restated). Consider T >                         2Lµ Lσ1 R and ηρ = dT max{1/2,ρ}       .
                                           3 −ρ
                            √              2
If RegT      ≤ 144dK log T T ρ+ 2k for some integer k, then we must also have
                                     3 −ρ
                      √              2
RegT n ≤ 144dK log T T ρ+ 2k+1 .                K
                                                o is a instance-dependent constant, where K :=
                                  √
max C0 , √Clog2 Cκ
                 T
                   , (L σ ρ 2
                         Tκ ) , 2   λRC   κ L σ
                                                 , C0 and C2 defined in Lemma 4.2 and 4.3 respectively,

Proof. In the following, we denote
                                                                                              r                      !
                                                                                                   2
              mt := min (2, L          σ
                                           |ct (at , a′t )|) , nt := min            2R,                  ∗
                                                                                                     (µ(a ) − µ(at ))
                                                                                                   α


                                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Continue from equation 18, we have the following.
The Base Case: When k = 1, let C3 = C2 dT ρ + 2d ληρ T , we have
                                                p

                                                                     T
                                                                                  !
                C0             2          µ σ
                                                            p       X   √
         RegT ≤    log(T ) + 8d ηρ T + 2L L1 R + 2C3 + 2d ληρ E           tmt nt .                  (19)
                ηρ                                                  t=1
                                                                    ( T           )
                C0                                                    X√
                   log(T ) + 8d2 ηρ T + 2Lµ Lσ1 R + 2C3 + 4dR ληρ E
                                                             p
              ≤                                                               tmt                   (20)
                ηρ                                                    t=1
                                                                       T
                                                                               !
                C0             2          µ σ
                                                             p        X
              ≤    log(T ) + 8d ηρ T + 2L L1 R + 2C3 + 4dR ληρ T          mt                        (21)
                ηρ                                                    t=1
                C0
                   log(T ) + 8d2 ηρ T + 2Lµ Lσ1 R + 2C3 + 4dLσ R ληρ Cκ T ρ .
                                                                p
              ≤                                                                                     (22)
                ηρ
We get equation 19 according to Lemma 4.2 and 4.3. We get equation 20 because of E (nt ) ≤ 2R.
We get equation 21 by Abel’s Summation Equation (see Lemma D.7). We get equation 22
because of corruption budget. Choosing the learning rate ηρ according to Theorem 4.1, we obtain
            √            ρ+1
RegT ≤ 144 log T KdT 2 . This confirms the validity of the claim when k = 1.

The Induction Argument: Let’s assume that the claim holds true for a general step k. In the
following, we will demonstrate that the claim also holds true for step k + 1. Because of Equation
                                                                   √          3/2−ρ
                                                                            ρ+ k
equation 14 and the induction claim, we obtain RegFO       144
                                                     T ≤ l1σ dK log T T
                                                                                2   . This suggests
that
                       T
                      X                          144                  3/2−ρ
                          E (µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )) ≤ σ dK log T T ρ+ 2k .
                                                        p

                      t=1
                                                  l1
By Jensen’s inequality, we have
                         ( r                                  )       r
                                  2  p                                    2p
           E(nt ) = min 2,          E  µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )            ≤          E (µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )).
                                  α                                       α
Therefore we have
                         T
                                        !             T
                           √
                                                r
                         X                          2 X√     p
                    E          tmt nt       ≤             tmt E (µ(a∗ ) − µ(at )).
                         t=1
                                                    α t=1
By the definition of ρ-Imperfect Human Feedback, we have |ct (at , a′t )| is upper bounded by
Ck t−1+ρ .
                                               √ PT √
Therefore, using Lemma 4.4 we can upper bound λ t=1 tmt nt by
                                         s
                  √ X T                                       √
                         √                 2λ                      3     3/2−ρ
                   λ       tmt nt ≤ 60Lσ
                                             σ (log T )0.25 Cκ dKT 2 ρ+ 2k+1
                     t=1
                                           αl1
                                     √
Since λ ≤ αl1σ /2, choosing ηρ = d1 log T
                                     T ρ , we have
                                            √

                               C2                  3/2−ρ   p                 p
        RegT ≤ 2d C0 + √             + 60Cκ KT 2k+1          log T T ρ + 12Kd log T T ρ
                               log T
                                     3/2−ρ
               ≤ 144dK log T T ρ+ 2k+1 .
                         p

The claim holds true for step k+1. Therefore, it implies that the claim holds true for all k. Repeating
this process infinitely many times, we obtain
                                                  p
                                     RegT ≤ O d log T T ρ ,
which completes the proof when ρ ∈ [0.5, 1].


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     P ROOF FOR P ROPOSITION 2
                                                                                  PT
Proposition (Proposition 2 restated). If the total corruption level satisfies t=1 |ct (at , a′t )| ≤
O(T ρ ), then for any α ∈ [ 12 , 1), if the utility function is strongly concave, for sufficiently large
                                             √
round T , by choosing learning rate ηρ := log      T −α
                                                2d T
                                                            √      1
       1. (Robustness) RoSMID incurs RegT ≤ Õ(dT α +           dT 2 (1−α)+ρ + dT ρ ).
       2. (Efficiency) There exists a strongly concave utility function µ and a link function σ such
          that RegT suffered by RoSMID is at least Ω (T α ) in scenario without corruption.

E.1    P ROOF FOR ROBUSTNESS S TATEMENT IN P ROPOSITION 2

Proof. From Lemma 4.3, we know
  ( T               )                             ( T                                          )
   X                                               X√
        ⊤        ∗          σ          ρ                                     ′            ∗
                              p            p                     σ
E      bt (at − aT ) ≤ 2RdL     ∗
                               λR + 2ϕT + d ληρ E     t min (2, L |ct (at , at )|) ∥at − aT ∥2
      t=1                                                          t=1
                                                             T
                                                             X √
                        ≤ 2RdLσ     λ∗R + 2ϕT ρ + 2Rd ληρ Lσ     t|ct (at , a′t )|
                                   p                 p

                                                                       t=1

                        ≤ 2RdLσ     λ∗R + 2ϕT ρ + 2Rd ληρ T Lσ T ρ .
                                   p                 p

We get the second inequality by using the fact that the diameter of the action space of R. We get the
last inequality by using Abel Summation Equation (see Lemma D.7). Therefore, by Lemma 4.2, we
have
               C0
                  log(T ) + 8d2 ηρ T + 2Lµ Lσ1 R + 4RdLσ λ∗R + 2ϕT ρ + 4Rd ληρ T Lσ T ρ .
                                                           p                      p
      RegT ≤
               ηρ
                 √
Choosing ηρ = log T −α
               2d T    , α ∈ [0.5, 1), we have
             p             p                                   √                   1
RegT ≤ 2dC0 log T T α + 4d log T T 1−α + 4RdLσ λ∗R + 2ϕT ρ + 4R dLσ (log T )0.25 T 2 (1−α) T ρ + 2Lµ Lσ1 R
                                                   p
            p            √          1   1

     ≤ O d log T T α + d(log T ) 4 T 2 (1−α) T ρ + dT ρ ,

which completes the proof of robustness statement.

E.2    P ROOF FOR E FFICIENCY S TATEMENT IN P ROPOSITION 2

Proof. The robustness statement in Proposition 2 implies that RoSMID could afford agnostic cor-
                    1+α
ruption level O(T 2 ). If Lemma E.1 holds, this implies that there exists a hard instance which
makes RoSMID incur regret in order of Ω(T α ) in non-corrupt setting. We can prove this by contra-
diction. Assume the efficiency statement in Proposition 2 is not true, which implies that for all µ,
and σ, there exists an ϵ > 0 such that RegT = c0 T α−ϵ , for some constant c0 > 0, we assume ϵ to
be the least possible. In this scenario, when we consider a linear link function σ(x) = 1+x
                                                                                         2 , Lemma
                                                  √     1+α−ϵ
E.1 implies that an agnostic corruption budget 2 c0 T 2 suffices to induce linear regret, which
contradicts the robustness statement in Proposition 2.
Lemma E.1. For any algorithm G incurs regret RegT ≤ c0 T α , for some constant c0 > 0, on
learning from bandit with reward feedback for strongly concave utilities µ in non-corrupted setting,
then there exists an instance µ such that G will suffer linear regret under agnostic corruption with
       √      1+α
budget c0 T 2 .

Proof. Consider the scenario when d = 2, the action space A := {(a1 , a2 ) : a1 ≥ 0, a2 ≥
0, a1 + a2 ≤ 1}, the utility function µθ (a) = ⟨θ, a⟩ − 21 ∥a∥22 with θ := [1, 0]. In this scenario,
the optimal action is a∗ := [1, 0]. Assume that the adversary want to “fool” the algorithm G to
make it believe the θ := [1, 1], with optimal arm a∗ = [ 21 , 21 ], each round, the corruption it should
introduce is ct (at ) = at2 , where ati is the i-th coordinate value of action at . To make reward


                                                  27
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  indistinguishable from these two environments, the total corruption budget which the adversary has
           PT                                                     PT
  to pay is t=1 |at2 |. We know that G incurs regret RegT := t=1 ⟨θ, a∗ −at ⟩− 12 ∥a∗ ∥22 + 12 ∥at ∥22 =
  1           1 2     1 2          α
  2 − at1 + 2 at1 + 2 at2 ≤ c0 T . Given this constraint, the maximum possible corruption paid by
                                                                             PT            √        α+1
  the adversary to make θ = [1, 1] and θ = [1, 0] indistinguishable is max t=1 |at2 | = c0 T 2 .
                                                          √     α+1
  Therefore, for any agnostic corruption no less than c0 T 2 , G can not distinguish θ = [1, 0] and
  θ = [1, 1] and has to incur linear regret in either of these environments.


  F     P ROOF FOR P ROPOSITION 3:
  In this section, we present the regret upper for dueling bandit gradient descent Yue & Joachims
  (2009) in presence of arbitrary and agnostic corruption. Before presenting the proof, we make
  several remarks. First, in Yue & Joachims (2009), the utility function µ is assumed to be strictly
  concave to ensure the uniqueness of the maximizer. However, in scenarios where the maximizer is
  unique within the action set for a concave utility function µ, the requirement for “strictness” can
  be relaxed. Second, we highlight the notation differences. We use a to denote actions while Yue
  & Joachims (2009) uses w. In our proof, we define Pt (a) := σ (µ(at ) − µ(a)) to represent the
  probability of the event at ≻ a. While in Yue & Joachims (2009), it is denoted as ct (w). Just to
  highlight, its corrupted version P̂t (a) := σ (µ(at ) − µ(a) + ct (at , a)) is newly introduced in our
  paper. Moreover, P̄t (a) := Ex∈B [Pt (PA (a + δx))] is denoted as ϵ̂t (w) + 21 in Yue & Joachims
  (2009). The definition of F (PA (at + δut ) , at ) is same as Xt (PW (wt + δut )) defined in Yue &
  Joachims (2009), except different notation. We remark PA (a) represent the projection of action a
  on A.
  Algorithm 3: Dueling Bandit Gradient Descent (DBGD) (Yue & Joachims, 2009)
  Input: Exploration rate δ, exploitation rate γ, initial action a1 = 0 ∈ A.
1 for t ∈ [T ] do
2     Sample unit vector ut uniformly and set a′t = PA (at + δut ).
3     Present action pair (at , a′t ) to user and receive corrupted dueling feedback F̂(a′t , at ).
4     Compute gradient ĝt = − dδ F̂(a′t , at )ut .
5     Set learning rate η = γδd and update at+1 = PA (at − ηĝt ).

                                                                                    PT
  Proposition (Proposition 3 restated). If the total corruption level satisfies t=1 |ct (at , a′t )| ≤
  O(T ρ ), then for any α ∈ (0, 14 ], if utility function µ is generally concave, for a sufficiently large
                                                √
  round T , choosing γ := √RT and δ := √13L2Rd
                                           σ Lµ T α
                                                    for Algorithm 3
                                                                        √        √
        1. (Robustness) RegT incurred by Algorithm 3 satisfies RegT ≤ O( dT 1−α + dT α+ρ ).
        2. (Efficiency) There exists a linear utility function
                                                               µ and a link function σ such that RegT
           suffered by Algorithm 3 is at least Ω T 1−α in scenario without corruption.

  F.1   P ROOF FOR ROBUSTNESS S TATEMENT IN P ROPOSITION 3

  Proof. The proof of Theorem 3 builds on the proof of Yue & Joachims (2009), where we extend it to
  a setting in presence of agnostic corruption. The proof follows Step 1-3 introduced in Theorem 4.1.
  Similarly, in Step 1, we decompose bias in the gradient caused by corruption. Notice that without
  corruption, DBGD performs expected gradient ascent, where the gradient gt is defined as follows
                                           d
                                   gt = − F (PA (at + δut ) , at ) ut .
                                           δ
  In the presence of adversarial corruption, the corrupted gradient is
                                           d
                                   ĝt = − F̂ (PA (at + δut ) , at ) ut .
                                           δ
  Therefore, we quantify the bias E(bt |at ) in the following lemma.


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma F.1. Let Pt (a) represent the likelihood of action at being preferred over a, where Pt (a) :=
σ(µ(at ) − µ(a)). Likewise, the corrupted version is defined as P̂t (a) = σ(µ(at ) − µ(a) + ct (at , a)).
The smoothed version of Pt over A is P̄t (a) := Ex∈B [Pt (PA (a + δx))]. Let  a′t = PA (at + δu         t ),
                                                  d      ′                      d       ′          ′
where ut is uniformly sampled from S and ĝt = − δ F̂ (at , at ) ut . Let bt := δ P̂t (at ) − Pt (at ) ut .
We have E(ĝt |at ) = E(∇P̄t (at )|at ) − E(bt |at ).

Proof. (Proof for Lemma F.1). Since a′t := PA (at + δut ), we have
            E(ĝt |at ) = Eut (E(ĝt |at , ut ))
                            d
                        = − Eut E(F̂(a′t , at )ut |at , ut )
                            δ
                            d
                        = − E P̂t (a′t )ut |at
                            δ
                            d  h                                i
                        = − E Pt (a′t ) + P̂t (a′t ) − Pt (a′t ) ut |at
                            δ
                                                               d h                        i
                        = ∇Ex∈B (Pt (PA (at + δx))|at ) − E P̂t (a′t ) − Pt (a′t ) ut |at              (23)
                                                               δ
                                        d h                             i
                        = ∇P̄t (at ) − E P̂t (a′t ) − Pt (a′t ) ut |at
                                        δ
                                        d h                             i
                        = E(gt |at ) − E P̂t (a′t ) − Pt (a′t ) ut |at .                               (24)
                                        δ
We get the equation equation 23 by using Lemma F.2. We get equation equation 24 by using Lemma
F.3.
Lemma F.2 (Lemma 2 in Yue & Joachims (2009)). Fix δ > 0, over random unit vector u, we have
                                                   δ
                                                     ∇P̄t (a).
                                    E[Pt (PA (a + δu))u] =
                                                   d
Lemma F.3 (Lemma 1 in Yue & Joachims (2009)). EF ,u [F(a′t , at )u] = −Eu [Pt (a′t )u].



In Step 2, we decompose regret under dueling bandits into two parts, regret of decision and feedback
error.
                                                                           σ
                                                                  L
Lemma F.4 (Regret Decomposition for DBGD). Define λ := Lσ −δL         µ L , L2 is the Lipschitz con-
           ′
                    √                                                    2

stant for σ , γ = R/ T , for bt defined in Lemma F.1, we have
                                  √                 !        T
                             2Rd T                         X
                                              σ µ
                                                                E b⊤          ∗

                 RegT ≤ λ              + 13δL L T + 2λ              t (at − a ) .
                                 δ                          t=1
                         |             {z            } |           {z            }
                                   Regret of Decision                F eedback Error


Proof. Because of Lemma F.5, we have
             " T                      #  T
              X                          X
                                    ∗
                                           E λ∇P̄t (at )(at − a∗ ) + (3 + λ)δLσ Lµ

           E      P̄t (at ) − P̄t (a ) ≤
                 t=1                          t=1
                  T
                  X
             =λ          E(E(gt |at )⊤ (at − a∗ )) + (3 + λ)δLσ Lµ T
                   t=1
                  T
                  X
             =λ          E(E(ĝt + bt |at )⊤ (at − a∗ )) + (3 + λ)δLσ Lµ T
                   t=1
                  T
                  X                               T
                                                  X
             =λ          E(ĝt⊤ (at − a∗ )) + λ         E(b⊤        ∗              σ µ
                                                           t (at − a )) + (3 + λ)δL L T
                   t=1                            t=1


                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                               σ
Lemma F.5 (Lemma 4 in Yue & Joachims (2009)). Fix δ ∈ (0, LLµ L2 ), for λ defined in Lemma F.4,
we have
          " T                     #  T
            X                        X
                                ∗
                                       E λ∇P̄t (at )⊤ (at − a∗ ) + (3 + λ)δLσ Lµ .

        E     P̄t (at ) − P̄t (a ) ≤
               t=1                           t=1


Since at+1 = PA (at − ηĝt ), and η = γδd , by applying the telescoping sum and because a1 = 0,
∥gt ∥2 ≤ G, ∀t, we have
                            T                           2
                                                               T ηG2

                           X                           R
                               E ĝt⊤ (at − a∗ ) ≤ λ

                        λ                                  +           .
                           t=1
                                                        2η        2



Noticing that ∥bt ∥2 ≤ dδ min (2, Lσ |ct (at , a′t )|). Moreover, ∥at − a∗ ∥2 ≤ 2R. Therefore, in Step 3,
we can control the feedback error by the following.
              PT          ⊤        ∗
                                                     σ ρ
Lemma F.6.       t=1 E bt (at − a ) ≤ 2RdL T /δ.


Proof. (Proof for Lemma F.6).
                          T                                  T
                          X                             dX
                                E(bt (at − a∗ )) ≤ 2R         min (2, Lσ |ct (at , a′t )|)
                          t=1
                                                        δ t=1
                                                                 T
                                                        dLσ X
                                               ≤ 2R            |ct (at , a′t )|
                                                         δ t=1
                                                        dLσ T ρ
                                               = 2R             .
                                                          δ

                                                                                   hP                         i
                                                                                       T                     ∗
Lemma F.7 (Lemma 3 in Yue & Joachims (2009)). RegT ≤ 2E                                t=1 P̄t (at ) − P̄t (a )   +
5δLσ Lµ T

Set G = dδ , and by Lemma F.7, we have
                                      √           !
                                  2Rd T       σ µ       λdLσ T ρ
                      RegT ≤ λ          + 13δL L T + 4R          .
                                     δ                     δ

                                      √                                  √                  4
                                                                               2RdLµ L2
Therefore, by choosing δ := √13L2Rd
                                σ Lµ T α
                                         , γ := √RT , and T >             √
                                                                              13Lσ Lµ Lσ
                                                                                                , we have
                                √                     √
                      RegT ≤ 2λT 26RdLσ Lµ T 1−α + 2Lσ 26RdLσ Lµ T α+ρ .
              σ
                  √           α
           L          σ
                13L L T √ µ
λT = Lσ √13L σ Lµ T α −Lµ L 2Rd
                                , completes the proof.
                                2



F.2   P ROOF FOR E FFICIENCY S TATEMENT IN P ROPOSITION 3

Proof. The robustness statement in Proposition 3 implies that DBGD could afford agnostic cor-
ruption level O(T 1−α ). This implies that there exists a hard instance which makes DBGD attain
regret in order of Ω(T 1−α ) in non-corrupt setting, formally described as follows. To start a proof by
contradiction, we assume that the efficiency statement in Proposition 3 is false. Specifically, for all
problem instance µ, σ, there exist a ϵ > 0, such that RegT ≤ O(T 1−α−ϵ ). We assume ϵ to be the
least possible. In particular, there exists a pair of instance µ, σ such that RegT = c0 T 1−α−ϵ , c0 is
a positive constant. In other words, it says that there exists a pair of instance µ, σ such that DBGD
suffers regret in Θ(T 1−α−ϵ ).


                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consider the following problem instance. µ(a) = θ⊤ a, specifically µ is linear function. Let d = 2
with action set A1 := {(a1 , a2 ) : a1 ≥ 0, a2 ≥ 0, 21 a1 + a2 − 14 ≤ 0} with θ = [ 21 , 12 ]. The
optimal arm is a1 = [ 21 , 0], which is unique. Let the link function σ(x) = 12 + 21 x. It is easy to
verify that it is rotational symmetric and Lipschitz. Denote RegT as the regret occurred by DBGD
on this problem instance. We know RegT ≤ O(T 1−α−ϵ ). Consequently, it implies that a2 is at
most proposed 8c0 T 1−α−ϵ times. This is because RegT ≤ c0 T 1−α−ϵ and if the proposed action
pair (at , a′t ) including a2 at round t, it occurs regret at least 81 .
Now consider a different problem instance with the same µ, σ but different action set, which is
A2 := {(a1 , a2 ) : a1 ≥ 0, a2 ≥ 0, 23 a1 + a2 − 43 ≤ 0}. The optimal arm in this action set
a2 = [0, 43 ], which is also unique. Proposing arm a1 = [ 21 , 0] occurs at least 18 regret. Consider an
adversary that pulls the utility of a2 from 38 down to 18 whenever it is pulled at a cost of ct (At ) = 14 . It
is equivalent to say that every time when the proposed arm w falls in the region W = {a1 ≥ 0, a2 ≥
0, 21 a1 + a2 − 41 ≥ 0, 32 a1 + a2 − 34 ≤ 0}, we assume that the utility is sampled from θ⊤ PA1 (w)
and |ct (w)| = |θ⊤ PA1 (w) − θ⊤ w| ≤ 41 . Choosing the total corruption budget as 2c0 T 1−α−ϵ , the
adversary can afford to corrupt 8c0 T 1−α−ϵ times.
This means that as long as the adversary is corrupting, the utility observed in the first problem
instance is exactly the same as the utility observed in the second problem instance, in which we
pull a2 as most 8c0 T 1−α−ϵ . However, a2 is the optimal arm in the second problem instance, which
implies that the regret occurred on the second problem instance is at least T − 8c0 T 1−α−ϵ , which is
linear in T . This contradicts the robustness statement in Proposition 3, which says that when agnostic
corruption is 2c0 T 1−α−ϵ , the regret upper bound is O(T 1−ϵ ), which is sublinear. To reconcile the
conflicts, we must have the efficiency statement in Proposition 3 true to make the agnostic corruption
budget at least Ω(T 1−α ) to make the parallel world argument valid.


G     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we list all the experiment details. At the beginning, we introduce the regret order
fitting method, and baseline algorithms for comparison.
Fitted Order of Regret. We introduce the methodology that we use to compute the order of RegT
in terms of the number of iteration, T . To fit the order of the regret, we first convert it into log scale.
Then we input the last 1% of data, run linear regression, and use ordinary least squares to estimate
the slope of the line, which is the fitted order of RegT .
Baseline Algorithms. We consider three baseline algorithms for comparison, Doubler (Ailon et al.,
2014) and Sparring (Ailon et al., 2014)
Doubler is the first approach that transforms a dueling bandit problem into a standard multi-armed
bandit (MAB) problem. It operates in epochs of exponentially increasing length: in each epoch, the
left arm is sampled from a fixed distribution, and the right arm is selected using a MAB algorithm
to minimize regret against the left arm. The feedback received by the MAB algorithm is the number
of wins the right arm achieves compared to the left arm. Under linear link assumption, Doubler has
been proven to experience regret as the same order as underlying MAB algorithm. For continuous
action space and general concave utility, we choose Bandit Gradient Descent (BGD, (Flaxman et al.,
2004)), with regret O(T 3/4 ), as the underlying MAB algorithm.
Sparring initializes two MAB instances and lets them compete against each other. It is a heuristic
improvement over Doubler. Although it does not come with a regret upper bound guarantee, it is
reported to enjoy better performance compared to Doubler (Ailon et al., 2014). We also choose
BGD as the underlying MAB algorithm.
To validate efficiency-robustness trade-off in Proposition 2 and Proposition 3, we try different α
values. In the first row of Figure 3, we consider α = 0.05 for DBGD and α = 0.9 for RoSMID.
We consider ρ ∈ [0.5, 0.95]. According to the theoretical prediction, both DBGD and RoSMID
can tolerate at most O(T 0.95 ) agnostic corruption, which aligns with experiment results. This is
because the estimated order of regret is less than 1. In the second row of Figure 3, we consider
α = 0.1 for DBGD and α = 0.8 for RoSMID. According to the theoretical prediction, both DBGD
and RoSMID can tolerate at most O(T 0.9 ) agnostic corruption. From the figure, we can see they


                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


have smaller fitted order of regret when ρ = 0.5 while at a cost of tolerating smaller magnitude of
agnostic corruption (it has linear regret when ρ = 0.95), which reveals intrinsic tradeoff between
efficiency and robustness.


Figure 3: In the first row, we consider α = 0.05 for DBGD and α = 0.9 for RoSMID. In the second
row, we consider α = 0.1 for DBGD and α = 0.8 for RoSMID. Given the α, for each algorithm,
we tested its performance under ρ-Imperfect Human feedback with ρ = 0.5, 0.8, 0.95. For each ρ,
we presented a line plot of the average regret over five simulations, accompanied by ± one standard
deviation shown by the shaded region. In the legend, o denotes the estimated line slope, calculated
using least squares on the last 1% of the data.


G.1   C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY

Firstly, we emphasize that our robustified algorithm retains the same computational complexity
as the originals. This indicates that incorporating robustness does not compromise computational
efficiency, ensuring the practicality and scalability of the enhanced algorithm for real-world appli-
cations. Specifically, RoSMID has a running time of O(d3 T ), where the d3 term arises from the
singular value decomposition. Similarly, the robustified DBGD algorithm runs in O(dT ), assuming
that PA (at + δut ) can be efficiently computed through matrix transformations.
As our work is the first to address corruption-robust learning from a continuous-action strictly con-
cave utility, there is no directly comparable literature for this exact setting. However, we provide
relevant comparisons for reference. RCDB (Di et al., 2024), designed for corruption-robust learning
in a linear contextual dueling bandit framework, has a running time of O(K 2 d2 T ), where K is the
number of actions. Similarly, Versatile-DB (Saha & Gaillard, 2022), which addresses dueling bandit
problems in a multi-armed bandit setting under adversarial attacks, has a running time of O(K 2 T ),
where K represents the number of arms. K 2 comes from solving arg maxx∈S (⟨x, y⟩−f (x)) using
second order Newton methods and f is a convex function.


                                                 32
