Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ICLR: I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING OF R EPRESENTATIONS
 Core Francisco Park∗1,2,3 , Andrew Lee∗4 , Ekdeep Singh Lubana∗1,3 , Yongyi Yang∗1,3,5 ,
 Maya Okawa1,3 , Kento Nishi1,4 , Martin Wattenberg4 , & Hidenori Tanaka1,3
 1
   CBS-NTT Program in Physics of Intelligence, Harvard University
 2
   Department of Physics, Harvard University
 3
   Physics & Informatics Lab, NTT Research Inc.
 4
   SEAS, Harvard University
 5
   CSE, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor



                                             A BSTRACT
         Recent work has demonstrated that semantics specified by pretraining data influ-
         ence how representations of different concepts are organized in a large language
         model (LLM). However, given the open-ended nature of LLMs, e.g., their ability
         to in-context learn, we can ask whether models alter these pretraining semantics
         to adopt alternative, context-specified ones. Specifically, if we provide in-context
         exemplars wherein a concept plays a different role than what the pretraining data
         suggests, do models reorganize their representations in accordance with these
         novel semantics? To answer this question, we take inspiration from the theory
         of conceptual role semantics and define a toy “graph tracing” task wherein the
         nodes of the graph are referenced via concepts seen during training (e.g., apple,
         bird, etc.) and the connectivity of the graph is defined via some predefined struc-
         ture (e.g., a square grid). Given exemplars that indicate traces of random walks on
         the graph, we analyze intermediate representations of the model and find that as
         the amount of context is scaled, there is a sudden re-organization from pretrained
         semantic representations to in-context representations aligned with the graph
         structure. Further, we find that when reference concepts have correlations in their
         semantics (e.g., Monday, Tuesday, etc.), the context-specified graph structure
         is still present in the representations, but is unable to dominate the pretrained struc-
         ture. To explain these results, we analogize our task to energy minimization for
         a predefined graph topology, providing evidence towards an implicit optimization
         process to infer context-specified semantics. Overall, our findings indicate scaling
         context-size can flexibly re-organize model representations, possibly unlocking
         novel capabilities.


1    I NTRODUCTION
A growing line of work demonstrates that large language models (LLMs) organize representations of
specific concepts in a manner that reflects their structure in pretraining data (Park et al., 2024c;d; En-
gels et al., 2024; Abdou et al., 2021; Patel & Pavlick, 2022; Anthropic AI, 2024; Gurnee & Tegmark,
2023; Vafa et al., 2024; Li et al., 2021; Pennington et al., 2014). More targeted experiments in
synthetic domains have further corroborated these findings, showing how model representations are
organized according to the data-generating process (Li et al., 2022; Jenner et al., 2024; Traylor et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2022b; Shai et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024b; Gopalani et al., 2024). However, when
a model is deployed in open-ended environments, we can expect it to encounter novel semantics for
a concept that it did not see during pretraining. For example, assume that we describe to an LLM
that a new product called strawberry has been announced. Ideally, based on this context, the
model would alter the representation for strawberry and reflect that we are not referring to the
pretraining semantics (e.g., the fruit strawberry). Does this ideal solution transpire in LLMs?
Motivated by the above, we evaluate whether when provided an in-context specification of a concept,
an LLM alters its representations to reflect the context-specified semantics. Specifically, we propose
  ∗
    Equal contribution. Contact: {corefranciscopark,andrewlee}@g.harvard.edu,
yongyi@umich.edu, {ekdeeplubana, hidenori tanaka}@fas.harvard.edu.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (a) Words on a grid
                                                                    (c) Emergent grid representation in context
        apple    bird     car     egg

       house    milk    plane    opera

         box    sand      sun    mango

        rock    math      code   phone

           (b) Data generation

 Random walk on a grid:
 “apple, bird, milk, sand, sun, plane, opera, …”   Context length: 200      Context length: 400    Context length: 1400


Figure 1: Alteration of representations in accordance with context-specified semantics (grid
structure). (a) We randomly arrange a set of concepts on a grid that does not reflect any correla-
tional semantics between the tokens. (b) We then generate sequences of tokens following a random
walk on the grid, inputting it as context to a Llama-3.1-8B model. (c) The model’s mean token
representations projected onto the top two principal components. As the number of in-context ex-
emplars increases, there is a formation of representations mirroring the grid structure underlying the
data-generating process. Representations are from the residual stream activation following layer 26.



an in-context learning task that involves a simple “graph tracing” problem wherein the model is
shown edges corresponding to a random traversal of a graph (see Fig. 1). The nodes of this graph are
intentionally referenced via concepts the model is extremely likely to have seen during training (e.g.,
apple, bird, etc.), while its connectivity structure is defined using a predefined geometry that is
ambivalent to correlations between concepts’ semantics (e.g., a square grid). Based on the provided
context, the model is expected to output a valid next node prediction, i.e., a node connected to the
last presented one. As we show, increasing the amount of context leads to a sudden re-organization
of representations in accordance with the graph’s connectivity. This suggests LLMs can manipulate
their representations in order to reflect concept semantics specified entirely in-context, inline with
theories of inferential semantics from cognitive science (Harman, 1982; Block, 1998). We further
characterize these results by analyzing the problem of Dirichlet energy minimization, showing that
models indeed identify the structure of the underlying graph to achieve a non-trivial accuracy on our
task. This suggests an implicit optimization process, as hypothesized by theoretical work on ICL in
toy setups (e.g., in-context linear regression), can transpire in more naturalistic settings (Von Oswald
et al., 2023a;b; Akyürek et al., 2023). Overall, our contributions can be summarized as follows.
• Graph Navigation as a Simplistic Model of Novel Semantics. We introduce a toy graph nav-
  igation task that requires a model to interpret semantically meaningful concepts as referents for
  nodes in a structurally constrained graph. Inputting traces of random walks on this graph into an
  LLM, we analyze whether the model alters its intermediate representations for referent concepts
  to predict valid next nodes as defined by the underlying graph connectivity, hence inferring, inline
  with theories of semantics from cognitive science, novel semantics of a concept (Harman, 1982).
• Emergent In-Context Reorganization of Concept Representations. Our results show that as
  context-size is scaled, i.e., as we add more exemplars in context, there is a sudden re-organization
  of concept representations that reflects the graph’s connectivity structure. Intriguingly, these re-
  sults are similar to ones achieved in a similar setup with human subjects (Garvert et al., 2017;
  Whittington et al., 2020). Further, we show the context-specified graph structure emerges even
  when we use concepts that have correlations in their semantics (e.g., Mon, Tues, etc.), but, in-
  terestingly, is unable to dominate the pretrained structure. More broadly, we note that this sudden
  reorganization is reminiscent of emergent capabilities in LLMs when other relevant axes, e.g.,
  compute or model size, are scaled (Wei et al., 2022; Srivastava et al., 2022; Lubana et al., 2024).
• An Energy Minimization Model of Semantics Inference. To provide a more quantitative ac-
  count of our results, we compute the Dirichlet energy of model representations with respect to
  the ground-truth graph structure, and find the energy decreases as a function of context size.
  This offers a precise hypothesis for the mechanism employed by an LLM to re-organize repre-
  sentations according to the context-specified semantics of a concept. These results also serve as


                                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (a) Words on a ring                                       (c) Emergent ring representation in context

          banana 9            apple                             Layer 1          Layer 6          Layer 16          Layer 26
                          0
       tomato 8                 1   lettuce


                                              Context length:
       onion 7                      2 grape


                                                   100
       orange 6                 3   fig
                    5     4
                  pear carrot


                                              Context length:
            (b) Data generation

      Randomly pick pairs of neighbors:


                                                   400
       (apple, banana), (orange, onion),
       (fig, carrot), (grape, lettuce), …


Figure 2: Alteration of representations in accordance with context-specified semantics (ring
structure). (a) We randomly place concepts on a ring structure unrelated to their semantics. (b) We
then generate sequences of tokens by randomly sampling neighboring pairs from the ring which is
used as the input context to a Llama-3.1-8B model. (c) The model’s mean representation of tokens
projected onto the top two principal components. As the number of in-context exemplars increases,
there is a formation of representations mirroring the ring structure underlying the data-generating
process. The representations are from the residual stream activations.



    evidence towards theories of in-context learning as implicit optimization in a more naturalistic
    setting (Von Oswald et al., 2023a;b; Akyürek et al., 2023).



2     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP : I N -C ONTEXT G RAPH T RACING

We first define our setup for assessing the impact of context specification on how a model organizes
its representations. In the main paper, we primarily focus on Llama3.1-8B (henceforth Llama3)
(Dubey et al., 2024), accessed via NDIF/NNsight (Fiotto-Kaufman et al., 2024). We present results
on other models—Llama3.2-1B / Llama3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024) and Gemma-2-2B /
Gemma-2-9B (Gemma Team, 2024)—in App. C.2.
Task. Our proposed task, which we call in-context graph tracing, involves random walks on a
predefined graph G. Specifically, inspired by prior work analyzing structured representations learned
by sequence models, we experiment with three graphical structures: a square grid (Fig. 1 (a)), a ring
(Fig. 2 (a)), and a hexagonal grid (Fig. 10). Results on hexagonal grid are deferred to appendix due
to space constraints. To construct the square grid, we randomly arrange the set of tokens in a grid
and add edges between horizontal and vertical neighbors. We then perform a random walk on the
graph, emitting the visited tokens as a sequence (Fig. 1 (b)). For the ring, we add edges between
neighboring nodes and simply sample random pairs of neighboring tokens on the graph (Fig. 2 (b)).
Nodes in our graphs, denoted T = {τ0 , τ1 , . . . , τn }, are referenced via concepts that the model is
extremely likely to have seen during pretraining. While any choice of concepts is plausible, we
select random tokens that, unless mentioned otherwise, have no obvious semantic correlations with
one another (e.g., apple, sand, math, etc.). However, these concepts have precise meanings
associated with them in the training data, necessitating that to the extent the model relies on the
provided context, the representations are morphed according to the in-context graph. We highlight
that a visual analog of our task, wherein one uses images instead of text tokens to represent a concept,
has been used to elicit very similar results with human subjects as the ones we report in this paper
using LLMs (Garvert et al., 2017; Whittington et al., 2020; Mark et al., 2020; 2024; Brady et al.,
2009). We also note that our proposed task is similar to ones studied in literature on in-context RL,
wherein one provides exploration trajectories in-context to a model and expects it to understand the
environment and its dynamics (a.k.a., a world model) (Lee et al., 2024b; Laskin et al., 2022).


                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     R ESULTS

3.1   V ISUALIZING INTERNAL ACTIVATION USING PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS

Since we are interested in uncovering context-specific representations, we input sequences from our
data-generating process to the model and first compute the mean activations for each unique token
τ ∈ T . Namely, assume a given context C := [c0 , ..., cN −1 ], where ci ∈ T , that originates from
an underlying graph G. At each timestep, we look at a window of Nw (=50) preceding tokens (or
all tokens if the context length is smaller than Nw ), and collect all activations corresponding to each
token τ ∈ T at a given layer ℓ. We then compute the mean activations per token, denoted as hℓτ ∈
Rd . We further denote the stack of mean token representations as H ℓ (T ) ∈ Rn×d . Finally, we run
PCA on H ℓ (T ), and use the first two principal components to visualize model activations (unless
stated otherwise). We note that while PCA visualizations are known to suffer from pitfalls as a
representation analysis method, we provide a thorough quantitative analysis in Sec. 4 to demonstrate
that the model re-organizes concept representations according to the in-context graph structure, and
prove in Sec. 5 that the structure of the graph is reflected in the PCA visualizations because of this
re-organization of representations. We also provide further evidence on the faithfulness of PCA by
conducting a preliminary causal analysis of the principal components, finding that intervening on
concept representations’ projections along these components affects the model’s ability to accurately
predict valid next node generations (App. C.4).
Results. Figs. 1, 2 demonstrate the resulting visualizations for square grid and ring graphs, re-
spectively (more examples are provided in the Appendix; see Fig. 9, 10). Strikingly, with enough
exemplars, we find representations are in fact organized in accordance with the graph structure un-
derlying the context. Interestingly, results can be skewed in the earlier layers towards semantic
priors the model may have internalized during training; however, these priors are overridden as we
go deeper in the model. For example, in the ring graph (see Fig. 2), concepts apple and orange
are closer to each other in Layer 6 of the model, but become essentially antipodal around layer 26,
as dictated by the graph; the antipodal nature is also more prominent as context length is increased.
We also observe that despite developing a square-grid structure when sufficient context length is
given (see Fig. 1), the structure is partially irregular; e.g., it is wider in the central regions, but
narrowly arranged in the periphery. We find this to be an artifact of frequency with which a concept
is seen in the context. Specifically, due to lack of periodic boundary conditions, concepts that are
present in the inner 2×2 region of the grid are visited more frequently during a random walk on the
graph, while the periphery of the graph has a lower visitation frequency. The representations reflect
this, thus organizing in accordance with both structure and frequency of concepts in the context.
Overall, the results above indicate that as we scale context size, models can re-organize semantically
unrelated concepts to form task-specific representations, which we call in-context representations.
Intriguingly, these results are broadly inline with theories of inferential semantics from cognitive
science as well (Harman, 1982; Block, 1998).

3.2   S EMANTIC P RIOR VS . I N -C ONTEXT TASK R EPRESENTATIONS

Building on results from the previous section, we now investigate the impact of using semantically
correlated concepts. Specifically, we build on the results from Engels et al. (2024), who show that
representations for days of the week, i.e., {Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
Friday, Saturday, Sunday}, organize in a circular geometry. We randomly permute the
ordering of these concepts, arrange them on a 7-node ring graph similar to the previous section (see
Fig. 3a), and evaluate whether the in-context representations can override the strong pretraining prior
internalized by the model.

Results. Fig. 3 (b, c) demonstrate the resulting visualizations. We find that when there is a conflict
between the semantic prior and in-context task, we observe the original semantic ring in the first
two principal components. However, the components right after in fact encode the context-specific
structure: visualizing the third and fourth principal components shows the newly defined ring struc-
ture. This indicates that the context-specified structure is present in the representations, but does not
dominate them. In Fig. 14, we report the model’s accuracy on the in-context task, finding that the
model overrides the semantic prior to perform well on our task when enough context is given.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a)                                         (b)                                                  (c)
                  Tuesday
                            Monday


                                                                                                       Principal Component 4
                                                   Principal Component 2
     Wednesday

                                       Sunday


       Thursday

                            Saturday                                       Principal Component 1                               Principal Component 3
                  Friday

                                            Semantic Link                                   In-Context Link



Figure 3: In-context representations form in higher principal components in the presence
of semantic priors. (a) (Purple) Semantic links underlying days of the week. (Dashed blue) We
define a non-semantic graph structure by linking non-neighboring days and generate tokens from
this graph. (b) (Purple) The ring geometry formed by semantic links established during pre-training
remains intact in the first two principal components. (c) (Dashed blue) The non-semantic structure
provided in-context can be seen in the third and fourth principal components. Note that the star
structure in the first two components (b), which match the ground truth graphical structure of our data
generating process (a), becomes a ring in the next two principal components (c). The representations
are from the residual stream activation following layer 21.


4    E FFECTS OF C ONTEXT S CALING : E MERGENT R E -O RGANIZATION OF
     R EPRESENTATIONS
Our results in the previous section demonstrate models can re-organize concept representations in
accordance with the context-specified semantics. We next aim to study how this behavior arises
as context is scaled—is there a continuous, monotonic improvement towards the context-specified
structure as context is added? If so, is there a trivial solution, e.g., regurgitation based on context that
helps explain these results? To analyze these questions, we must first define a metric that helps us
gauge how aligned the representations are with the structure of the graph that underlies the context.

Dirichlet Energy. We measure the Dirichlet energy of our graph G’s structure by defining an
energy function over the model representations. Specifically, for an undirected graph G with n
nodes, let A ∈ Rn×n be its adjacency matrix, and x ∈ Rn be a signal vector that assigns a value xi
to each node i. Then the Dirichlet energy of the graph with respect to x is defined as
                                             X
                                   EG (x) =      Ai,j (xi − xj )2 .                            (1)
                                                                           i,j


For a multi-dimensional signal, the Dirichlet energy is defined as the summation of the energy
over each dimension. Specifically, let X ∈ Rn×d be a matrix that assigns each node i with a
d-dimensional vector xi , then the Dirichlet energy of X is defined by
                                  d X
                                  X                                                         X
                    EG (X) =                    Ai,j (xi,k − xj,k )2 =                             Ai,j ∥xi − xj ∥2 .                                  (2)
                                  k=1 i,j                                                    i,j


Overall, to empirically quantify the formation of geometric representations, we can measure the
Dirichlet energy with respect to the graphs underlying our data generating processes (DGPs) and
our mean token activations hℓτ :
                                                X
                                EG (H ℓ (T )) =   Ai,j ∥hℓi − hℓj ∥2 ,                       (3)
                                                                                 i,j
            ℓ         n×d
where H (T ) ∈ R      is the stack of our mean token representations hℓ at layer ℓ and i, j ∈ T
are tokens from our DGP at a certain context length. We note H ℓ (T ) is a function of context


                                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                       Layer 18                            Layer 30               Accuracy

                                                    Grid                                                                   Ring                                                                  Hex
 Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                        Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                             Normalized Dirichlet Energy
                                                                       1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                    1.0
                               0.05                                                                                                                                        0.025
                                                                       0.8                            0.10                                  0.8                                                                    0.8
                               0.04                                                                                                                                        0.020
                                                                                                      0.08


                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Accuracy
                                                                       0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                    0.6
                               0.03                                                                   0.06                                                                 0.015
                                                                       0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                    0.4
                               0.02                                                                   0.04
                                                                       0.2                                                                  0.2                            0.010                                   0.2
                               0.01                                                                   0.02
                                                                       0.0                                                                  0.0                            0.005                                   0.0
                                      100     101          102   103                                         100     101       102    103                                          100     101         102   103
                                            Context Length                                                         Context Length                                                        Context Length

Figure 4: A model continuously develops task representation as it learns to traverse novel
graphs in-context. We plot the accuracy of graph traversal and the Dirichlet energy of the graph,
computed from the model’s internal representations, as functions of context length. We note that
the Dirichlet energy never reaches a perfect zero—ruling out that the representations are learning a
degenerate structure, as was also seen in the PCA visualizations in Sec. 3. (a) A 4x4 grid graph with
16 nodes. (b) A circular ring with 10 nodes. (c) A “honey-comb” hexagonal lattice, with 30 nodes.

length as well, but we omit it in the notation for brevity. Intuitively, the measure above indicates
whether neighboring tokens (nodes) in the ground truth graph have a small distance between their
representations. Thus, as the model correctly infers the correct underlying structure, we expect to
see a decrease in Dirichlet energy. We do note that, in practice, Dirichlet energy minimization has a
trivial solution where all nodes are assigned the same representation. While we can be confident this
trivial solution does not exist in our results, for else we would not see distinct node representations in
PCA visualizations nor high accuracy for solving our tasks, we still provide an alternative analysis in
App. C.3 where the representations are standardized (mean-centered and normalized by variance) to
render this trivial solution infeasible. We find results are qualitatively similar with such standardized
representations, but more noisy since standardization can induce sensitivity to noise.

4.1                              R ESULTS : E MERGENT O RGANIZATION AND TASK ACCURACY I MPROVEMENTS

We plot Llama3’s accuracy at the in-context graph tracing task alongside the Dirichlet energy mea-
sure (for different layers) as a function of context. Specifically, we compute the “rule following
accuracy”, where we add up the model’s output probability over all graph nodes which are valid
neighbors. For instance, if the graph structure is apple-car-bird-water and the current state
is car, we add up the predicted probabilities for apple and bird. This metric simply measures
how well the model abides by the graph structure.
Results are reported in Fig. 4. We see once a critical amount of context is seen by the model,
accuracy starts to rapidly improve. We find this point in fact closely matches when Dirichlet Energy
reaches its minimum value: energy is minimized shortly before the rapid increase in in-context task
accuracy, suggesting that the structure of the data is correctly learned before the model can make
valid predictions. This leads us to the claim that as the amount of context is scaled, there is an
emergent re-organization of representations that allows the model to perform well on our in-context
graph tracing task. We note these results also provide a more quantitative counterpart of our PCA
visualization results before.

Is there a Trivial Solution at play? A simple baseline that would exhibit an increase in per-
formance with increasing context involves the model merely regurgitating a node’s neighbors by
copying them from its context. We call this the memorization solution. While such a solution would
not explain the reorganization of representations, we use it as a baseline to show the model is likely
engaging in a more intriguing mechanism. Since our accuracy metric measures rule following, this
memorization solution will achieve value 1 if the node has been observed in the context and 0 other-
wise. Following our data sampling process then, if we simply choose an initial node at random with
replacement, we can express the probability of a node existing in a context of length l as:
                                                               l
                                                       n−1
                                    pseen1 (x) = 1 −              ,                                (4)
                                                         n


                                                                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

      fig5

             (a)                50 Nodes                     (b)                               25 Nodes


             Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy
                          Context Size                                              Context Size

                           Llama-3.1-8B               1-shot Memorization                 2-shot Memorization

                                          Piecewise Linear Fit              Transition Point


Figure 5: A memorization solution cannot explain Llama’s ICL graph tracing performance.
We plot the rule-following accuracy from Llama-3.1-8B outputs and accuracies from a simple 1-shot
and 2-shot memorization hypothesis. (a) A ring graph with 50 nodes. (b) A square grid graph with
25 nodes. In both cases, we find that the memorization solution cannot explain the accuracy ascent
curve. Instead, we find a slow phase and a fast phase, which we fit with a piecewise linear fit.


where x is the context and n is the number of nodes available. Note that the current node itself
does not matter as the sampling probability is uniform with replacement. We also evaluate another,
similar baseline that assumes the same token much be encountered twice for the model to recognize
it as an in-context exemplar. To define a closed-form expression for this solution, we have the
probability that a node has appeared twice as follows:
                                                         1         (l−1)
                                                       1     n−1
                          pseen2 (x) = pseen1 (x) − l                    .                     (5)
                                                       n      n
To evaluate whether the memorization solutions above explain our results, we plot their performance
alongside the observed performance of Llama-3. Fig. 5 shows the result (a) on a ring graph with 50
nodes and (b) on a grid graph with 25 nodes. We find, in both cases, that neither the 1-shot nor the
2-shot memorization curve can explain the behavior of Llama. Instead, we observe that the accuracy
has two phases, a first phase where the accuracy improves very slowly, and a second phase where
the log-linear slope suddenly changes to a steeper ascent. We find that a piecewise linear fit can
extract this transition point fairly well, which will be of interest in the next section.


5     E XPLAINING EMERGENT RE - ORGANIZATION OF REPRESENTATIONS : T HE
      ENERGY MINIMIZATION HYPOTHESIS

Building on the results from previous section, we now put forward a hypothesis for why we are able
to identify such structured representations from a model: we hypothesize the model internally runs
an energy minimization process in search of the correct structural representation of the data (Yang
et al., 2022), similar to claims of implicit optimization in in-context learning proposed by prior work
in toy settings (Von Oswald et al., 2023a;b). More formally, we claim the following hypothesis.
Hypothesis 5.1. Let n be the number of tokens, d be the dimensionality of the representations, and
H (ℓ,t) (T ) ∈ Rn×d be the stack of representations
                                                    for each token learned by the model at layer ℓ
and context length t, then EG H (ℓ,t) (T ) decays with context length t.

5.1    M INIMIZERS OF D IRICHLET E NERGY AND S PECTRAL E MBEDDINGS .

We call the k-th energy minimizer of EG the optimal solution that minimizes EG and is orthogonal
                                                                            n
to the first k − 1 energy minimizers. Formally, the energy minimizers z (k) k=1 are defined as the


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Spectral embedding of a ring graph.           Figure 7: Spectral embedding of a grid graph.


solution to the following problem:

                                       z (k) = arg min EG (z)                                      (6)
                                                    z∈Sn−1

                                     s.t.   z ⊥ z (j) , ∀j ≤ k − 1,                                (7)

where Sn−1 is the unit sphere in n dimensional Euclidean space. The energy minimizers are known
to have the following properties (Spielman, 2019):

      1. z (1) = c1 for some constant c ̸= 0, which is a degenerated solution that assigns the same
         value to every node; and

                      (2) (3)
      2. If we use zi , zi      as the coordinate of node i, it will be a good planar embedding. We
         call them (2-dimensional) spectral embeddings.

Spectral embeddings are often used to a draw graph on a plane and in many cases can preserve the
structure of the graph (Tutte, 1963). In Figs. 6 and 7, we show the spectral embedding results for
a ring graph and a grid graph respectively. Notice how such spectral embeddings are similar to the
representations from our models in Fig. 1 and 2. As we show in Theorem B.1, this is in fact expected
if our energy minimization hypothesis is true: if the representations H from the model minimize
the Dirichlet energy and are non-degenerated, then the first two principal components of PCA will
exactly produce the spectral embeddings z (2) , z (3) . Here we present an informal version of the
theorem, and defer the full version and proof to the appendix.
Theorem 5.1 (Informal Version of Theorem B.1). Let G be a graph and H ∈ Rn×d (where n ≥
d ≥ 3) be a matrix that minimizes Dirichlet energy on G with non-degenerated singular values, then
the first two principal components of H will be z (2) and z (3) .

See App. B for the formal version and proof of Theorem 5.1. See also Tab. 2 for an empirical
validation of the theorem, wherein we show the principal components align very well with spectral
embeddings of the graph.

5.2   E NERGY M INIMIZATION AND G RAPH C ONNECTIVITY

Given the relationship between spectral embeddings (i.e., energy minimizers) and the principal com-
ponents observed in our results (Figs. 1, 2), we claim that the model’s inference of the underlying
structure is akin to an implicit energy minimization. To further analyze the implication of this claim,
we show that the moment at which we can visualize a graph using PCA is the moment at which the
model has found a large connected component (i.e., the graph’s structure). Specifically, consider
an unconnected graph Ĝ, i.e., Ĝ has multiple connected components. Then, there are multiple de-
generate solutions to the energy minimization problem, which will be found by PCA. Specifically,
suppose Ĝ has q connected components, with Ui denoting the set of nodes of the i-th component.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     25           36
      (a)      # of Nodes
                                     64          144
                                                              (b)


Figure 8: In-context emergence. We analyze the in-context accuracy curves as a function of
context-size inputted to the model. The graph used in this experiment is an m × m grid, with a
varying value for m. (a) The rule following accuracy of a graph tracing task. The accuracy show
a two phase ascent. We fit a piecewise linear function to the observed ascent to extract the transi-
tion point, which moves rightwards with increasing graph size. (b) Interestingly, the transition point
scales as a power-law in m, i.e., the number of nodes in the graph.

Then we can construct the first q energy minimizers as follows: ∀i ∈ [q], let the j-th value of z (i) be
                                                        i−1
                                           −α j ∈ [ U
                                           
                                      (i)       i             k
                                     zj =                                                            (8)
                                                        k=1
                                             1      otherwise,
                                           

                            Pq        P          (i−1)
                                 ′        j∈U ′ zj ′
where α1 = 1 and αi = Pki−1
                         =i
                            P                k
                                                (i−1)    for i ∈ [q] \ {1}.
                             k=1          j∈Uk zj


It is easy to check that each z (i) constructed above for i ∈ [q] has 0 energy, and is thus a global
minimizer of EĜ . Moreover, all z (i) ’s are orthogonal to each other and hence satisfy our definition
of the first q energy minimizers. It is important to notice that these z (i) ’s for i ∈ [q] contain no
information about the structure of the graph, other than identifying each connected component.
Theorem B.1 tells us that the principal components of a non-degenerated (rank s where s > 1)
solution H that minimizes the energy will be z (2) · · · z (s+1) . Thus, if the graph is unconnected, then
the energy-minimizing representations will be dominated by information-less principal components,
in which we should not expect any meaningful visualization. The acute reader may recall that the
first minimizer z (1) is a trivial solution of the energy minimization that assigns the same value to
every node. Conveniently, the above argument also implies that this is not a concern: PCA will rule
out this degenerate solution as demonstrated in Theorem B.1.
In-context emergence: A hypothesis. Our results in Fig. 5 showed an intriguing breakpoint that
is reminiscent of a second-order phase transition (i.e., an undefined second derivative). As shown in
Fig. 8, we in fact find this behavior is extremely robust across graphs of different sizes, and shows a
power-law scaling trend with increasing graph size (see App. C.7 for several more results in this vein,
including different graph topologies). Given the relationship offered between energy minimization
and discovery of a connected component (graph structure) in our analysis above, a possible frame-
work to explain these results may be the problem of bond-percolation on a graph (Newman, 2003;
Hooyberghs et al., 2010): in bond-percolation, one starts with an unconnected graph and slowly
fills edges to connect its nodes; as edges are filled, there is a second-order transition after which
a large connected component emerges in the graph. The nature of the transition observed in our
experiments (Fig. 8) and the theoretical connection between energy minimization and existence of a
connected component provide some evidence towards the plausibility of this hypothesis. However,
we believe the analogy is still loose, for our graph sizes are relatively small (likely causing signifi-
cant finite-size effects) and the experiments need to corroborate any scaling theory of the transition
point from percolation literature would require running graphs with at least 2 orders-of-magnitude
difference in their sizes. However, the consistency of the hypothesis with our empirical results and
analysis implies that investigating it further may be fruitful.


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   R ELATED W ORK
Model Representations. Researchers have recently discovered numerous structured representa-
tions in neural networks. Mikolov et al. (2013) suggests that concepts are linearly represented in
activations, and Park et al. (2024d) more recently suggests this may be the case for contemporary
language models. Numerous researchers have found concrete examples of linear representations
for human-level concepts, including “truthfulness” (Burns et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b; Marks &
Tegmark, 2024), “refusal” (Arditi et al., 2024), toxicity (Lee et al., 2024a), sycophancy (Rimsky
et al., 2024), and even “world models” (Li et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023). Park et al. (2024c) finds
that hierarchical concepts are represented with a tree-like structure consisting of orthogonal vectors.
A relevant line of work includes that of Todd et al. (2023) and Hendel et al. (2023). Both papers
find that one can compute a vector from in-context exemplars that encode the task, such that adding
such a vector during test time for a new input can correctly solve the task. Language models do not
always form linear representations, however. Engels et al. (2024) find circular feature representa-
tions for periodic concepts, such as days of the week or months of the year, using a combination of
sparse autoencoders and PCA. Csordás et al. (2024) finds that recurrent neural networks trained on
token repetition can either learn an “onion”-like representation or a linear representation, depending
on the model’s width. Unlike such prior work, we find that task-specific representations with a de-
sired structural pattern can be induced in-context. To our knowledge, our work offers the first such
investigation of in-context representation learning.
Scaling In-Context Learning Numerous works have demonstrated that in-context accuracy im-
proves with more exemplars (Brown et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022; Bigelow et al., 2023). With longer
context lengths becoming available, researchers have begun to study the effect of many-shot prompt-
ing (as opposed to few-shot) (Agarwal et al., 2024; Anil et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023c). For instance,
Agarwal et al. (2024) reports improved performance on ICL using hundreds to thousands of exem-
plars on a wide range of tasks. Similarly, Anil et al. (2024) demonstrate the ability to jail-break
LLMs by scaling the number of exemplars. Unlike such work that evaluates model behavior, we
study the effect of scaling context on the underlying representations, and provide a framework for
predicting when discontinuous changes in behavior can be expected via mere context-scaling.
Synthetic Data for Interpretability Recent works have demonstrated the value of interpretable,
synthetic data generating processes for understanding Transformer’s behavior, including in-context
learning (Park et al., 2024a; Ramesh et al., 2023; Garg et al., 2023), language acquisition (Lubana
et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2024; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023b), fine-tuning (Jain et al., 2023; Lubana et al.,
2023; Juneja et al., 2022), reasoning abilities (Prystawski et al., 2024; Khona et al., 2024; Wen et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2022a), and knowledge representations (Nishi et al., 2024; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023a).
While prior work typically pre-trains Transformers on synthetic data, we leverage synthetic data to
study representation formation during in-context learning in pretrained large language models.

7   D ISCUSSION
In this work, we show that LLMs can flexibly manipulate their representations from semanatics
internalized based on pretraining data to semantics defined entirely in-context. To arrive at these
results, we propose a simple but rich task of graph tracing, wherein traces of random walks on a
graph are shown to the model in-context. The graphs are instantiated using predefined structures
(e.g., lattices) and concepts that are semantically interesting (e.g., to define nodes), but meaning-
less in the overall context of the problem. Interestingly, we find the ability to flexibly manipulate
representations is in fact emergent with respect to context size—we propose a model based on en-
ergy minimization to hypothesize a mechanism for the underlying dynamics of this behavior. These
results suggest context-scaling can unlock new capabilities, and, more broadly, this axis may have
as of yet been underappreciated for improving a model. In fact, we note that, to our knowledge,
our work is to first to investigate the formation of representations entirely in-context. Our study
also naturally motivates future work towards formation of world representations Li et al. (2023a)
and world models (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018) in-context, which can have significant implications
toward building general and open-ended systems, as well as forecasting its safety concerns. We
also highlight the relation of our experimental setup to similar tasks studied in neuroscience litera-
ture Garvert et al. (2017); Mark et al. (2020; 2024), wherein humans are shown random walks of a
graph of visual concepts; fMRI images of these subjects demonstrate the formation of a structured
representation of the graph in the hippocampal–entorhinal cortex, similar to our results with LLMs.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We greatly thank the National Deep Inference Fabric (NDIF) pilot program (Fiotto-Kaufman et al.,
2024), especially, Emma Bortz, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, Adam Belfki, David Bau, and the team who
provided us with access to representations of Llama models, making this work possible. CFP and HT
acknowledge the support of Aravinthan D.T. Samuel, Cecilia Garraffo and Douglas P. Finkbeiner.
CFP, ESL, KN, MO, and HT are supported by the CBS-NTT Program in Physics of Intelligence.
AL and MW acknowledges support from the Superalignment Fast Grant from OpenAI. MW also ac-
knowledges support from Effective Ventures Foundation, Effektiv Spenden Schweiz, and the Open
Philanthropy Project. Part of the computations in this paper were run on the FASRC cluster sup-
ported by the FAS Division of Science Research Computing Group at Harvard University. ESL
thanks Eric Bigelow for crucial discussions that helped define several hypotheses pursued in this
work, and the Harvard CoCoDev lab (especially Peng Qian) and Talia Konkle for feedback on an
earlier version of the paper. CFP thanks Zechen Zhang, Eric Todd, Clement Dumas, and Shivam
Raval for useful discussions. All authors thank David Bau and his lab for useful feedback on the
paper’s results.

AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
CFP, AL, ESL, and HT conceived the in-context graph traversal task, inspired by discussions and ex-
perimentations with MO and KN in a related work on pretraining. CFP and AL co-led experiments,
where CFP discovered the in-context learning of the ring-structured representation with input from
HT, kicking off this study. AL suggested extending this to grid structures to CFP connecting it to
world representations, and ESL proposed hexagonal configurations. ESL hypothesized in-context
transitions with increased context and percolation mechanism. CFP conducted semantic overriding
and percolation experiments, while AL performed accuracy-energy experiments and causal inter-
ventions, with CFP, AL, and ESL developing transition point detection methods and contributing
to energy normalization. YY formulated the energy minimization theory and its proofs, collaborat-
ing with ESL to connect the framework to component existence and demonstrate PCA’s optimality.
MW provided alternative hypotheses for experimental robustness. CFP, AL, ESL, YY, and HT co-
developed an initial manuscript with feedback from MW, with ESL leading the final writing and
project narrative development. CFP, AL, and HT created figures, while CFP and AL jointly devel-
oped the appendix. AL conducted substantial experiments to verify the main claims generalize to
other models with CFP’s support. HT supervised the project.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Mostafa Abdou, Artur Kulmizev, Daniel Hershcovich, Stella Frank, Ellie Pavlick, and Anders
 Søgaard. Can language models encode perceptual structure without grounding? a case study
 in color. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06129, 2021.

Rishabh Agarwal, Avi Singh, Lei M. Zhang, Bernd Bohnet, Luis Rosias, Stephanie Chan, Biao
  Zhang, Ankesh Anand, Zaheer Abbas, Azade Nova, John D. Co-Reyes, Eric Chu, Feryal Be-
  hbahani, Aleksandra Faust, and Hugo Larochelle. Many-shot in-context learning, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11018.

Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning
  algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models, 2023. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2211.15661.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.1, knowledge storage and
  extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14316, 2023a.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 1, learning hierarchical lan-
  guage structures. ArXiv e-prints, abs/2305.13673, May, 2023b.

Cem Anil, Esin Durmus, Mrinank Sharma, Joe Benton, Sandipan Kundu, Joshua Batson, Nina
  Rimsky, Meg Tong, Jesse Mu, Daniel Ford, et al. Many-shot jailbreaking. Anthropic, April, 2024.

Anthropic AI.   Scaling Monosemanticity: Extracting Interpretable Features from
  Claude 3 Sonnet, 2024.       https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/
  scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.

Andy Arditi, Oscar Obeso, Aaquib Syed, Daniel Paleka, Nina Panickssery, Wes Gurnee, and
  Neel Nanda. Refusal in language models is mediated by a single direction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.11717, 2024.

Eric J Bigelow, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, and Tomer D Ullman.
  In-context learning dynamics with random binary sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17639,
  2023.

Ned Block. Semantics, conceptual role. Routledge encyclopedia of philosophy, 8:652–657, 1998.

Timothy F Brady, Talia Konkle, and George A Alvarez. Compression in visual working memory:
  using statistical regularities to form more efficient memory representations. Journal of Experi-
  mental Psychology: General, 138(4):487, 2009.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.

Collin Burns, Haotian Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in lan-
  guage models without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03827, 2022.

Róbert Csordás, Christopher Potts, Christopher D Manning, and Atticus Geiger. Recurrent neural
  networks learn to store and generate sequences using non-linear representations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.10920, 2024.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, and et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Joshua Engels, Isaac Liao, Eric J. Michaud, Wes Gurnee, and Max Tegmark. Not all language model
  features are linear, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14860.

Ky Fan. On a theorem of weyl concerning eigenvalues of linear transformations i. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 35(11):652–655, 1949.

Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, Alexander R Loftus, Eric Todd, Jannik Brinkmann, Caden Juang, Koyena
  Pal, Can Rager, Aaron Mueller, Samuel Marks, Arnab Sen Sharma, Francesca Lucchetti, Michael
  Ripa, Adam Belfki, Nikhil Prakash, Sumeet Multani, Carla Brodley, Arjun Guha, Jonathan Bell,
  Byron Wallace, and David Bau. Nnsight and ndif: Democratizing access to foundation model
  internals, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.14561.

Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2208.01066.

Mona M Garvert, Raymond J Dolan, and Timothy EJ Behrens. A map of abstract relational knowl-
 edge in the human hippocampal–entorhinal cortex. elife, 6:e17086, 2017.

Gemma Team. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118.

Pulkit Gopalani, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, and Wei Hu. Abrupt learning in transformers: A case study
  on matrix completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.22244, 2024.

Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. Language models represent space and time. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.02207, 2023.

David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2018.

Gilbert Harman. Conceptual role semantics. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 23(2):242–256,
  1982.

Roee Hendel, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. In-context learning creates task vectors. In
  Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 9318–9333, Singapore, December 2023. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.624. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.624.

H. Hooyberghs, B. Van Schaeybroeck, and J. O. Indekeu. Percolation on bipartite scale-free net-
  works. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 389(15):2920–2929, August 2010.
  ISSN 0378-4371.

Samyak Jain, Robert Kirk, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, Edward Grefen-
  stette, Tim Rocktäschel, and David Scott Krueger. Mechanistically analyzing the effects of fine-
  tuning on procedurally defined tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12786, 2023.

Erik Jenner, Shreyas Kapur, Vasil Georgiev, Cameron Allen, Scott Emmons, and Stuart Russell. Evi-
  dence of learned look-ahead in a chess-playing neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00877,
  2024.

Jeevesh Juneja, Rachit Bansal, Kyunghyun Cho, João Sedoc, and Naomi Saphra. Linear connectivity
  reveals generalization strategies. arXiv preprint. arXiv:2205.12411, 2022.

Mikail Khona, Maya Okawa, Jan Hula, Rahul Ramesh, Kento Nishi, Robert Dick, Ekdeep Singh
 Lubana, and Hidenori Tanaka. Towards an understanding of stepwise inference in transformers:
 A synthetic graph navigation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07757, 2024.

Michael Laskin, Luyu Wang, Junhyuk Oh, Emilio Parisotto, Stephen Spencer, Richie Steigerwald,
 DJ Strouse, Steven Hansen, Angelos Filos, Ethan Brooks, et al. In-context reinforcement learning
 with algorithm distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14215, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrew Lee, Xiaoyan Bai, Itamar Pres, Martin Wattenberg, Jonathan K Kummerfeld, and Rada
  Mihalcea. A mechanistic understanding of alignment algorithms: A case study on dpo and
  toxicity. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2401.01967.
Jonathan Lee, Annie Xie, Aldo Pacchiano, Yash Chandak, Chelsea Finn, Ofir Nachum, and Emma
  Brunskill. Supervised pretraining can learn in-context reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Belinda Z Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00737, 2021.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Watten-
  berg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wat-
  tenberg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic
  task. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=DeG07_TcZvT.
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time
  intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=aLLuYpn83y.
Mukai Li, Shansan Gong, Jiangtao Feng, Yiheng Xu, Jun Zhang, Zhiyong Wu, and Lingpeng Kong.
 In-context learning with many demonstration examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04931, 2023c.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Transformers
  learn shortcuts to automata. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10749, 2022a.
Ziming Liu, Ouail Kitouni, Niklas S Nolte, Eric Michaud, Max Tegmark, and Mike Williams. To-
  wards understanding grokking: An effective theory of representation learning. Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 35:34651–34663, 2022b.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Smaranda
  Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8086–8098,
  Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  acl-long.556. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.556.
Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Eric J Bigelow, Robert P Dick, David Krueger, and Hidenori Tanaka. Mech-
  anistic mode connectivity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22965–23004.
  PMLR, 2023.
Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Kyogo Kawaguchi, Robert P Dick, and Hidenori Tanaka. A percolation
  model of emergence: Analyzing transformers trained on a formal language. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.12578, 2024.
Shirley Mark, Rani Moran, Thomas Parr, Steve W Kennerley, and Timothy EJ Behrens. Transferring
  structural knowledge across cognitive maps in humans and models. Nature communications, 11
  (1):4783, 2020.
Shirley Mark, Phillipp Schwartenbeck, Avital Hahamy, Veronika Samborska, Alon B Baram, and
  Timothy E Behrens. Flexible neural representations of abstract structural knowledge in the human
  entorhinal cortex. Elife, 13, 2024.
Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language
  model representations of true/false datasets, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
  06824.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space, 2013. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.
Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world
  models of self-supervised sequence models. In Proceedings of the 6th BlackboxNLP Work-
  shop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 16–30, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2309.00941.
M. E. J. Newman. The Structure and Function of Complex Networks. SIAM Review, 45(2):167–256,
 January 2003. ISSN 0036-1445, 1095-7200.
Kento Nishi, Maya Okawa, Rahul Ramesh, Mikail Khona, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, and Hidenori
  Tanaka. Representation shattering in transformers: A synthetic study with knowledge editing.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17194, 2024.
Core Francisco Park, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Itamar Pres, and Hidenori Tanaka. Competition dynam-
  ics shape algorithmic phases of in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01003, 2024a.
Core Francisco Park, Maya Okawa, Andrew Lee, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, and Hidenori Tanaka.
  Emergence of hidden capabilities: Exploring learning dynamics in concept space, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.19370.
Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, Yibo Jiang, and Victor Veitch. The geometry of categorical and hierar-
  chical concepts in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01506, 2024c.
Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry
  of large language models, 2024d. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03658.
Roma Patel and Ellie Pavlick. Mapping language models to grounded conceptual spaces. In Inter-
  national conference on learning representations, 2022.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
   representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
   processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543, 2014.
Ben Prystawski, Michael Li, and Noah Goodman. Why think step by step? reasoning emerges from
  the locality of experience. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Tian Qin, Naomi Saphra, and David Alvarez-Melis. Sometimes i am a tree: Data drives unstable
  hierarchical generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04619, 2024.
Rahul Ramesh, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Mikail Khona, Robert P Dick, and Hidenori Tanaka. Com-
  positional capabilities of autoregressive transformers: A study on synthetic, interpretable tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12997, 2023.
Nina Rimsky, Nick Gabrieli, Julian Schulz, Meg Tong, Evan Hubinger, and Alexander Turner.
  Steering llama 2 via contrastive activation addition. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
  Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15504–15522, Bangkok, Thailand, August
  2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.828. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.828.
Adam S Shai, Sarah E Marzen, Lucas Teixeira, Alexander Gietelink Oldenziel, and Paul M Riech-
  ers. Transformers represent belief state geometry in their residual stream. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.15943, 2024.
Daniel Spielman. Spectral and algebraic graph theory. Yale lecture notes, draft of December, 4:47,
  2019.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eric Todd, Millicent L Li, Arnab Sen Sharma, Aaron Mueller, Byron C Wallace, and David Bau.
  Function vectors in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15213, 2023.
Aaron Traylor, Roman Feiman, and Ellie Pavlick. Can neural networks learn implicit logic from
  physical reasoning? In The eleventh international conference on learning representations, 2022.
William Thomas Tutte. How to draw a graph. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 3
 (1):743–767, 1963.
Keyon Vafa, Justin Y Chen, Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Ashesh Rambachan. Evalu-
  ating the world model implicit in a generative model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03689, 2024.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023a.
Johannes Von Oswald, Maximilian Schlegel, Alexander Meulemans, Seijin Kobayashi, Eyvind
  Niklasson, Nicolas Zucchet, Nino Scherrer, Nolan Miller, Mark Sandler, Max Vladymyrov, et al.
  Uncovering mesa-optimization algorithms in transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05858,
  2023b.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Kaiyue Wen, Yuchen Li, Bingbin Liu, and Andrej Risteski. Transformers are uninterpretable with
  myopic methods: a case study with bounded dyck grammars. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
James CR Whittington, Timothy H Muller, Shirley Mark, Guifen Chen, Caswell Barry, Neil Burgess,
  and Timothy EJ Behrens. The tolman-eichenbaum machine: unifying space and relational mem-
  ory through generalization in the hippocampal formation. Cell, 183(5):1249–1263, 2020.
Yongyi Yang, David P Wipf, et al. Transformers from an optimization perspective. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:36958–36971, 2022.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Here we provide some additional details regarding our experimental setups.


Context Windows. Our analyses require computing mean token representations hi for every token
i ∈ T in our graphs. To do so, we grab the activations per each token in the most recent context
window of Nw tokens. Because we further require that each token is observed at least once in our
window, we use a batch of prompts, where the batch size is equal to the number of nodes in our
graph. For each prompt in the batch, we start our random traversal (or random pairwise sampling)
with a different node, ensuring that each node shows up at least once in the context. In the case
when our context length (Nc ) is longer than the window, we simply use every token (Nw = Nc ).


Computational Resources. We run our experiments on either A100 nodes, or by using the APIs
provided by NDIF (Fiotto-Kaufman et al., 2024).


B    T HE C ONNECTION B ETWEEN E NERGY M INIMIZATION AND PCA
     S TUCTURE

In this section, for a matrix M ∈ Rn×d , we use lowercase bold letters with subscript to represent the
columns for M , e.g. mk represents the k-th column of M . Moreover, we use σk (M ) to represent
the k-th largest singular value of M and when M is PSD we use λk (M ) to represent the k-th
largest eigenvalue of M . Moreover, we use ek to represent a vector with all-zero entries except a
1 at entry k, whose dimension is inferred from context, and 1 to represent a vector with all entries
being 1. For a natural number n, we use [n] to represent {1, 2, · · · , n}.
                              n
Furthermore, we use z (k) k=1 to represent the energy minimizers of the Dirichlet energy, defined
in Section 4. Let A ∈ Rn×n be the adjacency matrix of the graph, D = diag(A1) be the degree
matrix, and L = D − A be the Laplacian matrix. Through an easy calculation one can know that
for any vector x ∈ Rn ,

                                           EG (x) = ⟨x, Lx⟩ .                                      (9)

Therefore, from the Spectral Theorem (e.g. Theorem 2.2.1 in Spielman (2019)), we know that zk is
the eigenvector of L corresponding to λn−k+1 (L) = EG (zk ).
We will show that, if a matrix H ∈ Rn×d minimizes the energy and is non-degenerated (has several
distinct and non-zero singular values), then the PCA must exactly give the leading energy minimiz-
ers, starting from z2 .
Theorem B.1. Let G be a graph and ϵ1 > ϵ2 > · · · > ϵs > 0 be s ≤ min{n, d} − 1 distinct positive
numbers. Let matrix H ∈ Rn×d be the solution of the following optimization problem:

                                       H = arg min EG (X)                                        (10)
                                                  X∈Rn×d
                                    s.t.   σk (X) ≥ ϵk , ∀k ∈ [r],                               (11)

then the k-th principle component of H (for k ∈ [r]) is z (k+1) .



Proof. We first prove that the leading left-singular vectors of H are exactly energy minimizers. Let
r = min{n, d}. Let the SVD of H be H = U ΣV ⊤ , where Σ = diag [σ1 , σ2 , · · · , σd ] are the
singular values of H, and U ∈ Rn×r , V ∈ Rr×d .


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let h′i represents the i-th row of H. Notice that
                                         X                   2
                               EG (H) =       Ai,j h′i − h′j                                    (12)
                                          i,j
                                                                               2
                                                                   ⊤
                                          X
                                      =         Ai,j (ei − ej ) H                               (13)
                                          i,j
                                                                                   2
                                                                   ⊤
                                          X
                                      =         Ai,j (ei − ej ) U Σ                             (14)
                                          i,j
                                           r
                                          XX                               2
                                      =              σk2 ⟨ei − ej , uk ⟩                        (15)
                                         i,j k=1
                                        X r
                                      =      σk2 EG (uk ).                                      (16)
                                        k=1


Since σk ’s and uk ’s are independent, no matter what are the values of uk , we know that each σk
will take the smallest possible value, and from the given condition, it is σk = ϵk , ∀k ∈ [s], and
σk = 0, ∀k ∈ [r] \ [s].
Since uk ’s are singular vectors, we have uk ’s are orthogonal to each other. Using Theorem 1 in Fan
                                                            Ps′
(1949), we know that for any s′ ∈ [n], the minimizer of k=1 EG (uk ) is uk = z (k) , ∀k ∈ [s′ ].
                                               Ps
Therefore, it is evident that the minimizer of k=1 σk2 EG (uk ) must satisfies uk = z (k) , ∀k ∈ [s],
since from the above argument of σk ’s and the given condition condition we know that σ1 > σ2 >
· · · > σs > 0.
Now we have proved that uk = z (k) , ∀k ∈ [s]. Next we consider the output of PCA. Let pk be the
k-th principle component output by the PCA of H. We know that pk is the eigenvector of

                                            C=H
                                              cHc⊤                                              (17)
                                                            c = H − 1 11⊤ H is the centralized
that corresponds to the k-th largest eigenvalue of C, where H       n
H.
From the Spectral Theorem, we have
                                   pk = arg        max         ⟨p, Cp⟩ .                        (18)
                                                  p∈Sn−1
                                                p⊥pi ,∀i≤k−1


Let J = span{1} be the set of vectors whose every entry has the same value. Let J ⊥ be the subspace
in Rn that is orthogonal to J. For a subspace K of Rn , let ΠK : Rn → Rn be the projection operator
onto K.
We have that
                  p1 = arg max   ⟨p, Cp⟩                                                        (19)
                          p∈Sn−1

                                           1 ⊤       ⊤       1 ⊤
                     = arg max     p, I  −   11   HH     I −   11  p                            (20)
                          p∈Sn−1           n                 n
                     = arg max
                            n−1
                                ΠJ ⊥ (p), HH ⊤ ΠJ ⊥ (p)                                         (21)
                            p∈S

                     = arg max
                            n−1
                                p, HH ⊤ p ,                                                     (22)
                            p∈S
                             p⊥J


which, again from Spectral Theorem, is the eigenvector of the second largest eigenvalue of HH ⊤ ,
which is u2 = z (2) . Using an induction and the same reasoning, it follows that for any k ∈ [s], we
have pk = z (k+1) . This proves the proposition.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C         A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
C.1        D ETAILED L AYER - WISE V ISUALIZATION OF R EPRESENTATIONS

In Figure 9 and Figure 10 we provide additional visualizations per layer for each of our models and
each of our data generating processes.
                                      Layer 0                                                                  Layer 2                                                          Layer 4                                                          Layer 6
    0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.25
                                                                               0.75                                                                   1.0                                                      1.00
    0.4
                                                                               0.50                                                                                                                            0.75
    0.2                                                                                                                                               0.5                                                      0.50
                                                                               0.25
    0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                               0.00
                                                                                                                                                      0.0                                                      0.00
    0.2                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.25
    0.4                                                                        0.50                                                                   0.5                                                      0.50
                                                                               0.75                                                                                                                            0.75
    0.6
                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                0.6          0.4      0.2       0.0        0.2         0.4                 1.0             0.5           0.0           0.5                  1.5       1.0        0.5      0.0   0.5      1.0          1.0          0.5       0.0          0.5       1.0          1.5
                                      Layer 8                                                                  Layer 10                                                     Layer 12                                                             Layer 14
    1.5                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                1.0                                                                                                                              2
    1.0                                                                         0.5                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
    0.5                                                                         0.0                                                                   0.5

                                                                                                                                                      0.0                                                        0
    0.0                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                      0.5
    0.5                                                                         1.0                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                      1.0
    1.0                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                1.0         0.5 0.0       0.5       1.0     1.5        2.0                     1           0             1             2                          1         0          1         2                    2            1         0            1         2            3
                                   Layer 16                                                                    Layer 18                                                     Layer 20                                                             Layer 22
      3
                                                                                 3                                                                     4
      2                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                 2
      1                                                                                                                                                2                                                         2
                                                                                 1
      0                                                                          0                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                       0
      1                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                 2                                                                     2
      2
                                                                                 3                                                                                                                               4
      3
                                                                                 4                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
           3           2       1      0         1     2          3         4               4           2             0             2         4              4         2          0          2        4                6        4         2        0        2        4        6         8
                                   Layer 24                                                                    Layer 26                                                     Layer 28                                                             Layer 30
                                                                               10.0
      6                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                7.5                                                                   10
      4                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                5.0
      2                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                2.5                                                                                                                              5
      0
                                                                                0.0                                                                    0                                                         0
      2
                                                                                2.5                                                                                                                              5
      4                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                5.0
      6                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                7.5
                                                                                                                                                      10                                                        15
      8
                                                                               10.0
          7.5         5.0     2.5 0.0           2.5       5.0        7.5              10           5             0             5           10                10        5         0         5    10       15               15       10        5        0         5       10   15


Figure 9: We plot 2d PCA projections from every other layer in Llama3.1-8B (Dubey et al., 2024),
given the grid-traversal task. In deeper layers, we can see a clear visualization of the grid.


                                                                                                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Layer 0                                                          Layer 2                                                      Layer 4                                                              Layer 6
                                                                           0.8
     0.6                                                                                                                                   0.75
                                                                           0.6                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                           0.50
     0.4                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                           0.25                                                             0.5
                                                                           0.2
     0.2                                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                                           0.0                                                                                                                              0.0
     0.0                                                                   0.2                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                           0.50                                                             0.5
                                                                           0.4
     0.2
                                                                           0.6                                                             0.75                                                             1.0
     0.4                                                                   0.8                                                             1.00
           0.6         0.4         0.2 0.0         0.2    0.4     0.6            0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25                             1.0       0.5      0.0           0.5        1.0                    1.0         0.5     0.0            0.5             1.0
                                         Layer 8                                                          Layer 10                                                     Layer 12                                                             Layer 14
                                                                                                                                               2.0                                                           2
     1.0
                                                                           1.5                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
     0.5                                                                   1.0                                                                 1.0

                                                                           0.5                                                                 0.5
     0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                           0.0
     0.5                                                                                                                                       0.5                                                           1
                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                               1.0
     1.0                                                                   1.0                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                               1.5
           1.0               0.5         0.0        0.5         1.0              1.5      1.0           0.5 0.0     0.5       1.0   1.5               1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0                                   2            1            0                  1            2
                                         Layer 16                                                         Layer 18                                                     Layer 20                                                             Layer 22
                                                                                                                                                4                                                            6
      3
                                                                            3                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
      2                                                                     2                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
      1                                                                     1                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                0                                                            0
      0                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                1                                                            2
                                                                            1
      1                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                            2                                                                                                                                4
      2                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                            3                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                4
      3
                                                                            4
                 3           2       1         0     1     2          3          4              2           0             2         4                      4       2        0         2      4          6         7.5         5.0     2.5    0.0          2.5            5.0     7.5
                                         Layer 24                                                         Layer 26                                                     Layer 28                                                             Layer 30
      8
                                                                           7.5                                                                 10                                                           20
      6
                                                                           5.0                                                                                                                              15
      4                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                           2.5                                                                                                                              10
      2
                                                                           0.0                                                                  0                                                            5
      0
      2                                                                    2.5                                                                  5                                                            0

      4                                                                    5.0                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                               10
      6                                                                    7.5                                                                                                                              10

      8                                                                   10.0                                                                 15                                                           15
                 7.5     5.0        2.5 0.0         2.5   5.0     7.5                10             5        0            5         10                10       5        0         5         10         15           20         15     10     5        0          5         10     15


Figure 10: We plot 2D PCA projections from every other layer in Llama3.1-8B (Dubey et al., 2024)
for the hexagonal grid task.


                                                                                                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2    PCA, D IRICHLET E NERGY, AND ACCURACY R ESULTS ON OTHER M ODELS

Here we provide results from other language models, i.e., Llama3-1B (Dubey et al., 2024), Llama3-
8B-Instruct, Gemma2-2B (Gemma Team, 2024), and Gemma2-9B. In Figure 11, we plot the 2d
PCA projections from the last layer of various models for various data generating processes. In
Figure 12, we plot the normalized Dirichlet energy curves against accuracy for various language
models on various tasks. Across all models and tasks, we see results similar to the main paper.

        Llama_3.2_1B: grid                                    Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: grid                                        Gemma_2_2B: grid                                        Gemma_2_9B: grid
   6                                                                                                               100                                                           100
                                                             10
   4
                                                              5                                                        50                                                        50
   2
   0                                                          0                                                        0                                                          0
   2
                                                              5                                                        50
   4                                                                                                                                                                              50

   6                                                         10
                                                                                                                   100                                                           100
   8
       7.5   5.0           2.5 0.0       2.5    5.0    7.5         15        10    5     0       5     10                        100         50        0       50     100              100    50       0        50        100
        Llama_3.2_1B: ring                                    Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: ring                                        Gemma_2_2B: ring                                        Gemma_2_9B: ring
                                                                                                                       30                                                        40
   3                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                       20                                                        30
   2                                                         1.0                                                       10                                                        20
   1                                                                                                                   0                                                         10
                                                             0.5
   0                                                                                                                   10                                                         0
                                                             0.0                                                       20                                                         10
   1
                                                             0.5                                                       30                                                         20
   2
                                                                                                                       40                                                         30
   3                                                         1.0
       3     2         1     0       1     2     3     4            2.0      1.5   1.0   0.5   0.0   0.5    1.0             40           20            0        20          40           20        0       20        40
        Llama_3.2_1B: hex                                     Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: hex                                         Gemma_2_2B: hex                                         Gemma_2_9B: hex
   8                                                                                                               100
                                                             15                                                                                                                  100
   6
                                                                                                                       50
                                                             10
   4                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                              5                                                        0
   2
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
   0                                                          0                                                        50
   2                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                              5                                                    100
   4
                                                             10                                                    150                                                           100
   6
       7.5       5.0       2.5   0.0      2.5    5.0                    15    10     5   0      5    10     15              150        100        50       0   50    100                100   50       0        50    100


Figure 11: We plot 2d PCA projections from the last layer of various language models, given various
data generating processes. For the grid and hexagonal graphs, we apply PCA on the last layers. For
the rings, we visualize layers 14, 10, 16, and 20 respectively. Interestingly, for Llama3.2-1B, we
find the ring representation in the 2nd and 3rd principal components.


C.3    S TANDARDIZED D IRICHLET E NERGY

In Fig. 13, we report Dirichlet energy values computed after standardization of representations,
i.e., after mean-centering them and normalizing by the standard deviation. This renders the trivial
solution to Dirichlet energy minimization infeasible, since assigning a constant representation to
all nodes will yield infinite energy (due to zero variance). As can be seen in our results, the plots
are qualitatively similar to the non-standardized energy results (Fig. 12), but more noisy, especially
for the ring graphs. This is expected, since standardization can exacerbate the influence of noise,
yielding fluctuations in the energy calculation.


                                                                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             Layer 18                                                                                Layer 9                                                                                Layer 18                                                                                Layer 18                                                                                  Layer 28
                                                             Layer 30                                                                                Layer 15                                                                               Layer 30                                                                                Layer 24                                                                                  Layer 36
                                                             Accuracy                                                                                Accuracy                                                                               Accuracy                                                                                Accuracy                                                                                  Accuracy
                                                   Llama_3.1_8B: grid                                                                      Llama_3.2_1B: grid                                                             Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: grid                                                                     Gemma_2_2B: grid                                                                          Gemma_2_9B: grid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.045                                                                                0.030                                           0.9
                                      0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.022                                           0.8
                                                                                                                              0.05                                                                                                                           0.8
        Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                       Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized Dirichlet Energy
                                                                                                                                                                      0.8                                       0.040                                                                                                                                0.8
                                                                              0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.025                                                                                     0.020                                           0.7
                                      0.04                                                                                    0.04                                                                              0.035                                                                                                                                0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6                                                                                                                               0.018                                           0.6
                                                                              0.6                                                                                     0.6                                       0.030                                                                                0.020                                           0.6


                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.016                                           0.5
                                      0.03                                                                                    0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.025                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4                                     0.015                                                                                     0.014                                           0.4
                                                                              0.4                                                                                     0.4                                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                              0.02                                                                              0.020                                                                                                                                                                          0.012                                           0.3
                                      0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.010                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.015                                        0.2                                                                                                                               0.010                                           0.2
                                                                              0.2                                             0.01                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                      0.01                                                                                                                                                                      0.010                                                                                0.005                                                                                     0.008                                           0.1
                                                                                                                              0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                             100       101      102     103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100    101        102   103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100       101      102     103
                                                      Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                         Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                            Context Length
                                                   Llama_3.1_8B: ring                                                                      Llama_3.2_1B: ring                                                             Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: ring                                                        0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gemma_2_2B: ring                                                                          Gemma_2_9B: ring
                                                                              1.0                                                                                                                                       0.12                                 1.0                                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                              0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.06
        Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                          Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Normalized Dirichlet Energy
                                      0.10                                                                                                                            0.8                                                                                                                                    0.07                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                              0.8                                             0.10                                                                                      0.10                                 0.8                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.06                                                                                      0.05
                                      0.08                                                                                    0.08                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                              0.6                                                                                                                                       0.08                                 0.6                                             0.05                                    0.6
                                                                                                                              0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.04
                                      0.06                                                                                                                            0.4                                                                                                                                    0.04                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                              0.4                                                                                                                                       0.06                                 0.4                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                              0.04                                                                                                                                                                           0.03                                                                                      0.03
                                      0.04
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2                                               0.04                                 0.2                                                                                     0.2                                                                                       0.2
                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                              0.02                                                                                                                                                                           0.02
                                      0.02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.02
                                                                              0.0                                                                                                                                       0.02                                 0.0                                             0.01                                    0.0                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                              0.00                                    0.0
                                             100       101      102     103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100    101        102   103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100       101      102     103
                                                      Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                         Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                            Context Length
                                                   Llama_3.1_8B: hex          1.0
                                                                                                                                           Llama_3.2_1B: hex                                                              Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: hex                                                                      Gemma_2_2B: hex                                                                           Gemma_2_9B: hex
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.016
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0225                                                                                                                                                                               0.011
                                0.025                                                                                 0.025                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
  Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                               Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                       Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized Dirichlet Energy
                                                                                                                                                                      0.8                                                                                    0.8                                     0.014                                           0.8
                                                                              0.8                                                                                                                         0.0200                                                                                                                                                                               0.010                                           0.7
                                0.020                                                                                 0.020                                                                               0.0175                                                                                     0.012                                                                                     0.009                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                    0.6                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                      0.015                                                                               0.0150                                                                                     0.010                                                                                     0.008                                           0.5
                                0.015
                                                                                                                                                                      0.4                                 0.0125                                             0.4                                     0.008                                                                                     0.007                                           0.4
                                                                              0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                      0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0100                                                                                                                                                                               0.006                                           0.3
                                0.010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.006
                                                                              0.2                                                                                     0.2                                 0.0075                                             0.2                                                                                     0.2                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                      0.005                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.004
                                0.005                                                                                                                                                                     0.0050                                                                                                                                                                               0.004                                           0.1
                                             100       101      102     103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100    101        102   103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100       101      102     103
                                                      Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                         Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                            Context Length


Figure 12: Accuracy versus normalized Dirichlet energy curves for various language models on
various tasks. For every model and task, we see energy minimized before accuracy starting to
improve.


                                                             Layer 18                                                                                Layer 9                                                                                Layer 18                                                                                Layer 18                                                                                  Layer 28
                                                             Layer 30                                                                                Layer 15                                                                               Layer 30                                                                                Layer 24                                                                                  Layer 36
                                                             Accuracy                                                                                Accuracy                                                                               Accuracy                                                                                Accuracy                                                                                  Accuracy
                                0.130
                                                   Llama_3.1_8B: grid                                                         0.13
                                                                                                                                           Llama_3.2_1B: grid                                                   0.130
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: grid                                                                     Gemma_2_2B: grid                                                     0.130
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gemma_2_9B: grid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.125                                           0.9                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.8
  Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                       Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                0.125                                                                                                                                                                           0.125                                                                                                                                0.8
                                                                              0.8                                             0.12                                    0.8                                                                                                                            0.120                                                                                     0.125                                           0.7
                                0.120                                                                                                                                                                           0.120                                                                                                                                0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6                                     0.115                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                0.115                                                                                         0.11                                                                              0.115                                                                                                                                0.6                                       0.120
                                                                              0.6                                                                                     0.6
                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.110                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                0.110                                                                                                                                                                           0.110                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                              0.10                                                                                                                           0.4                                     0.105                                                                                     0.115                                           0.4
                                0.105                                         0.4                                                                                     0.4                                       0.105                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.3
                                0.100                                                                                                                                                                           0.100                                                                                0.100                                           0.3                                       0.110
                                                                                                                              0.09
                                                                              0.2                                                                                                                                                                            0.2                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                0.095                                                                                                                                 0.2                                       0.095                                                                                0.095                                           0.2
                                                                                                                              0.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.105                                           0.1
                                0.090                                                                                                                                                                           0.090                                                                                0.090                                           0.1
                                             100       101      102     103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100    101        102   103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100       101      102     103
                                                      Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                         Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                            Context Length
                                                   Llama_3.1_8B: ring                                                         0.30
                                                                                                                                           Llama_3.2_1B: ring                                                   0.300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: ring                                                        0.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gemma_2_2B: ring                                                                          Gemma_2_9B: ring
                                                                              1.0                                                                                                                                                                            1.0                                                                                     1.0
                                0.235
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.300
  Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                       Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                      0.8                                       0.295                                                                                        0.32                                                                                                                              0.8
                                0.230                                         0.8                                             0.29                                                                                                                           0.8                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.295
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.290
                                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                                                                    0.31                                                                                                                              0.6
                                0.225                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.290
                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                              0.6                                             0.28                                                                              0.285                                        0.6                                                                                     0.6
                                0.220                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.30                                                                              0.285
                                                                                                                                                                      0.4                                       0.280                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                              0.4                                                                                                                                                                            0.4                                                                                     0.4
                                0.215                                                                                         0.27                                                                                                                                                                           0.29                                                                              0.280
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.275                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                0.210                                         0.2                                                                                     0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                                     0.2                                       0.275
                                                                                                                              0.26                                                                                                                                                                           0.28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.270
                                0.205                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.270
                                                                              0.0                                                                                                                                                                            0.0                                             0.27                                    0.0                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                             100       101      102     103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100    101        102   103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100       101      102     103
                                                      Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                         Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                            Context Length
                                0.065
                                                   Llama_3.1_8B: hex          1.0
                                                                                                                                           Llama_3.2_1B: hex                                                    0.065
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Llama_3.1_8B_Instruct: hex                                                                      Gemma_2_2B: hex                                                0.0650
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gemma_2_9B: hex
                                                                                                                      0.065                                                                                                                                                                          0.065
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0625                                                0.8
  Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                               Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                       Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized Dirichlet Energy


                                                                                                                      0.060                                           0.8                                       0.060                                        0.8                                                                                     0.8
                                0.060                                         0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.060                                                                                                                                     0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0600
                                                                                                                      0.055
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.055                                        0.6                                     0.055                                                                               0.0575                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy


                                0.055                                         0.6                                     0.050
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0550                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.050                                                                                0.050
                                                                                                                      0.045                                                                                                                                  0.4                                                                                                                         0.0525                                                0.4
                                0.050                                         0.4                                                                                     0.4                                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.045
                                                                                                                      0.040                                                                                     0.045                                                                                                                                                                    0.0500                                                0.3
                                0.045                                         0.2                                     0.035                                           0.2                                                                                    0.2                                     0.040                                           0.2                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0475
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.040
                                                                                                                      0.030                                                                                                                                                                          0.035                                                                               0.0450                                                0.1
                                             100       101      102     103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100    101        102   103                                                          100       101      102     103                                                            100       101      102     103
                                                      Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                         Context Length                                                                          Context Length                                                                            Context Length


Figure 13: Accuracy versus zero mean centered normalized Dirichlet energy curves for various
language models on various tasks. Zero mean centering ensures that graph representations are not
using the trivial solution to energy minimization (i.e., assigning the same representation for every
node).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4   C AUSAL A NALYSIS OF R EPRESENTATIONS

In this section we report preliminary causal analyses of our graph representations. While fully under-
standing the mechanisms behind the formation of such representations, as well as the relationship
between said representations and model outputs are an interesting future direction, this is not the
focus of our work and thus we only ran proof-of-concept experiments.
With that said, we ask: do the principal components that encode our graph representations have any
causal role in the model’s predictions?
To test this, we attempt to “move” the location of the activations for one node of the graph to another
by simply re-scaling its principal components. Namely, assume activation hℓi corresponding to node
i at layer ℓ. Say we wish to “move” the activation to a different target node j. We first compute
the mean representation of node j using all activations corresponding to node j within the most
recent Nw (= 200) timesteps, notated as h̄j . Assuming the first two principal components encode
the “coordinates” of the node, we simply re-scale the principal components of hi to match that of
h̄j .
We view this approach as rather rudimentary. Namely, there are likely more informative vectors that
encode richer information, such as information about neighboring nodes. However, we do find that
the first two principal components have some causal role in the model’s predictions.
We test our re-scaling intervention on 1,000 randomly generated contexts. For each context, assum-
ing our underlying graph has n nodes, we test “moving” the activations of the last token i to all n − 1
other locations in the graph. We then report the averaged metric across the resulting 1,000 × n − 1
testcases.
We report 3 metrics: accuracy (Hit@1), Hit@3, and “accumulated probability mass” on valid tokens.
Hit@1 (and Hit@3) report the percentage of times at which the top 1 (top 3) predicted token is a
valid neighbor of the target node j. For “accumulated probability mass”, we simply sum up the
probability mass allocated to all neighbors (i.e., valid predictions) of the target node j.
Table 1 reports our results for our ring and grid tasks. We include results for re-scaling with 2 or 3
principal components, as well as null interventions and interventions with a random vector. Overall,
we find that the principal components have some causal effect on the model’s output predictions, but
does not provide a full explanation.

                              Ring                         Grid                        Hex
                    Hit@1     Hit@3      Prob    Hit@1     Hit@3     Prob    Hit@1     Hit@3     Prob
  Interv. (n=2)      0.61      0.91       0.6     0.57      0.95     0.55     0.30      0.32     0.69
  Interv. (n=3)      0.77      0.96      0.76     0.68      0.98     0.65     0.42      0.46     0.82
   Null Interv.      0.20      0.50      0.20     0.17      0.33     0.16     0.07      0.20     0.05
 Random Interv.      0.17      0.47      0.19     0.16      0.37     0.17     0.06      0.18     0.05

Table 1: Intervention results for our ring and grid tasks. We demonstrate that often times, simply
re-scaling the principal component for each token representation can “move” the token to a different
position in the graph. However, we note that our simple re-scaling approach does not perfectly
capture a causal relationship between principal components and model predictions.

C.5   E MPIRICAL S IMILARITY OF P RINCIPAL C OMPONENTS AND S PECTRAL E MBEDDINGS

Theorem 5.1 predicts that if the model representations are minimizing the Dirichlet energy, the first
two principal components will be equivalent to the spectral embeddings (z (2) , z (3) .
Here we empirically measure whether the first two principal components are indeed equivalent to
the spectral embeddings. In Table 2, we measure the cosine similarity scores between the principal
components and spectral embeddings.

C.6   ACCURACY OF I N - CONTEXT TASKS WITH A CONFLICTING SEMANTIC PRIOR

What would happen when an in-context task which contradicts a semantic prior is given to a model?
Namely, Engels et al. (2024) show that words like days of the week have a circular representation.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              | cos(PC 1, z (2) )|        | cos(PC2, z (3) )|
                           Grid                     0.950                       0.954
                           Ring                     0.942                       0.930
                           Hex                      0.745                       0.755

Table 2: Absolute value of cosine distances of principal components from model activations and
spectral embeddings. We empirically observe that in practice, these coordinates end up being very
similar. For the grid and hexagon, we use principal components from the last layer, while for the
ring, we use an earlier layer (layer 10) in which the ring is observed.


In our experiment, we randomly shuffle tokens for days of the week (i.e., tokens {Mon, Tue,
Wed, Thu, Fri, Sat, Sun} to define a new ring, and give random neighboring pairs from
the newly defined ring as our in-context task.
Figure 14 demonstrates the accuracy when given an in-context task that is contradictory to a semantic
prior. Interestingly, we first observe the model make predictions that reflects the original semantic
prior (pink). This accuracy drops very quickly as the model captures that the semantic rule is not
being followed. With more exemplars, we see a slow decay of the remaining semantic accuracy and
a transition in the model’s behavior as it begins to make predictions that reflect the newly defined
ordering of our ring (blue).

                                        1.0         Shuffled
                                                    Semantic
                                        0.8
                                        0.6
                             Accuracy


                                        0.4
                                        0.2
                                        0.0
                                                0      200          400      600     800
                                                         Number of examples


Figure 14: In-context structure overrides semantic prior. Given an in-context task that contra-
dicts a model’s semantic prior, we observe the model transition from making predictions that adhere
to the semantic prior (pink) to predictions that reflect the newly defined in-context task.

Furthermore, in Fig. 15, we quantify the Dirichlet energy computed only from certain PC dimen-
sions. We find that energy minimization happens in the dimensions corresponding to the in-context
structure.

                                    0.5

                                    0.4
                             Energy


                                    0.3
                                                    Total
                                    0.2             PCA 1,2
                                                    PCA 3,4
                                               6 × 100      101          2 × 101 3 × 101
                                                            Context Length


Figure 15: Energy minimization happens in the in-context component dimensions. We show
the Dirichlet energy depending on the context given when taking 1) all 2) semantic (PCA 1,2) 3)
in-context (PCA 3,4) dimensions. We show that energy minimization happens in PCA 3,4 corre-
sponding to the in-context dimensions.


                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.7               A DDITIONAL E MPIRICAL V ERIFICATIONS OF T RANSITION P REDICTIONS

Here we provide additional details for empirically verifying our predictions for model transitions.
Figures 16, 17, and 18 demonstrate detailed accuracy curves for a wide range of graph sizes.


Figure 16: Emergent behavior for varying task complexity (graph size) for the Hexagonal task.
We plot the accuracy for varying levels of complexity (graph size) for the hexagonal in-context
task. Interestingly, regardless of graph size, we see an abrupt, discontinuous change in the model’s
performance. Figure 19 demonstrates that we can predict when such abrupt change can be expected
as a function of task complexity.

                  1.0     Graph Size=16                              1.0     Graph Size=25                 1.0     Graph Size=36                1.0     Graph Size=49
                  0.8                                                0.8                                   0.8                                  0.8
                  0.6                                                0.6                                   0.6                                  0.6
      pneighbor


                                                         pneighbor


                                                                                               pneighbor


                                                                                                                                    pneighbor


                  0.4           Llama ICL (raw)                      0.4                                   0.4                                  0.4
                                Llama ICL (smoothed)
                  0.2           Piecewise Linear Fit                 0.2                                   0.2                                  0.2
                                Transition Point:25.58
                  0.0                                                0.0                                   0.0                                  0.0
                    101          102                                   101          102                      101          102                     101          102
                           Example Index                                      Example Index                         Example Index                        Example Index
                  1.0     Graph Size=64                              1.0     Graph Size=81                 1.0     Graph Size=100               1.0     Graph Size=121
                  0.8                                                0.8                                   0.8                                  0.8
                  0.6                                                0.6                                   0.6                                  0.6
      pneighbor


                                                         pneighbor


                                                                                               pneighbor


                                                                                                                                    pneighbor


                  0.4                                                0.4                                   0.4                                  0.4
                  0.2                                                0.2                                   0.2                                  0.2
                  0.0                                                0.0                                   0.0                                  0.0
                    101          102                                   101          102                      101          102                     101          102
                           Example Index                                      Example Index                         Example Index                        Example Index
                  1.0     Graph Size=144                             1.0     Graph Size=169                1.0     Graph Size=196               1.0     Graph Size=225
                  0.8                                                0.8                                   0.8                                  0.8
                  0.6                                                0.6                                   0.6                                  0.6
      pneighbor


                                                         pneighbor


                                                                                               pneighbor


                                                                                                                                    pneighbor


                  0.4                                                0.4                                   0.4                                  0.4
                  0.2                                                0.2                                   0.2                                  0.2
                  0.0                                                0.0                                   0.0                                  0.0
                    101          102                                   101          102                      101          102                     101          102
                           Example Index                                      Example Index                         Example Index                        Example Index
                  1.0     Graph Size=256                             1.0     Graph Size=289                1.0     Graph Size=324               1.0     Graph Size=361
                  0.8                                                0.8                                   0.8                                  0.8
                  0.6                                                0.6                                   0.6                                  0.6
      pneighbor


                                                         pneighbor


                                                                                               pneighbor


                                                                                                                                    pneighbor


                  0.4                                                0.4                                   0.4                                  0.4
                  0.2                                                0.2                                   0.2                                  0.2
                  0.0                                                0.0                                   0.0                                  0.0
                    101          102                                   101          102                      101          102                     101          102
                           Example Index                                      Example Index                         Example Index                        Example Index


Figure 17: Emergent behavior for varying task complexity (graph size) for the grid task. We
plot the accuracy for varying levels of complexity (graph size) for the grid in-context task. Interest-
ingly, regardless of graph size, we see an abrupt, discontinuous change in the model’s performance.
Figure 8 demonstrates that we can predict when such abrupt changes can be expected as a function
of task complexity.


                                                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                1.0     Graph Size=10                              1.0     Graph Size=50                 1.0     Graph Size=100                1.0     Graph Size=200
                0.8                                                0.8                                   0.8                                   0.8
                0.6                                                0.6                                   0.6                                   0.6


    pneighbor


                                                       pneighbor


                                                                                             pneighbor


                                                                                                                                   pneighbor
                0.4           Llama ICL (raw)                      0.4                                   0.4                                   0.4
                              Llama ICL (smoothed)
                0.2           Piecewise Linear Fit                 0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2
                              Transition Point:12.86
                0.0                                                0.0                                   0.0                                   0.0
                  101          102                                   101          102                      101           102                     101          102
                         Example Index                                      Example Index                          Example Index                        Example Index
                1.0     Graph Size=300                             1.0     Graph Size=400                1.0     Graph Size=500                1.0     Graph Size=600
                0.8                                                0.8                                   0.8                                   0.8
                0.6                                                0.6                                   0.6                                   0.6
    pneighbor


                                                       pneighbor


                                                                                             pneighbor


                                                                                                                                   pneighbor
                0.4                                                0.4                                   0.4                                   0.4
                0.2                                                0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2
                0.0                                                0.0                                   0.0                                   0.0
                  101          102                                   101          102                      101           102                     101          102
                         Example Index                                      Example Index                          Example Index                        Example Index
                1.0     Graph Size=800                             1.0     Graph Size=900                1.0     Graph Size=1000
                0.8                                                0.8                                   0.8
                0.6                                                0.6                                   0.6
    pneighbor


                                                       pneighbor


                                                                                             pneighbor
                0.4                                                0.4                                   0.4
                0.2                                                0.2                                   0.2
                0.0                                                0.0                                   0.0
                  101          102                                   101          102                      101           102
                         Example Index                                      Example Index                          Example Index


Figure 18: Emergent behavior for varying task complexity (graph size) for the ring task.
We plot the accuracy for varying levels of complexity (graph size) for the ring in-context task.
Interestingly, regardless of graph size, we again see an abrupt, discontinuous change in the model’s
performance.

                                                                    48               70
    (a)                 # of Nodes
                                                                   126              286
                                                                                                (b)


Figure 19: In-context emergence in a Hexagonal graph tracing task. We analyze the in-context
accuracy curves as a function of context-size inputted to the model. The graph used in this exper-
iment is an m × m grid, with a varying value for m. (a) The rule following accuracy of a graph
tracing task. The accuracy show a two phase ascent. We fit a piecewise linear function to the ob-
served ascent to extract the transition point, which moves rightwards with increasing graph size. (b)
Interestingly, the transition point scales as a power-law in m, i.e., the number of nodes in the graph.

    a)                  48 Nodes                       b)                   70 Nodes         c)                   126 Nodes           d)               286 Nodes


Figure 20: Hexagonal graph tracing accuracies compared to the memorization solution The
rule following accuracies on the hexagonal graph compared to the memorization model in Sec. 4.1.
Hexagonal graph with a) 48 b) 70 c) 126 d) 286 nodes. Generally we find that the hexagonal graph
tracking accuracy from Llama-3.1-8B (Dubey et al., 2024) is lower than the 1,2-shot memorization
model, indicating that there might be a different underlying process.


                                                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    L IMITATIONS
We emphasize that our work has a few limitations. Namely, PCA, or more broadly, low dimensional
visualizations of high dimensional data can be difficult to interpret or sometimes even misleading.
Despite such difficulties, we provide theoretical connections between energy minimization and prin-
cipal components to provide a compelling explanation for why structures elicited via PCA faithfully
represent the in-context graph structure. Second, we find a strong, but nevertheless incomplete,
causal relationship between the representations found by PCA and the model’s predictions. We
view the exact understanding of how these representations form, and the exact relationship between
the representations and model predictions as an interesting future direction, especially given that
such underlying mechanism seems to depend on the scale of the context.


                                                27
