Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


VOILA: E VALUATION OF MLLM S FOR P ERCEPTUAL
U NDERSTANDING AND A NALOGICAL R EASONING
 Nilay Yilmaz♢∗ Maitreya Patel♢ Yiran Lawrence Luo♢ Tejas Gokhale♡                        Chitta Baral♢
 Suren Jayasuriya♢ Yezhou Yang♢
 ♢
   Arizona State University ♡ University of Maryland, Baltimore County



                                               A BSTRACT

             Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have become a powerful tool for
             integrating visual and textual information. Despite their exceptional performance
             on visual understanding benchmarks, measuring their ability to reason abstractly
             across multiple images remains a significant challenge. To address this, we intro-
             duce VOILA, a large-scale, open-ended, dynamic benchmark designed to evaluate
             MLLMs’ perceptual understanding and abstract relational reasoning. VOILA em-
             ploys an analogical mapping approach in the visual domain, requiring models to
             generate an image that completes an analogy between two given image pairs, ref-
             erence and application, without relying on predefined choices. Our experiments
             demonstrate that the analogical reasoning tasks in VOILA present a challenge to
             MLLMs. Through multi-step analysis, we reveal that current MLLMs struggle
             to comprehend inter-image relationships and exhibit limited capabilities in high-
             level relational reasoning. Notably, we observe that performance improves when
             following a multi-step strategy of least-to-most prompting. Comprehensive eval-
             uations on open-source models and GPT-4o show that on text-based answers, the
             best accuracy for challenging scenarios is 13% (LLaMa 3.2) and even for simpler
             tasks is only 29% (GPT-4o), while human performance is significantly higher at
             70% across both difficulty levels.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have made remarkable strides in advancing human-
level language processing and visual perception in tasks such as image captioning (Vinyals et al.,
2015), visual question answering (Agrawal et al., 2016), object detection, and scene understanding
(Bochkovskiy et al., 2020). While these advancements are promising, perceptual reasoning tasks
such as relational and analogical reasoning, where models must infer and understand visual infor-
mation, remain a significant challenge. Achieving human-level cognitive intelligence in these tasks
demands greater attention and development.
According to Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives, creation, rather than evaluation, requires
the highest cognitive skills in the learning process (Bloom et al., 1956). However, many current mul-
timodal reasoning tasks (Wang et al., 2024e; Plummer et al., 2016) rely on multiple-choice formats,
where models select a solution from a predefined set. Although this approach provides insight into
the learning and understanding capabilities of a model, we argue that it fails to reveal the model’s
ability to engage in high-level cognitive tasks involving the interpretation of visual context and ab-
stract reasoning. To attain human-level cognitive intelligence, MLLMs must go beyond evaluating
options; they must generate solutions for complex tasks that require advanced reasoning skills. Ex-
isting studies on open-ended visual reasoning tasks (Zellers et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Johnson
et al., 2016), which assess MLLMs’ cognitive capabilities, are limited in scope and do not fully
explore these higher-order reasoning abilities.
In response to these challenges, we introduce VOILA: an open-ended reasoning benchmark de-
signed to evaluate whether MLLMs possess vision-level understanding and relational reasoning ca-
pabilities. Our benchmark focuses on an analogical reasoning task which has been developed as
    ∗
        Corresponding author: nyilmaz3@asu.edu. Code and data: github.com/nlylmz/Voila


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          VOILA with Distractions (VOILA-WD)                 VOILA without Distractions (VOILA-ND)


            :             ::            :
                                               ?                 :            ::             :
                                                                                                     ?
            :             ::            :
                                               ?                 :            ::             :
                                                                                                     ?
Figure 1: Examples of visual analogy questions from the VOILA benchmark with distractions
(VOILA-WD) and without distractions (VOILA-ND). The aim is to generate an image that completes
the analogy problem following perceptual and relational reasoning. Each visual analogy question
has a specific rule configuration that leads to the answer. The questions in VOILA-WD benchmark
can apply the distraction rule when no relational pattern exists between images. For the examples
shown above, the answers that complete the VOILA-ND analogy by following the relation rules are
“two bears driving a car” and “two female children swimming”. The answers to the VOILA-WD
analogy are “four [any subject] reading” and “two male children doing anything”.



a cognitive assessment of problem-solving, decision-making, classification, and learning processes
(Goswami, 1992). Analogical reasoning consists of diverse atomic abilities; perceptual understand-
ing, mapping abstract relationships between visual contents (Gentner, 1983), and transferring rela-
tional patterns to novel cases. These integral sub-tasks are essential for achieving a coherent solution
to the analogy problem. A key aspect of analogical reasoning is the transfer of knowledge from pre-
viously learned relations to new concepts. The task involves two image pairs: a reference pair and
an application pair. The reference pair shares both visual and abstract contextual information. The
goal is to infer the relationship and apply it to predict the unknown content in the application pair.
A few examples are shown in Figure 1.
Our benchmark incorporates a multi-step reasoning process, which is crucial for analyzing where
MLLMs encounter difficulties. This process allows for a detailed examination of the models’ limi-
tations about the key properties of the task. To introduce varying levels of difficulty, we created two
sub-datasets: VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND. Our findings indicate that VOILA-WD presents a greater
challenge than VOILA-ND due to the introduction of visual distractions where a certain property of
the image (e.g. subject, number, task) is irrelevant to the analogical reasoning. Experimental results
reveal that state-of-the-art MLLMs struggle on VOILA. Although GPT-4o reaches 79% accuracy
in the description of the image and 43% precision in the identification of the relationship stages, it
struggles to produce correct answers to complete the analogy. LLaMa 3.2 achieves the highest per-
formance, attaining 13% accuracy in implementing the relationship stage on VOILA-WD. Interest-
ingly, GPT-4o outperforms other models on VOILA-ND, achieving an accuracy of 29% in applying
relationships. However, human performance significantly surpasses these results, achieving 71%
and 69% accuracy on VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND, respectively.
We observe that least-to-most (L2M) prompting (Zhou et al., 2023) improves model accuracy com-
pared to direct answering strategies. Input formats also influence model performance: using sequen-
tial images instead of a single image collage results in an average of 40% improvement. Addition-
ally, the image generation step notably reduces model performance. We conduct an ablation study
on VOILA-WD using GPT-4o, showing that even when ground truth information (image descriptions
or relationships) is provided at each step, the model achieves only 17% accuracy on the applying
relations step. Another ablation study on the VOILA-ND benchmark demonstrates that the model’s
performance improves by 27% when textual information is used instead of visual input. We describe
our experimental setup and findings in Sections 4 and 5 in detail.
Our contributions and findings are summarized below:
• We present VOILA, a large-scale, open-ended benchmark to evaluate MLLMs’ high-level visual
  reasoning capabilities. We introduce a method for the dynamic creation of extensive visual anal-
  ogy questions utilizing text-to-image models.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Figure 2: Dataset creation pipeline of VOILA.


• We assess state-of-the-art MLLMs on VOILA, revealing a significant performance gap between
  humans (71%) and MLLMs (13%).
• We conduct comprehensive investigation of factors influencing performance: image format,
  prompting techniques, distraction rules, input information types, and provision of ground truths.


2   R ELATED WORK

Visual Analogical Reasoning. Visual Analogical Reasoning is a complex task that requires mod-
els to recognize abstract similarities between visual contexts and underlying relational rules and to
apply these rules to novel visual content to generate solutions. Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPMs)
(Raven et al., 1938), introduced in 1938, are one of the earliest visual analogical reasoning tests,
designed to assess human intelligence by completing a 3x3 matrix of visual patterns based on rela-
tional reasoning. Recent visual analogy benchmarks, such as VISALOGY (Sadeghi et al., 2015) and
VASR (Bitton et al., 2022), offer valuable perspectives but have limitations. VISALOGY, which is
not publicly available, focuses on attributes and actions in Google images with manual annotations,
while VASR emphasizes general image understanding rather than feature-based relationships. In
contrast, VOILA introduces a more complex and dynamic approach to visual analogical reasoning.
It incorporates diverse subject relationships and rule-based structures and manipulates up to three
properties at a time. Additionally, VOILA introduces distraction elements to increase task difficulty,
requiring models to discover and filter out the irrelevant changes among properties while solving
analogy questions. Unlike static datasets, VOILA allows the generation of over 6.4M distinct visual
analogy scenarios across 14 subject types, 13 actions, and 4 numeric values by adjusting flexible
property-rule configuration, offering a scalable and adaptable evaluation platform for MLLMs.

Prompting. Prompting strategies are critical to improving the performance of MLLMs, especially
in complex reasoning tasks. Zero-shot prompting provides models with task instructions without
examples, while few-shot prompting includes example-based prompts to guide the model toward
the correct answer (Brown et al., 2020). Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting enhances reasoning by
breaking down problems into sequential steps, allowing the model to tackle each sub-problem in a
structured manner (Wei et al., 2022). Two common CoT approaches include zero-shot CoT (Kojima
et al., 2022), which encourages step-by-step reasoning without examples, and few-shot CoT (Wei
et al., 2022), which includes rationales or explanations to guide reasoning. Research has shown that
few-shot CoT, by providing exemplar rationales, often outperforms zero-shot approaches (Zhang
et al., 2024). Another method, Least-to-Most (L2M) prompting (Zhou et al., 2023), adopts a similar
multi-phase structure as CoT but without the use of rationales. Instead, L2M progressively breaks
down the task, using the solution to each sub-problem as input for the next. In VOILA, we extend the
use of L2M to gain a deeper understanding of MLLMs’ behavior across sub-tasks, from recognizing
visual content to generating accurate images based on relational reasoning.

Multimodal Reasoning Benchmarks. Multimodal reasoning benchmarks have been instrumen-
tal in advancing the evaluation of MLLMs, integrating both textual and visual information to assess
models’ capabilities across a variety of domains. Domain-specific benchmarks like ScienceQA (Lu
et al., 2022), A-OKVQA (Schwenk et al., 2022), Math-Vision (Wang et al., 2024b), and MMMU-
Pro (Yue et al., 2024) focus on specialized knowledge, such as scientific, mathematical, and visual
question-answering reasoning tasks. Meanwhile, benchmarks such as CompBench (Kil et al., 2024),
MMRel (Nie et al., 2024), MARVEL (Jiang et al., 2024b), and ScanReason (Zhu et al., 2024) ad-
dress more generalized multimodal relational reasoning. Several studies also focus on multi-step
reasoning tasks, where models must process information sequentially, such as VisualCoT (Shao
et al., 2024), LogicVista (Xiao et al., 2024), and VideoCoT (Wang et al., 2024d), while datasets


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


such as MuirBench (Wang et al., 2024a), MIRB (Zhao et al., 2024) and MANTIS-Eval (Jiang et al.,
2024a) assess multiple image reasoning. Visual action planning (Gokhale et al., 2019) and visual
procedural planning (Chang et al., 2020; Su et al., 2024) has also been explored to find relationships
between pairs of images. However, VOILA distinguishes itself by focusing on high-order abstract
relations and knowledge transfer across multiple images, challenging models not only to under-
stand but also to generate both images and text while applying correct relational reasoning. These
positions VOILA as a unique benchmark for testing MLLMs’ higher-level cognitive abilities.

3     C ONSTRUCTING THE VOILA B ENCHMARK
The VOILA benchmark was designed to evaluate the abstract reasoning capabilities of MLLMs.
This task challenges models to process perceptual information and apply relational reasoning by in-
terpreting visual content from three given images to generate a fourth image according to a specified
pattern. VOILA is a large-scale dataset that dynamically generates visual analogy questions based
on demand and configuration. The dataset can generate over 6.4M questions, distributed across 19
unique structures and utilizing a total of 7,280 images which makes VOILA highly scalable and
adaptable to various configurations. Figure 2 illustrates the dataset creation pipeline of VOILA.

3.1   DATASET C REATION P IPELINE

Property Identification. The VOILA dataset is generated using an image analogy framework
(A : A′ :: B : B ′ ). Each of the first three images contains distinct properties that form the basis
for the visual analogy questions. We identified three key properties: the number of subjects, subject
type, and action. In the VOILA benchmark, each question qi includes three images (I1 , I2 , I3 ), with
each image containing corresponding properties (ni , si , ai ) ∈ P . A total of 14 subjects, 4 numbers,
and 13 actions were used to create the image dataset. For further details regarding the categorical
information of the property types, please refer to Appendix A.1.

Rule Definition. To structure each visual analogy question, four types of rules are applied in
VOILA: Stable, Change, Arithmetic, and Distraction. The rules are assigned to the properties as
outlined in Table 1, with each image containing rule-property pairs I(ri , pi ). Let N symbolize the
number of the subject property, P1 , P2 and P3 represent the same property (subject type or action)
but different values. The rule patterns are defined as follows:
• Stable: The property value in the first image is the same as in the second image:
                                          P1 : P1 :: P2 : P2 .
• Change: The property value in the first image changes in the second image:
                                          P1 : P2 :: P1 : P2 .
• Arithmetic: The number of subjects changes by either increasing or decreasing from the first
  image to the second image. N ≥ 1:
                            N2 : N4 :: N1 : N3 → 4 − 2 = 2 :: 1 + 2 = 3.
• Distraction: The property values except the number of subjects are different in three images.
  There is no correlation among these values, so P is a distraction. After applying increase or
  decrease changes, if N ≤ 0, then N is a distraction:
             P1 : P2 :: P3 : AN Y .N4 : N1 :: N2 : AN Y → 1 − 4 = −3 :: 2 − 3 = −1.

Text Prompt and Image Generation. To ensure that the relationships between images are easily
recognizable, the images in VOILA must be clear and object-centered. We employ the open-source
SDXL model, which generates high-quality images based on a simple text prompt structure that
includes the number of subjects, subject types, and actions, for example “Two dogs walking”. Com-
plex or overly detailed prompts can lead to incorrect image generation (Podell et al., 2023), so we
maintain straightforward prompt structures. After generating text prompts, the images for the anal-
ogy questions are produced using the SDXL pipeline, with output resolution set to 1024 × 1024 and
a guidance scale of 8, which controls the fidelity to the text prompt. For each prompt, 30 images are
generated. Appendix A.2 provides examples of generated images and their text descriptions.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: VOILA contains analogies with three properties and four rules applied to these properties.

                 Properties            Stable   Change      Arithmetic   Distraction
                 Action                  ✓         ✓             ×            ✓
                 Number of Subjects      ✓         ×             ✓            ✓
                 Subject Type            ✓         ✓             ×            ✓


Algorithm 1 Visual Analogy Generation
  Input: Three property arrays: numbers[], subjects[], actions[]
  Output: Question array: Q[Image0 , Image1 , Image2 , Image3 ]
  Define rules Ry where y = 1, 2, 3, 4 {Stable, Changes, Arithmetic, Distraction}
  Define analogy structures Ai where i = 1, 2, . . . , 19
  Each structure Ai contains variables ni , si , ai and different rule configurations
  for i = 1 to 19 do
     ni ← applyRy (numbers[]) {Generate all possible permutations of properties}
     si ← applyRy (subjects[])
     ai ← applyRy (actions[])
     combinations[] ← combineProperties(ni , si , ai , count) {Generate random selections with balanced
     distribution}
     for n, s, a in combinations[] do
        for x = 0 to 3 do
           Imagex ← findImage(n[x], s[x], a[x], index) {Find images that matches requested properties.
           Use the index to provide a variety of images.}
        end for
        Q ← (Image0 , Image1 , Image2 , Image3 )
     end for
  end for
  End


Data Cleaning. It is essential to verify the alignment between the text prompts and the generated
images. Some images may not correspond correctly to their prompts (see Appendix A.3), making
them unsuitable for visual analogy construction. These images were manually filtered, and from this
process, we retained 10 images per prompt, resulting in a total of 7,280 diverse images.

Building Image Analogies. To construct visual analogy questions, we combine image features
using predetermined rules. Each question follows a specific rule-property configuration, with the
number of properties undergoing changes determining the dataset configuration. Since VOILA in-
cludes three properties, it proposes three different analogy structures. The number of cases required
for each structure is calculated by pairing unchanged properties with unmodified rules. Given that
Arithmetic and Change rules modify properties, the remaining two rules are used for the process.
                                                         n!
                                      C = rn−p ·                 ,                                 (1)
                                                   p! · (n − p)!
where r is the number of rules (excluding Arithmetic and Change), n is the total number of prop-
erties, and p indicates the number of changed properties. This yields 19 unique cases for three
configurations: 12 cases for 1 property change, 6 cases for 2 property changes, and 1 case where all
properties change. Appendix A.5 details the possible cases and assigned rules for each property.
To create a dynamic VOILA benchmark, we propose the Visual Analogy Generation strategy (see
Algorithm 1), which takes input properties, structure, and rule configurations and outputs the cor-
responding image sequence for each VOILA question. Each structure is assigned a property-rule
configuration, and the number of distinct analogy questions for each structure is calculated based
on rule-property permutations, including dual permutations for the Stable and Change rules, and
length-3 permutations for the Distraction rule. Unique number combinations for Arithmetic and
Distraction rules are manually calculated to eliminate redundancy (see Appendix A.5 for details).
In VOILA, the analogy questions are equally distributed among the 19 structures, ensuring a distinct
combination of properties for each question. Images can be reused across different configurations,
preserving uniqueness while distributing image usage evenly.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                    Sequential Images or Image Collage


                                                                                                                                                                           Evaluation
       Understanding the visual content of images
                                                                                                            Expected Output : number + subject + action                 *Evaluation
    Prompt 1: Describe the content of three images in one sentence using                                    Image 1: Two senior woman playing soccer.                   Prompts:
    number of subjects, subject types, and actions in the format of 'Image :                                Image 2: Two elderly woman reading book.                    Give me the score
    Description'                                                                                            Image 3: Four rabbits playing with a ball.                  by comparing the
                                                                                                                                                                        provided texts to
       Identifying the relationships                                                                                                                                    the ground truth.
                                                                                                            Expected Output :                                           If the answer is
    Prompt 2: Identify the changed and unchanged properties observed                                        The subject number remains constant two.                    correct, assign 1
    between the first and second images, focusing on number of subjects,                                    Action is changed from playing soccer to reading a book.    point for each
    subject types, and action properties.                                                                   Subject type remains constant senior woman.                 property,
                                                                                                                                                                        otherwise give 0.

        Applying the relationship to the third image
    Prompt 3: Apply the identified unchanged and changed properties to the Image
    3 to predict Image 4. Give me the answer for the fourth image in the format of
    'The answer is number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}'. Use the
    following rules to determine the properties for the fourth image:                          Muti-modal
    1.If a property remains constant between Image 1 and Image 2, the property in                 Large      Expected Output :
    the fourth image will have the same value as the property from the Image 3.                 Language     The answer is:
    2.If a property (excluding number of subjects) changes between Image1 and                    Models      number = 4 subject = rabbits action = reading a book
    Image 2 and is the same in the Image 1 and Image 3, set the property value from
    Image 2 to the fourth image. Otherwise, set it to 'any’.                                                                                                                   Ground Truth:
    3. To determine the number of subjects in the fourth image, apply the increase
    or decrease rate observed from Image 1 to Image 2 to the number of subjects in
    Image 3. If the result is less than one, set the number property to 'any'.


       Generating the fourth image                                                                                                                                     VQA Prompts:
                                                                                                                                                                       1. Is there {subject}?
    Prompt 4: Generate the image based on the following description : {output}                                                                                         2. Is there {number}
                                                                                                                                                                       subject?
                                                                                                                                                                       3. Is subject {action}?


Figure 3: VOILA multi-step reasoning and evaluation pipeline. The top section illustrates two visual
input formats. The left side of the MLLMs connection displays the four primary tasks along with
their corresponding prompts, while the right side presents the expected outcomes for each task. The
results are scored in the evaluation stage utilizing GPT-4o and ground truths.


4       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
VOILA Test Dataset. For evaluating MLLMs, the VOILA benchmark is split into two distinct
test datasets: VOILA-WD, which includes Distraction rules, and VOILA-ND, which excludes them.
VOILA-WD consists of 10K unique questions, applying all four rules across 19 structures, while
VOILA-ND comprises 3.6K questions with seven configurations and three rules (see Appendix A.4
for details). Each dataset contains 527 questions per configuration, with 728 images annotated with
image contents, relationship explanations, and descriptions of the requested image.

Models. We evaluated several baseline models on both VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND: GPT-4o
(Achiam et al., 2023), Emu2-37B (Sun et al., 2024), Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct (Wang et al., 2024c),
CogVLM2-19B (Hong et al., 2024), SEED-LLaMA-8B (Ge et al., 2023), Llama 3.2-11B, and
MolmoE-7B (Deitke et al., 2024). Models incapable of producing visual output were excluded
from the image generation task.

Image Input. Given that some baseline models, such as CogVLM2, do not support multiple image
inputs, we implemented two visual input formats: a sequential presentation of the three images and
an image collage combining the three images into a single visual representation.

Prompting. We applied the Least-to-Most (L2M) prompting strategy (Zhou et al., 2023) and man-
ually decomposed the visual analogy task into four sub-problems: (1) understanding the visual
content, (2) identifying relationships between images, (3) applying those relationships to the third
image, and (4) generating the content of the fourth image. Instead of using sub-questions, we em-
ployed sub-instructions, asking the models to solve each sub-task sequentially, with the previous
answer appended to the next problem. This structured reasoning process allowed us to evaluate
performance at each sub-task. We tested various prompts on the baseline models using both L2M
and direct answer approaches. The prompts used for multi-step reasoning and direct answering are
detailed in Appendix C.1.

Evaluation. Performance on VOILA is assessed at each step based on correct property prediction.
Using GPT-4o and four distinct text prompts, we scored model responses for each step, see Figure


                                                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 2: Evaluation results of VOILA using least-to-most (L2M) (Zhou et al., 2023) prompting.

                          VOILA-WD (VOILA w/ Distraction)         VOILA-ND (VOILA w/o Distraction)
                       Describing   Identifying    Applying      Describing   Identifying    Applying
Method
                        Images       Relations    Relationship    Images       Relations    Relationship
Human (AMTurks)             -            -             71.36         -             -           69.69
Image Collage
COG-VLM2                  56.05       14.54            0.41        57.93        19.13           6.39
Qwen-VL2-Chat             48.41       12.25            0.52        44.80         9.87           3.77
GPT-4o                    65.37       24.93            3.94        64.45        25.00          19.43
LLaMa 3.2                 68.28       29.00            13.16       67.88        24.45           6.83
Three Separate Images
MolmoE                     7.76        0.65            0.08         8.34        0.38           1.00
Qwen-VL2-Chat             77.80       20.58            0.85        75.80        21.20          5.20
GPT-4o                    78.94       42.79            6.44        78.53        38.60          29.03



3. In the first phase, the models’ ability to understand the visual content is evaluated. Given three
images Iij and their properties Pij and ground truth descriptions Gi , the score in this phase is
calculated as:

                              1 if Qi (Pij (n, s, a), Iij ) = Qi (Gi , Iij ) and j ∈ [0, 2]
                  f (Qi ) =                                                                       (2)
                              0 otherwise.

This scoring strategy is applied across the first three phases, where models are evaluated on whether
they correctly identify the properties of the images. In the second phase, we assess the models’
ability to extract relationships between the images. In the third phase, we evaluate the application
of these relationships to a new domain. In the final step, the model-generated images are assessed
using a VQA-style approach. For each property, we generated three questions based on the ground
truth text and used GPT-4o to answer these questions in relation to the generated image. A similar
property-based scoring method is applied to evaluate the generated images. Detailed evaluation
prompts for each step are provided in Appendix B.12.

Human Performance. We also evaluated human performance on the visual analogy task using
the Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) platform. A total of 440 distinct analogy questions, incor-
porating different rule configurations, were presented to participants. Instruction sets and example
questions, with and without Distraction rules, were provided during the experiment. Human par-
ticipants were tasked with predicting the properties of the missing fourth image. The results were
collected and evaluated against the ground truth text. Additional details on the MTurk human eval-
uation study are available in Appendix D.1.

5     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

5.1     M AIN R ESULTS

We evaluated the high-level reasoning abilities of state-of-the-art MLLMs on the VOILA benchmark.
Table 2 presents the step-by-step accuracy of the models on both VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND. Al-
though both GPT-4o and Qwen-VL2 achieved peak performance with an average accuracy of 78%
during the image description stage, GPT-4o distinguished itself with exceptional results in relational
reasoning by reaching an average precision of 40% in both datasets. In the application relation-
ship step, while GPT-4o outperformed other models by 29%, emerging as the top performer on
VOILA-ND, LLaMa 3.2 took the lead on VOILA-WD with a 13% accuracy rate, surpassing GPT-
4o by 6.7%. This result shows LLaMa 3.2’s enhanced ability to identify distractions compared to
other models. However, human participants still significantly outperformed all MLLMs, particularly
in understanding relationships and making inferences. The performance gap between human par-
ticipants and the top-performing models—LLaMa 3.2 on VOILA-WD and GPT-4o on VOILA-ND
—equals approximately 58% and 40%, respectively.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Voila with Distraction                                                                               Voila without Distraction
                 80                                                                                            80

                 70                                                                                            70

                 60                                                                                            60

                 50                                                                                            50
  Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                Accuracy (%)
                 40                                                                                            40

                 30                                                                                            30

                 20                                                                                            20

                 10                                                                                            10

        0
                                                                                                       0
     Describing Images       Identifying Relations   Applying Relationship   Generating Image       Describing Images               Identifying Relations   Applying Relationship   Generating Image
                                                      CogVLM2 (IC)            LLaMa 3.2 (IC)                        GPT-4o (3I)             SEED-LLaMA(3I)
                                                      QWEN2-VL (IC)           GPT-4o (IC)                           QWEN2-VL (3I)


                         Figure 4: Accuracy of VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND at each step, respectively.


Model accuracy notably declines after each reasoning step, illustrating the growing difficulty as
tasks become more complex. Figure 4 shows the accuracy of models across the four reasoning
stages on VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND. While most models achieve over 50% accuracy in the initial
image understanding stage, their performance drops sharply in the second stage, where they are
required to interpret relationships. This decline continues in the third stage, where models apply
these relationships to generate inferences for the third image. Due to the limited image generation
capabilities of baseline models, we evaluated this step only on GPT-4o, Seed-LLaMa, and Emu-2.
Across both datasets, performance dropped at the image generation stage (see Appendix B.2). These
results demonstrate that current MLLMs struggle with relational understanding and their inference
accuracy. Additional details on successful and failed cases are available in Appendix B.10.

5.2                   P ROPERTY S UCCESS OF M ODELS

To further analyze how baseline models understand and predict properties, we evaluated model per-
formance based on three properties: the number of subjects, subject type, and action, across each
reasoning step on VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND. Figure 5 highlights the property-based accuracy of
four models that perform best on VOILA-WD. Each model exhibited different strengths in identify-
ing properties at each step. QWEN2-VL, for instance, exhibited strong capabilities in identifying
numbers and subject types during the initial two steps, but its performance notably decreased when
applying relationships, particularly for these properties similar to CogVLM-2. GPT-4o maintained
high accuracy in predicting numbers during the first and second stages but experienced a signifi-
cant decrease of 60% in the relation application phase on VOILA-WD, followed by an additional
6% decline in the image generation step. Although QWEN2-VL and GPT-4o performed best dur-
ing the first stage, QWEN2-VL struggled more than GPT-4o to identify the relationships. LLaMa
3.2 achieves the most balanced performance across all categories, maintaining relatively high accu-
racy in the complex task of relationship application. While transferring the relationship step is the
most challenging part for CogVLM-2, QWEN2-VL, and GPT-4o, LLaMa 3.2 struggles more with
identifying relationships on VOILA-WD. Further property analysis for VOILA-WD is provided in
Appendix B.3.

5.3                   L2M VS D IRECT A NSWER

We conducted experiments comparing Least-to-Most (L2M) prompting with direct answering ap-
proaches on VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND. Table 3 summarizes the results, showing that L2M
prompting consistently improves model performance by breaking down the visual analogy task into
sub-problems. This approach leads to higher accuracy in both settings, with a particularly strong
impact on VOILA-WD, which involves more complex rule configurations. These findings suggest
that L2M prompting enhances the reasoning process by encouraging models to solve each part of
the problem incrementally. Additional results on direct answering are available in Appendix B.1.


                                                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Figure 5: Accuracy of baseline MLLMs regarding properties at each step on VOILA-WD.


      Table 3: Accuracy of the models in the                                         Table 4: Accuracy of the models in the
      third step using L2M and direct answering.                                     third step using L2M on image collage and
                                                                                     sequential image settings.
                                  VOILA-WD         VOILA-ND
                                        Direct     Direct                                                VOILA-WD           VOILA-ND
         Models                  L2M           L2M
                                        Answer     Answer                                             Image Sequential Image Sequential
                                                                                     Models
                                                                                                      Collage Images   Collage Images
         COG-VLM2 (IC)       0.41        0.18      6.39     3.57
         GPT-4o (3I)         6.44         0.9     29.03    16.94                     QWEN-VL2 (L2M)    0.52    0.85       3.77       6.8
         Seed LLama 14B (3I) 2.99        1.35     2.35     2.03                      GPT-4o (L2M)      3.94    6.44      19.43      29.03


5.4     I MAGE C OLLAGE VS S EQUENTIAL I MAGE

We examined the impact of input formats—image collage versus sequential images—on model per-
formance in VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND. Table 4 compares the results for Qwen2-VL and GPT-4o,
which accept both input formats. Our findings indicate that input configuration has a significant ef-
fect on visual perception: performance dropped by approximately 40% when models were presented
with image collages compared to sequential images. This pattern of performance degradation was
consistent across both VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND, highlighting that models struggle with visual
analogy tasks when images are combined in a collage format, which is counterintuitive and can be at-
tributed to the image resolution constraints. However, our additional study with LLaVA-OneVision
(Li et al., 2024) detailed in Appendix B.6, demonstrates that the AnyRes approach enhances the
interpretation of collaged images and helps to reduce the performance differences.


5.5     VOILA-WD VS VOILA-ND

According to the accuracy outcomes of mod-        30      29.03                                                      Voila With Distraction
                                                                                                                     Voila Without Distraction
els on both VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND bench-
                                                  25
marks, all models, excluding LLaMa 3.2, per-
form better addressing the VOILA-ND ques-         20                 19.43
tions, see Figure 6. The accuracy of best-
                                                                      Accuracy (%)


                                                                                16.94
performer GPT-4o, dropped by 22% when solv-       15
                                                                                      13.16
ing VOILA-WD questions. The results demon-
strate that implementing the Distraction rule     10
increases the difficulty level of the VOILA          6.44                                   6.83      6.39
                                                                                                                5.20
                                                   5            3.94
benchmark and proves that VOILA-WD intro-                                                                                    3.77

duces more complex challenges compared to                                  0.85                  0.41      0.90        0.52          0.85 1.08
                                                   0 GPT­4o GPT­4o QWEN2­VL LlaMa 3.2 Cog­VLM2 GPT­4o QWEN2­VL Emu­2
VOILA-ND. We also analyzed the rule-based             L2M, 3I L2M, IC L2M 3I           L2M 3I L2M, IC          3I       L2M, IC           3I
performances of LLaMa 3.2 and discovered
that it applies the Distraction rule better than Figure 6: Performance of the top-8 models on
other rules (Arithmetic and Stable), particu- VOILA-ND and VOILA-WD.
larly in number property which explains why
it achieves better results on the VOILA-WD unlike other models.


                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.6   E RROR A NALYSIS

To assess GPT-4o’s performance on the evaluation task and to quantify the differences between
human and GPT-4o evaluations, we examined 50 visual analogy questions and 180 responses, 30
corresponding to the image generation step, answered by various models using diverse rule config-
urations including the distraction rule. The results show that GPT-4o has an error rate of up to 10%
per step, and its challenges in recognizing relationships do not influence the benchmark assessment
procedure. Additional details of the analysis are available in Appendix B.5

6     A BLATION S TUDY
6.1   M ODEL P ERFORMANCE WITH ACCESS TO G ROUND T RUTH I NFORMATION

To better understand model behavior at each reasoning step, we conducted an ablation study on
GPT-4o by providing ground truth inputs starting from the second phase. This study aims to evalu-
ate the model’s reasoning abilities under ideal conditions. Using L2M prompting on the VOILA-WD
benchmark, we provided GPT-4o with ground truth image descriptions at phase 2. The model’s per-
formance in identifying relationships increased significantly, reaching 97%, indicating that GPT-4o
can effectively analyze changes in text descriptions when given correct inputs. However, when we
provided the model with ground truth relationships in the third step, its performance dropped dramat-
ically to 17%, well below human performance (71%). These results suggest that GPT-4o struggles
to apply known relationships to new visuals, revealing limited reasoning in practical inference.

6.2   H OW D OES V ISUAL I NFORMATION A FFECT P ERFORMANCE ?

We also investigated how visual versus textual information affects model performance on the anal-
ogy task by conducting an ablation study on VOILA-ND. In this experiment, we used a direct an-
swering prompt without any explanation of the rules. Two experiments were conducted with GPT-
4o, one using three sequential images as input and the other using text descriptions of those images.
When processing image data, GPT-4o achieved an accuracy of 22%, while with textual input, its ac-
curacy rose to 49%. These results highlight the importance of input format in MLLM performance,
exposing a gap between visual and textual reasoning abilities.
We also analyze the results based on the number of
correctly answered questions on VOILA-ND. Fig-
ure 7 demonstrates the rule-based performance com-
parison of models that accept visual and textual in-
formation. The outcomes of both models show that
the Arithmetic rule included in rule numbers 6 and
7 influences GPT-4o’s performance. The models
present better accuracy when Stable or Change rules
are applied to the number property. We also ob-
served that models achieve the lowest accuracy in Figure 7: Correct number of questions in
predicting the properties in rule 7 where all proper- VOILA-ND.
ties in question change at a time.

7     C ONCLUSION
We introduced VOILA, a large-scale, open-ended, and dynamic reasoning benchmark designed to
evaluate the visual understanding and analogical reasoning capabilities of state-of-the-art MLLMs.
VOILA comprises two sub-tasks: the more complex VOILA-WD and the simpler VOILA-ND. Our
evaluations revealed that humans outperform the best-performing models by a substantial margin
of 58% on VOILA-WD and 40% on VOILA-ND. These results demonstrate that current MLLMs
not only struggle to generate accurate visual or textual outputs but also lack the ability to recognize
and apply relational reasoning across images. The significant performance gap between humans and
MLLMs underscores the limitations of current models in higher-level cognitive tasks. We anticipate
that VOILA will serve as a rigorous benchmark for advancing MLLMs, systematically evaluating
their ability to tackle complex reasoning tasks that demand human-like intelligence.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NY is supported by the Republic of Türkiye Ministry of National Education. MP, CB, and YY are
supported by US NSF RI grant #2132724. TG was supported by the SURFF award from UMBC
ORCA. We thank the NSF NAIRR initiative, the Research Computing (RC) at Arizona State Uni-
versity (ASU), and cr8dl.ai for their generous support in providing computing resources. The views
and opinions of the authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the funding
agencies and employers.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. 6
Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Stanislaw Antol, Margaret Mitchell, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Dhruv
  Batra, and Devi Parikh. Vqa: Visual question answering, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1505.00468. 1
Yonatan Bitton, Ron Yosef, Eli Strugo, Dafna Shahaf, Roy Schwartz, and Gabriel Stanovsky. Vasr:
  Visual analogies of situation recognition, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.
  04542. 3
B. S. Bloom, M. B. Engelhart, E. J. Furst, W. H. Hill, and D. R. Krathwohl. Taxonomy of educational
  objectives. The classification of educational goals. Handbook 1: Cognitive domain. Longmans
  Green, New York, 1956. 1
Alexey Bochkovskiy, Chien-Yao Wang, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao. Yolov4: Optimal speed and
  accuracy of object detection, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10934. 1
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165. 3
Chien-Yi Chang, De-An Huang, Danfei Xu, Ehsan Adeli, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles.
  Procedure planning in instructional videos. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  334–350. Springer, 2020. 4
Matt Deitke, Christopher Clark, Sangho Lee, Rohun Tripathi, Yue Yang, Jae Sung Park, Moham-
 madreza Salehi, Niklas Muennighoff, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini, Jiasen Lu, Taira Anderson, Erin
 Bransom, Kiana Ehsani, Huong Ngo, YenSung Chen, Ajay Patel, Mark Yatskar, Chris Callison-
 Burch, Andrew Head, Rose Hendrix, Favyen Bastani, Eli VanderBilt, Nathan Lambert, Yvonne
 Chou, Arnavi Chheda, Jenna Sparks, Sam Skjonsberg, Michael Schmitz, Aaron Sarnat, Byron
 Bischoff, Pete Walsh, Chris Newell, Piper Wolters, Tanmay Gupta, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Jon Borchardt,
 Dirk Groeneveld, Jen Dumas, Crystal Nam, Sophie Lebrecht, Caitlin Wittlif, Carissa Schoenick,
 Oscar Michel, Ranjay Krishna, Luca Weihs, Noah A. Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ross Girshick,
 Ali Farhadi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Molmo and pixmo: Open weights and open data for
 state-of-the-art multimodal models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17146.
 6
Yuying Ge, Sijie Zhao, Ziyun Zeng, Yixiao Ge, Chen Li, Xintao Wang, and Ying Shan. Making
  llama see and draw with seed tokenizer, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
  01218. 6
Dedre Gentner. Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Sci-
  ence, 7(2):155–170, 1983. ISSN 0364-0213. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0364-0213(83)
  80009-3.      URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0364021383800093. 2


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tejas Gokhale, Shailaja Sampat, Zhiyuan Fang, Yezhou Yang, and Chitta Baral. Cooking with
  blocks: A recipe for visual reasoning on image-pairs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 5–8, 2019. 4

Usha Goswami. Analogical Reasoning in Children. Psychology Press, 1992. 2

Wenyi Hong, Weihan Wang, Ming Ding, Wenmeng Yu, Qingsong Lv, Yan Wang, Yean Cheng, Shiyu
 Huang, Junhui Ji, Zhao Xue, Lei Zhao, Zhuoyi Yang, Xiaotao Gu, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng,
 Da Yin, Zihan Wang, Ji Qi, Xixuan Song, Peng Zhang, Debing Liu, Bin Xu, Juanzi Li, Yuxiao
 Dong, and Jie Tang. Cogvlm2: Visual language models for image and video understanding, 2024.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16500. 6

Dongfu Jiang, Xuan He, Huaye Zeng, Cong Wei, Max W.F. Ku, Qian Liu, and Wenhu Chen. Mantis:
  Interleaved multi-image instruction tuning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024,
  2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=skLtdUVaJa. 4

Yifan Jiang, Jiarui Zhang, Kexuan Sun, Zhivar Sourati, Kian Ahrabian, Kaixin Ma, Filip Ilievski,
  and Jay Pujara. Marvel: Multidimensional abstraction and reasoning through visual evaluation
  and learning, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13591. 3

Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual
  reasoning, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.06890. 1

Jihyung Kil, Zheda Mai, Justin Lee, Zihe Wang, Kerrie Cheng, Lemeng Wang, Ye Liu, Arpita
   Chowdhury, and Wei-Lun Chao. Compbench: A comparative reasoning benchmark for multi-
   modal llms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16837. 3

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11916, 2022. 3

Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan
  Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03326. 9, 19

Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tony Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains for
  science question answering. In The 36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2022. 3

Jiahao Nie, Gongjie Zhang, Wenbin An, Yap-Peng Tan, Alex C. Kot, and Shijian Lu. Mmrel: A
   relation understanding dataset and benchmark in the mllm era, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2406.09121. 3

Bryan A. Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M. Cervantes, Juan C. Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and
  Svetlana Lazebnik. Flickr30k entities: Collecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer
  image-to-sentence models, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04870. 1

Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.01952. 4

John Raven, J. C. Raven, J. H. Court, Psychological Corporation, J. C. Raven, et al. Raven’s Pro-
  gressive Matrices. Western Psychological Services, 1938. 3

Fereshteh Sadeghi, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Ali Farhadi. Visalogy: Answering visual analogy
  questions, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.08973. 3

Dustin Schwenk, Apoorv Khandelwal, Christopher Clark, Kenneth Marino, and Roozbeh Mot-
  taghi. A-okvqa: A benchmark for visual question answering using world knowledge, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.01718. 3


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hao Shao, Shengju Qian, Han Xiao, Guanglu Song, Zhuofan Zong, Letian Wang, Yu Liu, and Hong-
  sheng Li. Visual cot: Advancing multi-modal language models with a comprehensive dataset and
  benchmark for chain-of-thought reasoning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.
  16999. 3
Ying Su, Zhan Ling, Haochen Shi, Cheng Jiayang, Yauwai Yim, and Yangqiu Song. Actplan-1k:
  Benchmarking the procedural planning ability of visual language models in household activities.
  In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pp. 14953–14965, 2024. 4
Quan Sun, Yufeng Cui, Xiaosong Zhang, Fan Zhang, Qiying Yu, Zhengxiong Luo, Yueze Wang,
  Yongming Rao, Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Generative multimodal models
  are in-context learners, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.13286. 6
Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and Dumitru Erhan. Show and tell: A neural image
  caption generator, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4555. 1
Fei Wang, Xingyu Fu, James Y. Huang, Zekun Li, Qin Liu, Xiaogeng Liu, Mingyu Derek Ma,
  Nan Xu, Wenxuan Zhou, Kai Zhang, Tianyi Lorena Yan, Wenjie Jacky Mo, Hsiang-Hui Liu, Pan
  Lu, Chunyuan Li, Chaowei Xiao, Kai-Wei Chang, Dan Roth, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and
  Muhao Chen. Muirbench: A comprehensive benchmark for robust multi-image understanding,
  2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09411. 4
Ke Wang, Junting Pan, Weikang Shi, Zimu Lu, Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. Measuring multi-
  modal mathematical reasoning with math-vision dataset, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2402.14804. 3
Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu,
  Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Mengfei Du, Xuancheng Ren, Rui Men, Dayiheng
  Liu, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s
  perception of the world at any resolution, 2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.
  12191. 6
Yan Wang, Yawen Zeng, Jingsheng Zheng, Xiaofen Xing, Jin Xu, and Xiangmin Xu. Videocot:
  A video chain-of-thought dataset with active annotation tool, 2024d. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2407.05355. 3
Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming
  Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, Tianle Li, Max Ku, Kai Wang, Alex Zhuang, Rongqi
  Fan, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language
  understanding benchmark, 2024e. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01574. 1
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022. 3
Yijia Xiao, Edward Sun, Tianyu Liu, and Wei Wang. Logicvista: Multimodal llm logical reasoning
  benchmark in visual contexts, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04973. 3
Xiang Yue, Tianyu Zheng, Yuansheng Ni, Yubo Wang, Kai Zhang, Shengbang Tong, Yuxuan Sun,
  Ming Yin, Botao Yu, Ge Zhang, et al. Mmmu-pro: A more robust multi-discipline multimodal
  understanding benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02813, 2024. 3
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From recognition to cognition: Visual
  commonsense reasoning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.10830. 1
Chi Zhang, Feng Gao, Baoxiong Jia, Yixin Zhu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Raven: A dataset for relational
  and analogical visual reasoning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.02741. 1
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, Hai Zhao, George Karypis, and Alex Smola. Multimodal
  chain-of-thought reasoning in language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2302.00923. 3

                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bingchen Zhao, Yongshuo Zong, Letian Zhang, and Timothy Hospedales. Benchmarking multi-
  image understanding in vision and language models: Perception, knowledge, reasoning, and
  multi-hop reasoning. arXiv preprint, 2024. 4
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables com-
  plex reasoning in large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
  10625. 2, 3, 6, 7
Chenming Zhu, Tai Wang, Wenwei Zhang, Kai Chen, and Xihui Liu. Scanreason: Empowering
  3d visual grounding with reasoning capabilities, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2407.01525. 3


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T HE VOILA DATASET
A.1   P ROPERTY D ETAILS

We select three properties to utilize in the VOILA: subject types, number of subjects and actions.
In total 14 distinct subject types used in the images: cat, dog, fox, hamster, rabbit wolf, bear, and
monkey, male child, female child, man, woman, senior man, and senior woman. Also, each image
includes one subject type. The numbers selected for the dataset are 1, 2, 3 and 4. We want to restrict
the numbers to avoid creating more complex configurations. Action property includes 13 physical
activities: playing soccer, driving a car, ice-skating, walking, swimming, jumping, typing, writing,
digging a hole, carrying something, reading, running, and eating food.

A.2   G ENERATED I MAGES B Y SDXL

Utilizing the SDXL text-to-image model, we generated 30 images for each prompt using various
properties. Some of the generated images are provided in Figures 8, 9, 10, and 11 with their text
prompts.


         Figure 8:               Figure 9:                                        Figure 11:
                                                          Figure 10:
      Four brown bears      Three senior women                               Two hamsters carrying
                                                      One dog swimming
        driving a car             writing                                         something


A.3   I MAGE C LEANING

Some of the images generated by the model obtain some problems like object hallucinations and
not depicting the action clearly. To eliminate these failure cases, we filter the images manually.
Figure 12 shows some of the faulty images generated by the model.


                   (a) Three male adolescents          (b) Two white foxes writing
                   swimming

                          Figure 12: Unmatched images with text prompt.


A.4   VOILA S TRUCTURE

The configuration of VOILA benchmarks is determined by the rules and the number of properties.
Table 5 shows all possible rule settings for three property-based cases using all rules that represent


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the configuration of VOILA-WD. On the other hand, Table 6 shows seven distinct cases excluding
the Distraction rule.

      Table 5: In total 19 cases are required to generate visual analogy questions in VOILA-WD.


                          Rule  Action     Subject Type Number of Subject
                          1     Change        Stable         Stable
                          2     Change        Stable      Distraction
                          3     Change      Distraction      Stable
                          4     Change      Distraction   Distraction
                          5      Stable      Change          Stable
                          6      Stable      Change       Distraction
                          7    Distraction   Change          Stable
                          8    Distraction   Change       Distraction
                          9      Stable       Stable       Arithmetic
                          10     Stable     Distraction    Arithmetic
                          11   Distraction    Stable       Arithmetic
                          12   Distraction Distraction     Arithmetic
                          13    Change       Change          Stable
                          14    Change       Change       Distraction
                          15     Stable      Change        Arithmetic
                          16   Distraction   Change        Arithmetic
                          17    Change        Stable       Arithmetic
                          18    Change      Distraction    Arithmetic
                          19    Change       Change        Arithmetic


      Table 6: In total 7 cases are required to generate visual analogy questions in VOILA-ND.


                         Rule Action Subject Type Number of Subject
                         1    Change    Stable         Stable
                         2    Stable   Change          Stable
                         3    Stable    Stable       Arithmetic
                         4    Change   Change          Stable
                         5    Stable   Change        Arithmetic
                         6    Change    Stable       Arithmetic
                         7    Change   Change        Arithmetic


                        Table 7: Number of different cases created by rules.


                   Properties        Stable Change Arithmetic Distraction
                   Action             156    156        -       22308
                   Number of Subjects 12      -        16         24
                   Subject Type       182    182        -       30576



A.5     C ASE N UMBERS

To calculate how many different cases we can generate using properties, we implement dual permu-
tations for the Stable and Change rules and a permutation of three for the Distraction rules. Potential
cases of the number of subjects are manually calculated. Table 7 shows the number of various pos-
sibilities for each property after assigning the rules. For 14 subject types, the Stable and Change
rules generate 182 cases that can be used in the visual analogy questions. Since the Distraction
number has a large amount of data variation, I fixed the generated number of data according to the
permutation results of Changes and Stable rules. Utilizing these variations, we can create more than
6.5M analogy questions.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B      E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
B.1     D IRECT A NSWERING

The reasoning workflow is applied with final determined prompts progressively for each model.
We tested the direct answering approach for some benchmark models on both VOILA-WD and
VOILA-ND. The models are tested on a zero-shot prompting approach without a multi-step process.
The steps of image description and understanding the relations are skipped in that study to directly
receive the answer from the model. The results are provided in Table 8.

Table 8: Evaluation results of VOILA using di-
rect answering on Applying Relationship. In this Table 9: Evaluation results of VOILA on Gener-
setting, there are no immediate results for De- ating Images. L2M = least-to-most prompting,
scribing Images and Identifying Relations.       DA = direct answering.


    Method            VOILA-WD VOILA-ND            Method                 VOILA-WD VOILA-ND

    Human (AMTurks)      71.36        69.69        Image Collage
                                                   GPT-4o (L2M)              2.76         13.01
    Image Collage
    Seed LLama 14B        2.14        0.76         Three Separate Images
                                                   GPT-4o (L2M)              4.93         20.76
    Three Separate Images                          GPT-4o (DA)               0.67          11.3
    GPT-4o                0.90        16.94        Seed LLama 14B (DA)       0.11            -
    Emu-2                 0.85         1.08        Emu-2 (DA)                0.03          0.11
    Seed LLama 14B        1.35         2.03


B.2     I MAGE G ENERATION

Image generation is the last step of the visual analogy questions. To answer the question cor-
rectly, MLLMs that are capable of creating visual outputs, need to generate the accurate images
aligned with the ground truths. We tested GPT-4o and Seed LLaMa on VOILA-WD and VOILA-ND
datasets to evaluate their performance of image generation after the relational inference step. Since
VOILA-ND has less challenging questions, the models perform better on VOILA-ND rather than
VOILA-WD which obtains some distraction rules. Since the models struggle to maintain their per-
formance until the last step, the accuracy of the image generation performance is below 5% of the
best-performing model (GPT-4o) on VOILA-WD. The more detailed results are provided in Table 9.

B.3     VOILA-WD P ROPERTY- BASED E VALUATION

We comprehensively analyze the performance of the baseline models against the accuracy of
the properties of each step. Table 10 and Figure 5 show the performance of various models in
VOILA-WD with respect to different configurations such as using L2M or directly answering and
entering an image collage or three sequential images. The results demonstrate that GPT-4o per-
forms better than other models in understanding and identifying relations across all properties in
visual content on VOILA-WD. However, LLaMa 3.2 shows more thriving performance in applying
relationships on subject types and actions.

B.4     VOILA-ND P ROPERTY- BASED E VALUATION

We evaluated models regarding property-based performance at each step on VOILA-ND under dif-
ferent configurations, including the use of L2M versus direct answering, as well as the input format
of an image collage compared to three sequential images. As the distraction rule affects the applica-
tion relationships stage, the model performances at the initial two stages show a similar pattern as in
the VOILA-WD dataset. The results provided in Table 11 and Figure 13 demonstrate that all models,
excluding LLaMa 3.2, achieved better performance on VOILA-ND and increased the accuracy of
property predictions in the final step. In contrast, LLaMa 3.2 exhibited a decrease in performance
at the last stage, particularly in the application of number relations. Notably, GPT-4o outperformed
other models in applying number and subject relations.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Performance of various models on different steps VOILA-WD. Model names: IC = image
collage, 3I = three sequential images, L2M = least-to-most prompting.

                              Describing Images        Identifying Relations    Applying Relationship         Generating Image
Model                   Number Subject Action Number Subject Action Number Subject Action Number Subject Action
Humans (MTurk)             -          -           -     -        -         -    93.6     82.3     91.4     -          -          -
CogVLM2 (L2M)             71.1       94.1    78.2     34.3      50.6     37.3    6.6      12.6    26.9     -          -       -
LLaVa (L2M)               75.4       87.8    67.5     30.7      32.6     27.8   31.2      30.0    32.9     -          -       -
QWEN2-VL (L2M)            62.0       89.2    76.1     32.2      53.6     38.8   3.16      21.8     1.9     -          -       -
QWEN2-VL (3I) (L2M)      96.9       95.8    81.0      58.9      57.9     41.1   11.6      17.6    20.8     -          -       -
MolmoE (3I) (L2M)        14.57      32.22   22.18     6.61     10.92     8.02   5.62     10.06   10.63     -          -       -
LLaMa 3.2 (IC) (L2M)     79.2       91.3    87.6      50.2      58.5     49.9   29.7      40.1    39.1     -          -       -
SEED-LLaMa (3I) (L2M)     89.1       87.3    93.7     48.8      45.8     48.0   12.1      19.7    24.8     -          -       -
GPT-4o (L2M)              86.0       95.9    78.8     68.1      70.9     46.5   25.4      33.8    33.2    3.4        3.7     3.2
GPT-4o (3I)(L2M)         99.6        97.0    81.7     94.3      78.5     55.9   33.8      36.5    35.0    5.6        6.1     5.6
GPT-4o (3I)                -          -       -         -        -         -    10.9      13.7    27.5    0.8        0.8     0.8
SEED-LLaMa (3I)            -          -       -         -        -         -     5.1      16.9    25.8    1.1        0.7     0.7
Emu-2                      -          -       -         -        -         -     3.0       6.1    12.5    0.2        0.2     0.1
CogVLM2                    -          -       -         -        -         -     7.8       8.2    23.7     -          -       -
SEED-LLaMa                 -          -       -         -        -         -     9.2      30.2     6.8     -          -       -


Table 11: Performance of various models on different steps VOILA-ND. Model names: IC = image
collage, 3I = three separate images, L2M = least-to-most prompting.

                           Describing Images          Identifying Relations     Applying Relationship      Generating Image
Model                   Number Subject Action Number Subject Action Number Subject Action Number Subject Action
Humans (MTurk)            -           -        -       -         -        -     92.4     85.4     91      -          -        -
CogVLM2 (L2M)            72.9        95      79       45.7     59.1     45.8    23.8     37.1    21.4      -          -       -
QWEN2-VL (L2M)           56.8       86.7    74.9      30.7      54      34.9    19.8     25.8    21.7      -          -       -
QWEN2-VL (3I)(L2M)       96.9       95.4     81       61.9     57.5     42.4    15.8      27     27.2      -          -       -
MolmoE (3I) (L2M)        15.5       37.6    26.9      6.23     10.6      8.5     8.9      22     14.2      -          -       -
LLaMa 3.2 (IC) (L2M)     77.8       90.9    88.4      50.9     60.9     49.2    15.1     50.1    48.3      -          -       -
SEED-LLaMa (3I)(L2M)     77.9       86.8    73.1      48.1     54.9     37.4     7.2     21.8    27.2      -          -       -
GPT-4o (L2M)             84.8       95.9    78.9      69.2     74.3     45.8    45.8     61.2    44.9    15.9       17.9    16.9
GPT-4o(3I)(L2M)          99.6       96.6    81.5       94      77.6     51.4    66.4     65.6    49.1    24.3       27.2    26.1
GPT-4o(3I)                -           -       -         -        -        -     28.9     45.5    18.7    14.4       15.1    14.6
Emu-2                     -           -       -         -        -        -      6.2      8.7    13.1     0.4        0.7     0.3
CogVLM2                   -           -       -         -        -        -      13      19.9    17.9      -          -       -
SEED-LLaMa (3I)           -           -       -         -        -        -      6.8      7.8    24.3      -          -       -
SEED-LLaMa                -           -       -         -        -        -      4.3     11.9    13.1      -          -       -


                 Figure 13: Property performance of models at each step on VOILA-ND


B.5     GPT-4 O E VALUATION P ERFORMANCE

We measured the gap between human and GPT-4 evaluations utilizing confusion tables for each step
including all attributes. In total 50 visual analogy questions and 180 responses were evaluated.

        • True Positive (TP): The number of cases where both the human and the GPT-4o agree that
          the response is correct.
        • False Negative (FN): The number of cases where the human expresses the answer is correct,
          but the GPT-4o says it is incorrect.


                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • False Positive (FP): The number of cases where the human says the answer is incorrect, but
         the GPT-4o states it is correct.
       • True Negative (TN): The number of cases where both the human and the GPT-4o agree that
         the response is incorrect.
       • Accuracy (Agreement): The number of cases where both the human and the GPT-4o agree.
         Accuracy (Agreement rate) = (TP + TN) / (TP + TN + FP + FN)

First, we calculated false negative and false positive cases between human and GPT-4o evaluations
for each step, attribute, and question answer. Then we computed the accuracy also called the agree-
ment rate. The results of each step regarding the attributes are provided in Tables 12, 13, 14, and
15. The “Question” in tables represents the question answer merged with three properties (number
+ subject + action).
The results show the agreement rate between human evaluation and GPT-4o was 91% to describe
images, 94% to identify relationships, 92% to apply relationships, and 91% to generate images.
Although the attribute agreement rate is the lowest at 74%, the precision to answer questions, which
require integration properties, exceeds 91%.

      Table 12: Step 1 - Describing Images             Table 13: Step 2 - Identifying Relations

      Attribute FP FN TP + TN Accuracy                 Attribute FP FN TP + TN Accuracy
      Number      1    7    142       95%              Number     4    5      39       78%
      Subject     5    5    140       93%              Subject    1   12      37       74%
      Action      5   14    131       87%              Action     2   8       40       80%
      Question    6    7    137       91%              Question   1   2       47       94%


   Table 14: Step 3 - Applying Relationships            Table 15: Step 4 - Generating Images

      Attribute FP FN TP + TN Accuracy                 Attribute FP FN TP + TN Accuracy
      Number      3   8     39        78%              Number     5    2      23       77%
      Subject     4   7     39        78%              Subject    1    4      25       83%
      Action      8   4     38        76%              Action     2    4      24       80%
      Question    2   2     46        92%              Question   1    2      27       90%


B.6    A NY R ES S TRATEGY W ITH I MAGE C OLLAGES

To investigate whether the AnyRes strategy would improve the performance of collaged images,
we experimented with the LLaVA-OneVision (Li et al., 2024) on VOILA-ND utilizing both image
collage and multiple image formats. We tested the model only in the first stage where the images
were processed. The model utilizing image collage achieves an accuracy of 53%, while the model
using multiple images performs slightly better, with 57% accuracy in describing images. Table 16
summarizes the results, showing that the AnyRes approach improves the image resolution and closes
the performance gap between the process of image collage and multiple images.

                 Table 16: Performance of LLaVA-OneVision on different input types

         Method               Input Type                Number Subject Action Total
         LLaVA-OneVision Image Collage           63.8%            94.5% 84.3% 53%
         LLaVA-OneVision Three Sequential Images 67.9%            73.7% 67.5% 57.5%


B.7    I MPACT OF S UB - PROMPTS ON I DENTIFYING R ELATIONSHIPS

We experimented with GPT-4o on the VOILA-WD dataset to discover the impact of employing
sub-prompts for determining property relationships between first and second images. For a fair


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


comparison, we froze the first-step answers and requested the model to find whether the num-
ber/subject/action changed or remained the same from the first image to the second image. Af-
ter merging the results from three sub-tasks, we achieved a similar accuracy of 42% with a single
prompt experiment. The accuracy of properties is also similar with 94% for numbers, 79% for sub-
jects, and 56% for action. The relationship identification performance of GPT-4o with single and
three sub-prompts, provided in Table 17 demonstrates that GPT-4o’s ability to identify relationships
is not affected by the number of properties asked in the prompt.

Table 17: Performance of GPT-4o on identifying relationships with different prompting approaches

                  Model    Approach              Number Subject Action Total
                  GPT-4o Single Prompt     94.3%           78.5% 55.9% 42.8%
                  GPT-4o Three Sub-prompts 94.1%           79.3% 56.3% 42.3%


B.8    C OT VS L2M F OR A PPLYING R ELATIONS

To evaluate the effectiveness of CoT in the “Applying Relationship” step, we conducted an exper-
iment utilizing GPT-4o on the VOILA-WD dataset. For a fair comparison of implementing CoT
and L2M for step 3, we froze the first and second-step answers and provided two textual examples
and their rationales. We requested from model to find the properties of the fourth image by provid-
ing previous sub-task answers. The result of the study provided in Table 18 shows that the L2M
approach with detailed instructions performs slightly better than the CoT approach for this task.

                    Table 18: Performance of GPT-4o with different approaches

              Model     Approach Inputs               Number Subject Action Total
              GPT-4o CoT            Two Examples 48.8%         33.1% 29% 5.96%
              GPT-4o L2M            Instructions 33.8%         36.5% 35.0% 6.44%


B.9    H UMAN VS M ODELS U SING E XAMPLES AND O PTIONS

We conducted an ablation study using GPT-4o on the VOILA-WD dataset to evaluate the perfor-
mance gap between human and model responses in the same conditions where two example ques-
tions and property options are provided. As the human evaluation was performed in one step, we set
up the experiment for the direct answering approach. In addition to the example images and lists, we
also provided detailed rationales to support the solutions. The experimental results provided in Table
19 demonstrate that offering examples and option lists impacts the model’s performance similar to
the L2M approach employing step-by-step instructions. Although the model selects each property
answer from the given list and analyzes example images and logic, its performance is significantly
below the human performance, with a notable 65% accuracy gap.

            Table 19: Performance comparison between human evaluation and models

       Method Approach            Inputs                    Number Subject Action        Total
       Human Direct Answering Two Examples and List 93.6% 82.3% 91.4% 71.36%
       GPT-4o Direct Answering Two Examples and List 46.6% 25.28% 64.4% 6.8%
       GPT-4o L2M              Instructions          33.8% 36.5% 35.0% 6.44%


B.10    FAILURE C ASE

An example of how visual analogy questions evaluate the MLLMs step-by-step is provided in Figure
14. In the example, we employ GPT-4o using the L2M approach with a sequence of three images.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 14: Failure L2M case of GPT-4o on VOILA-WD


B.11   S UCCESS C ASE


An example of how GPT-4o successfully reaches the solution is provided in Figure 15. To show all
stages of the task, including image generation, we utilize GPT-4o in the example.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Figure 15: Success L2M case of GPT-4o on VOILA-WD


B.12   E VALUATION P ROMPTS S TEP BY S TEP

After receiving the answers from MLLMs for using the L2M method, we execute the evaluation
pipeline which consists of multiple stages. Figures 16, 17, 18, and 19 show the evaluation of the
models’ outputs step by step.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Give me the score by comparing the provided texts to the ground truth text for each image focusing on subject
           numbers, subject types, and actions. Comparing similar subject types, such as "mice" versus "hamsters," or
           variations in number, such as "man" versus "men," is acceptable as a correct answer. However, differences in age
           or gender, such as "woman" versus "senior woman," are not acceptable as a correct answer. If the answer is
           correct, assign 1 point for each property, otherwise give 0. If three properties are correct for an image, then assign 1
           point for image-text matching.
           Ground truth texts: Image 1: three male children eating food. Image 2: three dogs eating food. Image 3: four male
           children running
           Texts to compare: Image 1: Three boys sitting and eating food from trays outdoors.\n\nImage 2: Three black dogs
           sitting and looking at bowls of food in a park.\n\nImage 3: Four boys running energetically on a grassy path.
           Write the output as JSON object with the following information for each image without explanation:
           {
             number: int,
             subject type: int,
             action: int,
             image-text matching: int
           }
                                                                                                                                           {
                                                                                                                                               "Image 1": {
                                                                                                                                                  "number": 1,
                                                                                                                                                  "subject type": 1,
                                                                                                                                                  "action": 1,
                                                                                                                                                  "image-text matching": 1
                                                                                                                                               },
                                                                                                                                               "Image 2": {
                                                                                                                                                  "number": 1,
                                                                                                                                                  "subject type": 1,
                                                                                                                                                  "action": 0,
                                                                                                                                                  "image-text matching": 0
                                                                                                                                               },
                                                                                                                                               "Image 3": {
                                                                                                                                                  "number": 1,
                                                                                                                                                  "subject type": 1,
                                                                                                                                                  "action": 1,
                                                                                                                                                  "image-text matching": 1
                                                                                                                                               }
                                                                                                                                           }



                                                            Figure 16: Step 1 evaluation


                    Give me the score by comparing the provided texts to the ground truth text to determine if the model correctly
                    identifies the unchanged and changed properties between Image 1 and Image 2. The properties to compare are the
                    number of subjects, the subject type, and the actions. If the answer is correct, assign 1 point for each property,
                    otherwise give 0. If three properties are correct then assign 1 point for identify_changes accuracy.
                    Ground truth texts: Number remains constant three. Action remains constant eating food. Subject type is changed
                    from male children to dogs.
                    Texts to compare: From Image 1 to Image 2:\n\n- Changed Properties:\n - Subject Types: Changed from \"boys\" to
                    \"dogs.\"\n - Action: Changed from \"sitting and eating food from trays outdoors\" to \"sitting and looking at bowls
                    of food in a park.\"\n\n- Unchanged Properties:\n - Number of Subjects: Remains three.
                    Write the output as JSON object with the following information for each image without explanation:
                    {
                      number: int,
                      subject type: int,
                      action: int,
                      identify_changes: int
                    }


                                                                                                                                                   {
                                                                                                                                                       "number": 1,
                                                                                                                                                       "subject type": 1,
                                                                                                                                                       "action": 0,
                                                                                                                                                       "identify_changes": 0
                                                                                                                                                   }


                                                            Figure 17: Step 2 evaluation


                                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Give me the score by comparing the provided texts to the ground truth text to determine if the model correctly
             identifies the properties of subject numbers, subject types, and actions in order. If ground truth text contains the
             value "any" for a property, it only counts as correct if the provided text also has 'any' for that property. Otherwise,
             the answer is incorrect. If the answer is correct, assign 1 point for each property, otherwise give 0. If three
             properties are correct for an image then assign 1 point for finding_image4.
             Ground truth texts: four dogs running
             Texts to compare: The answer is number = 4 subject = dogs action = running energetically on a grassy path.
             Write the output as JSON object with the following information for each image without explanation:
             {
               number: int,
               subject type: int,
               action: int,
               finding_image4: int
             }


                                                                                                                                       {
                                                                                                                                           "number": 1,
                                                                                                                                           "subject type": 1,
                                                                                                                                           "action": 1,
                                                                                                                                           "finding_image4": 1
                                                                                                                                       }


                                                           Figure 18: Step 3 evaluation


                                                           Figure 19: Step 4 evaluation


                                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P ROMPTS
C.1   P ROMPT S ELECTING

To find the best-performing parameters, we tested various text prompts on MLLMs on VOILA-ND
and VOILA-WD utilizing 0-shot and least-to-most prompting. Since VOILA-WD includes distrac-
tions, we modify the text prompts for VOILA-ND by excluding the explanation of distraction rules.
Figure 20 displays diverse zero-shot prompts we tried before selecting the final instructions. For
L2M prompting, we need multiple text instructions for each step. Various prompts are tested for
each sub-problem in a multiple-step reasoning process, see Figures 20, 21, 22, and 23.

      You are an AI visual assistant who can answer the visual analogy questions. To answer such questions:
      1- You should first understand the visual content of three images, and then find the relationships between the first and second images by
      looking at changes in numbers, subject types, and actions. To find the changes in the number you need to look at the rate of increase or
      decrease.
      2- Then apply same relationship to the third image to determine the fourth image. Give me the answer to what the fourth image is in the
      format of "The answer is number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}"
      If the subject number in the fourth image is less than one, the number in the fourth image is 'any'. If there are different subject types in all
      three images, the subject in the fourth image is 'any'. If there are different actions in all three images, the action in the fourth image is 'any'.


      You are an AI visual assistant who can analyze visual analogy questions with three images and find the fourth image based on the
      relationships observed in the first three. Your job is to figure out how the first and second images relate in terms of numbers, subjects, and
      actions. The relation of numbers depends on the rate of increase or decrease. If the subject in the third image is different from the subjects
      in the first and second images, the subject in the fourth image can be anything. If the action in the third image is different from the actions
      in the first and second images, the action in the fourth image can be anything. What is the fourth image? "The answer is number = {number}
      subject = {subject} action = {action}"


      Complete the visual analogy by comparing at subject type, number, and action properties: A is to B as C is to? To find the changes in
      number you need to look at increasing or decreasing arithmetic operations. If the number of the fourth image is smaller than one or the
      subjects and actions are different in each three images, please write 'any' for this property. Find the fourth image in the format of "The
      answer is number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}"


      Complete the visual analogy by comparing at subject type, number and action properties: A is to B as C is to? Answer in a format of "The
      answer is: number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}"


      Complete the visual analogy, A is to B as C is to D, by comparing at object type, number and action properties. Number can be find in
      decreasing or increasing order. What is the number of object, object type and action in fourth image?


                                               Figure 20: Zero-shot prompt selection.


                                      Figure 21: First prompt selection of L2M process


                                   Figure 22: Second prompt selection of L2M process.


                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Prompt 3: Apply the unchanged and changed number, subject, and action properties to the third image to find the fourth image. If a property is
      constant, it remains the same in the fourth image. If the property is changed, and it is the same in the first image, then the property in the fourth image
      will be the same in the second image. Otherwise, it can be 'any'. What is the fourth image? Write the answer in the format of "The fourth image is
      number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}"

      Prompt 3: Apply the unchanged and changed property rules to the third image to predict the fourth image. What is the fourth image? "The answer is
      number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}".If property except number is changed and different in all three images, the property in the
      fourth image can be 'any'.


      Prompt 3: Apply the unchanged and changed number, subject, and action properties to the third image to find the fourth image. If a subject is
      constant, it remains the same in the fourth image. If the subject is changed, and it is the same in the first image, then the subject in the fourth image
      will be the same in the second image. Otherwise, it can be 'any'. If an action is constant, it remains the same in the fourth image. If the action is
      changed, and it is the same in the first image, then the action in the fourth image will be the same in the second image. Otherwise, it can be 'any'.
      What is the fourth image? Write the answer in the format of "The fourth image is number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}".


    Prompt 3: Apply rules to predict number of subject, subject and action in fourth image:
    1.If a property is the same in the first and second images, set the property value from the third image to the fourth image.
    2.If a property (excluding number of subjects) changes between the first and second images and is the same in the first and third images, set the
    property value from the second image to the fourth image. Otherwise, set it to 'any'.
    3.Apply the increase or decrease rate in the number of subjects from the first to the second image to the third image. If the result is less than one, set
    the number to 'any'.
    Format your prediction as:'The answer is number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}'


    Prompt 3: Study the content of the three images in series, identify the changed and unchanged properties between the first image and the second
    image. If a property remains constant between first and second images, the corresponding property in the fourth image will have the same value as
    that of the third image. If a property (excluding the number of subjects) changes between the first and second images and is the same in the first and
    third images, the value of the respective property in the fourth image will be the same as that of the second image.
    Predict the description of the hidden fourth image in format of 'The answer is number = {number} subject = {subject} action = {action}'



                                       Figure 23: Third prompt selection of L2M process.


D       H UMAN E XPERIMENT
D.1       MT URK I NSTRUCTIONS

The human study was conducted by using the Amazon Mechanical Turk platform. Participants solve
440 various analogy questions in total. The instructions and example questions of the study were
provided in Figure 24.


                                        Figure 24: Human experiment of MTurk platform.


                                                                                26
