Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G ENERALIZED B EHAVIOR L EARNING FROM D IVERSE
D EMONSTRATIONS
 Varshith Sreeramdass, Rohan Paleja, Letian Chen, Sanne van Waveren, Matthew Gombolay
 Georgia Institute of Technology
 {vsreeramdass, rpaleja3, letian.chen, sanne}@gatech.edu,
 matthew.gombolay@cc.gatech.edu

    a    Collect diverse expert              b       Train with Guided Strategy Discovery                       c    Perform task in novel ways
        demonstrations for a task                     for task-relevant behavior discovery                          generalized from limited data

                             Expert                            State-action                                          Start
                                                                  space       GSD task relevance constraint:
              Start          states         Task-                                                                    states
              states                      relevant
                                           region                                                                             State-action
                         State-action                                                                                            space
                            space
                                                                                               task-relevance
                                                                                                  measure
                                          Refine
                                                                                    Encourage task-
                                           task-
                                                                                   relevant diversity
                                        relevance
                                                                                     through GSD
                                        measure f

                Goal                                                                                                  Goal
                states                                                                                                states
                                                                                                                                     Novel task-
                                           Behaviors                              Task-irrelevant                                   accomplishing
              Colored rectangles         colored-coded                        behaviors (i.e., outside                                behaviors
              visualize the learned        by learned                          task-relevant region)
            continuous latent factor:     latent codes
              placement location

Figure 1: The figure overviews our framework: Guided Strategy Discovery. (a) Given diverse task
demonstrations with underlying latent factors, (b) our framework optimizes a task-relevance guided
diversity objective, (c) to discover behaviors that generalize to unseen latent factor values.

                                                           A BSTRACT
          Diverse behavior policies are valuable in domains requiring quick test-time adap-
          tation or personalized human-robot interaction. Human demonstrations provide
          rich information regarding task objectives and factors that govern individual be-
          havior variations, which can be used to characterize useful diversity and learn di-
          verse performant policies. However, we show that prior work that builds naive rep-
          resentations of demonstration heterogeneity fails in generating successful novel
          behaviors that generalize over behavior factors. We propose Guided Strategy Dis-
          covery (GSD), which introduces a novel diversity formulation based on a learned
          task-relevance measure that prioritizes behaviors exploring modeled latent factors.
          We empirically validate across three continuous control benchmarks for generaliz-
          ing to in-distribution (interpolation) and out-of-distribution (extrapolation) factors
          that GSD outperforms baselines in novel behavior discovery by ∼21%. Finally,
          we demonstrate that GSD can generalize striking behaviors for table tennis in a
          virtual testbed while leveraging human demonstrations collected in the real world.
          Code is available at github.com/CORE-Robotics-Lab/GSD.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Intelligent agents that encounter a novel variation of a learned task should be able to adapt their
default decision making to suit the variation at hand. To adapt on-the-fly, agents must learn a concise
set of variations to quickly tune their behaviors. Such adaptability is valuable in applications such as
few-shot learning (Duan et al., 2017) and personalized human-robot interaction (Wang et al., 2022)
where limited examples or interaction must inform compatible approaches for task completion.
Behaviors that adaptable agents learn must be meaningfully diverse such that novel task variations
can be addressed sufficiently. In the past, unsupervised reinforcement learning (RL) (Laskin et al.,
2021) has been used to learn diverse behaviors or “skills”. However, learned behaviors intended
to explore the agent’s environment may not directly be useful towards task completion. Such ap-
proaches are further limited by their inability to identify and exhibit meaningful variations that are
useful during deployment. While supervised RL can be employed, reward specification to align
diverse behaviors with user expectations can be cumbersome (Soares & Fallenstein, 2014).


                                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In contrast to RL, learning from demonstration (LfD) methods enable agents to learn decision-
making policies directly from human examples. The distinct variations1 that individuals often ex-
hibit, even when pursuing the same task objectives (Sanderson, 1989), reflect creative ways of task
completion. We assume that these variations are governed by distinct but latent behavior factors.
These factors impart useful diversity in human behaviors that adaptable agents can exploit.
Prior work in heterogeneous Imitation Learning (IL) (Li et al., 2017; Chi et al., 2023) largely focuses
on generating behaviors corresponding to modes in training datasets or inferring representations of
test behaviors. In this work, we address the challenge of generating behaviors with novel varia-
tions. We specifically study the ability to inter- and extrapolate from demonstrations to effectively
produce new behaviors, that correspond to behavior factor values not seen in the training dataset,
while also accomplishing the task. For example, consider a robot quadruped that runs at differ-
ent speeds. We seek policies that run at 2m/s or 4m/s from demonstrations with speeds of 1m/s and
3m/s. Such a generalization ability can provide task-accomplishing behaviors with desirable charac-
teristics directly through latent prior sampling. However, generalization with latent behavior factors
is challenging, as we need to accurately identify the latent dimensions along which demonstrations
vary and locate individual behaviors in the corresponding space before extending to novel behaviors.
We focus on novel behavior generation in the setting of online IL (Ho & Ermon, 2016) due to its
data-sample efficiency. We show that prior approaches that utilize mutual information (MI)-based
diversity objectives (Li et al., 2017) fail to produce novel behaviors. We draw inspiration from
recent work in unsupervised RL (Park et al., 2022; 2024; 2023) that modify MI-based objectives
and structure latent representations in order to induce specific behavioral traits (e.g., high Euclidean
or temporal distances between states, controllability, etc). We propose to modify representation
learning by restricting the latent space from capturing state-action space regions irrelevant to the
task, identified through distillation of demonstration-specific occupancy measures. We find that our
formulation encourages diversity specifically along traits that vary across demonstrations. We refer
to this objective as task-relevant diversity as it produces behaviors that retain task-performance.
We present a novel approach to learn diverse task-accomplishing behaviors from demonstrations
that generalize over latent behavior factors. Our contributions are four-fold:
• We show the need for a novel formulation of diversity for generalization in IL from diverse demon-
  strations through experiments in a 2D Point Maze domain (Sec. 4).
• We formulate task-relevant diversity, an objective to encourage diversity along factors of variation
  among demonstrations by restricting representations from capturing irrelevant regions. We pro-
  pose Guided Strategy Discovery (GSD), an algorithm that optimizes diversity alongside imitation
  to discover novel task-accomplishing behaviors (Sec. 5).
• We demonstrate that GSD generalizes to novel behaviors with 21% average error reduction in
  behavior factors (known during evaluation) over four baselines across two splits (interpolation
  and extrapolation) in three domains spanning robot control, driving, and manipulation (Sec. 6.1).
• We demonstrate that GSD generalizes from physical human demonstrations to capture diverse
  stroke styles in a simulated Table Tennis domain (Sec. 6.3).

2   R ELATED W ORK
Generalization in Behavior Learning Prior works have studied generalization when agents are
faced with task specifications from test distributions (Benjamins et al., 2023; Silva et al., 2021;
Padalkar et al., 2023; Nair et al., 2022; Shridhar et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2020),
or deployment settings different from training environments (Fu et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2020;
Packer et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2023; Cobbe et al., 2019; Osa et al., 2022;
Zahavy et al., 2022). In IL, generalization has been considered when demonstrators operate with
diverse conditions (Qiu et al., 2023; Tangkaratt et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Paleja et al., 2020;
Schrum et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Hausman
et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2022a). Our work focuses on the latter, where we study heterogeneous
demonstrators with latent behavior factors. Among these, prior works either simply imitate multiple
behaviors (Wang et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Hausman et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2022a), characterize
heterogeneity through latent representations (Paleja et al., 2020; Schrum et al., 2023b; Li et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2020) or learn performant behaviors from diverse demonstrators (Qiu et al., 2023;
  1
    Demonstration diversity can also be attributed to varying sub-optimal ways of performing a task (Ra-
machandran & Amir, 2007). Our work, however, focuses solely on task-optimal demonstrations.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tangkaratt et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). Our work is the first to address learning both behavior
representations and performant behaviors that generalize over behavior factors.
Learning from demonstrations Prior works in LfD utilize demonstrations to learn rewards
(Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008; Fu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Ross et al., 2011)
or task-performant policies (Ross et al., 2011; Ho & Ermon, 2016; Qiu et al., 2023; Tangkaratt et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2021). Our work seeks diverse policies, particularly from expert demonstrations
with continuous latent factors (Wang et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Hausman et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2020; Peng et al., 2022a). While several works address heterogeneous IL with large datasets (Chi
et al., 2023), we use environment interaction to tackle covariate shift in low data regimes (Ho &
Ermon, 2016; Kostrikov et al., 2019; Reddy et al., 2020; Garg et al., 2021). Our work belongs to
the class of adversarial IL (AIL) methods (Orsini et al., 2021) which model imitation as adversarial
game between policies and a discriminator that captures expert occupancy. We study and address
the limitations of MI-based diversity objectives used alongside AIL methods (Li et al., 2017; Haus-
man et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2022a) in capturing latent factors specific to demonstrations.
Diverse behavior learning Diverse behavior learning has been employed for exploration, pre-
training, and generalization to novel environments. Quality Diversity (Batra et al., 2024) assumes
the availability of task performance metrics and functions for measuring behavior factors. In con-
trast, our work is related to unsupervised RL (Laskin et al., 2021) that learn behaviors without such
privileged information. Among them, we are similar to competence-based methods (Sharma et al.,
2020; Hansen et al., 2019; Park et al., 2022; 2023; 2024) that learn latent spaces to represent hetero-
geneous behaviors. Works focus on different aspects of diversity, such as state coverage (Eysenbach
et al., 2018; Park et al., 2022; Laskin et al., 2022; Mendonca et al., 2021), dynamics (Sharma et al.,
2020), controllability (Park et al., 2023; 2024), etc. Our work adopts ideas of regularization (Park
et al., 2022; 2023; 2024) for designing diversity objectives to improve heterogeneous IL.
Structured methods for heterogeneous IL CASSI (Li et al., 2023) uses MI-based objectives to
learn novel locomotion behaviors from unlabeled data but relies on additional rewards for task com-
pletion, unlike our approach which does not depend on rewards. FLD (Li et al., 2024) structures
latent spaces using differentiable fast Fourier transforms for periodic motions. In contrast, our ap-
proach is domain-agnostic, making it applicable across a broader range of tasks. ASE (Peng et al.,
2022b) applies latent sequence modeling combined with hyperspherical priors for smooth motion
transitions, and CALM (Tessler et al., 2023) builds on ASE with latent-conditioned discriminators.
However, both methods suffer from limitations of naive MI formulations, which our work addresses.

3    P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND P RELIMINARIES
We consider an infinite horizon, discounted, and reward-free Markov Decision Process (MDP\R),
(S, A, P, ρ0 , γ), where S and A represent state and action spaces, P : S × A × S → R, the transition
probabilities, ρ0 : S → R, the initial state distribution, and γ, the discount factor. An optimal expert
policy π ξ is governed by a continuous factor, ω ∈ Ω. The factor space, Ω, is split into disjoint
train and test regions, Tr(Ω) and Te(Ω), respectively. Given a demonstrations set, D, of trajectories
τiξ = {s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , ...}, at ∼ π ξ (·|st , ωi ), st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at ), and ωi ∈ Tr(Ω), we aim to learn a
policy π that captures the expert behavior π ξ over the entire factor space without access to ωi or Ω.
We ground our approach in InfoGAIL (Li et al., 2017), built upon Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016) to imitate demonstrations: J GAIL := Eπξ [log D(s, a)] +
Eπ [log(1 − D(s, a))], where D is a discriminator that distinguishes between the learned policy, π,
and the expert policy, π ξ . InfoGAIL additionally introduces a latent variable, z ∈ Z, to capture
factors underlying expert demonstrations. InfoGAIL optimizes MI by a variational lower bound
(Barber & Agakov, 2004), q(z|s, a). We refer to q as the decoder as it infers z from the state action
pair. The InfoGAIL objective is J InfoGAIL := J GAIL + λI Ez,π [log q(z|s, a)], where λI controls the
diversity objective weight.
For formulating our diversity objective, we build on ideas from network distillation (Teh et al.,
2017; Czarnecki et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020). MSRD (Chen et al., 2020) learns task rewards
from demonstrations, {ζi }, over a finite set of factors by employing distillation with AIRL (Fu
et al., 2018), a variant of GAIL that recovers a reward function, r(s, a). MSRD then distills the
reward functions for each variation, rζi , into a common reward function for the task, r̃0 . The
distillation is done by formulating each reward as, rζi (s, a) := r̃0 (s, a) + r̃ζi (s, a). The factor-
specific residual reward, r̃ζi (s, a), is encouraged to be close to zero with the additional objective,


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          3             Indicative Colors                     2           Assigned z             2           Assigned z             2           Assigned z
          2


                                                State dim 1
                                                              1                                  1                                  1
          1
Z dim 1   0                                                   0                                  0                                  0
         -1
                                                         -1                                      -1                                 -1
         -2
         -3                                              -2                                      -2                                 -2
           -3      -2     -1      0    1    2   3          -3        -2   -1   0    1    2   3     -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3     -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3
                               Z dim 0
              2                                               2                                  2                                  2
                        Demonstrations                                    Behaviors                          Behaviors                          Behaviors
State dim 1


                                                State dim 1
              1                                               1                                  1                                  1
              0                                               0                                  0                                  0
         -1                                              -1                                      -1                                 -1
         -2                                              -2                                      -2                                 -2
           -3     -2      -1    0    1      2   3          -3        -2   -1    0    1   2   3     -3   -2   -1    0    1   2   3     -3   -2   -1    0    1   2   3
                           State dim 0                                     State dim 0                        State dim 0                        State dim 0
                   a) Z, Demos                                    b) No regularization           c) Lipschitz constraints                  d) GSD (Ours)
Figure 2: Fig. 2a (Top): Map shows colors assigned to the 2D latent space. Fig. 2a (Bottom):
The agent starts at (-2, 0), moves to (2, 0), passing through (-1, 0), (0, ω) and (1, 0) where ω ∈
[−1, 1]. Full details are in Appendix A. Figs. 2b, 2c, 2d: Latent vectors assigned to the state space,
with a state-only decoder, and policy behaviors, under a high importance weight λI , are visualized.
Trajectories are colored according to conditioning latent vectors per Fig. 2a (Top). Baselines deviate
from demonstrations arbitrarily (Fig. 2b, Bottom) or uniformly (Fig. 2c, Bottom), disregarding the
goal. GSD (ours, Fig. 2d) discovers behaviors with novel latent variations (waypoints along x = 0)
while reaching closer to the goal (2, 0).

J MSRD := −Eζi ,π [(r̃ζi (s, a))2 ], to encourage the reward information common across demonstra-
tions pertaining to the task to be represented by the task reward function r̃0 .

4                 N EED FOR R EGULARIZATION
In this section, we show that prior diversity formulations from Li et al. (2017); Park et al. (2022) fail
to produce novel, task-accomplishing behaviors, motivating the need for a new formulation.
No regularization: InfoGAIL’s diversity objective, MI, promotes diverse behaviors by rewarding
the visitation of states associated with distinct latent vectors. In a 2D PointMaze domain with
continuous state-action space (see Fig. 2), we show that an increased diversity objective’s weight,
λI , does not necessarily result in more diverse behaviors that accomplish the task. This result can
be attributed to the decoder, q, a neural network (NN) that assigns latent vectors to state-action
pairs, ⟨s, a⟩. Without regularization, the decoder, q, produces unconstrained latent assignments,
with a high variety in smaller regions (see Fig. 2b, top, several distinct colors close to point (-2, 0)).
This finding aligns with prior work (Choi et al., 2021; Park et al., 2022). Without regularization,
related behaviors with close-by states can be mapped to unrelated far-away regions in the latent
space without any meaningful structure. This behavior can cause insufficient (see Fig. 2b, bottom,
several trajectories clump together along y = 0) or arbitrary (no pattern that governs deviation from
demonstrations) behavior diversity.
Prior regularization methods produce misaligned behaviors: Prior works in unsupervised
RL (Choi et al., 2021; Park et al., 2022) imposed Lipschitz constraints on the decoder, to enforce
that for any two state-action pairs, ⟨s, a⟩, ⟨s′ , a′ ⟩, the assigned latent vectors (specifically the mean
µ of the approximate posterior distribution q(·|s, a)), differ by at most the Euclidean distance be-
tween the pairs, scaled by λC . Formally, ||µq(·|s,a) − µq(·|s′ ,a′ ) || ≤ λC · ||s ⊕ a − s′ ⊕ a′ ||, where
⊕ denotes vector concatenation. The Lipschitz constraints ensure smooth latent vector assignments
(see Fig.2c, top), which encourages behaviors to deviate from demonstrations uniformly over the
state space. However, resulting behaviors do not necessarily proceed towards the goal (see Fig. 2c,
bottom). Other diversity formulations focusing on controllability and temporal reachability (Park
et al., 2023; 2024) will face similar issues if the auxiliary objectives are misaligned with behavior
heterogeneity. We propose a general formulation that encourages behavior diversity along latent
dimensions inferred from the demonstrations, without compromising task performance.

5                 O UR M ETHOD : G UIDED S TRATEGY D ISCOVERY
We present our approach for achieving generalizable IL from diverse demonstrations.


                                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1 E NCOURAGING f -R ELEVANT D IVERSITY
First, we present a general approach for encouraging diversity selectively within state-action space
regions indicated by high energy with respect to a scalar energy function, f : S × A → [0, 1].
We design our approach by analysing transitions that occur during learning. Consider a scenario
visualized in Fig. 3a, where an exploring agent is at a high f -energy state-action pair, ⟨s, a⟩, assigned
a latent vector z, and it enters another pair, ⟨s′ , a′ ⟩. If a different vector, z ′ s.t. z ′ ̸≈ z, were assigned
to ⟨s′ , a′ ⟩, the diversity rewards, log q(z|s, a), log q(z ′ |s′ , a′ ), would encourage behaviors π(·|·, z),
π(·|·, z ′ ), to visit ⟨s, a⟩ and ⟨s′ , a′ ⟩ respectively. The behavior, π(·|·, z ′ ), would be desirable if
⟨s′ , a′ ⟩ has high f -energy, as it would visit a high energy pair different from ⟨s, a⟩, increasing
coverage of high energy regions. On the other hand, if ⟨s′ , a′ ⟩ were a low f -energy pair, the behavior
π(·|·, z ′ ) visiting a low energy pair would be undesirable. In this case, the assignment for ⟨s′ , a′ ⟩
could be constrained close to z, which would remove the incentive for a behavior distinct from
π(·|·, z) to specifically visit ⟨s′ , a′ ⟩.
Selectively allowing distinct latent vector assignments only in high-energy regions encourages be-
haviors that target these regions, thereby promoting diversity only in high-energy regions. Constraint
shown in Eq. 1 formalizes this intuition: For a transition from ⟨s, a⟩ to ⟨s′ , a′ ⟩, the latter’s latent vec-
tor can be far from the former’s by at most the Euclidean distance between the two pairs, scaled by
f -energy of the latter and a factor λC .
                      ||µq(·|s,a) − µq(·|s′ ,a′ ) || ≤ λC · ||s ⊕ a − s′ ⊕ a′ || · f (s′ , a′ )               (1)
The proposed constraint (Eq. 1) disre-            -energy
gards the energy of the starting state-
action pair, f (s, a). The constraint
enforces the same latent assignment
for pairs in a low→low energy tran-
sition and allows different latent as-
signments for pairs in a low→high en-
ergy transition as visualized in Fig. 3b.                 -energy                    -energy
The enforcement can lead to connected
low energy regions being assigned the Figure 3: This figure shows a visualization of state transi-
same latent vector which is different tions that an agent at state-action pair, A, may undergo and
from that of reachable high energy re- the effect of our constraint in Eq. 1. The light blue region
gions. Distinct latent vectors for low indicates high f -energy and white state-action pairs do not
energy regions can result in behav- yet have assigned latent vectors. The lightness of the arrows
iors visiting those low-energy regions, indicates the slackness of our constraint (Eq. 1) from scaling
which is not desirable.                   with f -energy on the right-hand side.
We rectify our constraints to prevent latent assignments for low energy regions, by enforcing them
only with transitions with high energy starting pairs through scaling the constraint with f -energy of
the starting pair, as shown in Eq. 2. Thus, when the starting pair is of low energy, the constraint
implemented with a Lagrange multiplier is less effective due to a smaller violation.
The modified constraints encourage the decoder to effectively use the latent space to solely represent
high-energy regions. We refer to the resulting objective as f -relevant diversity.
        f (s, a) · ||µq(·|s,a) − µq(·|s′ ,a′ ) || ≤ f (s, a) · [λC · ||s ⊕ a − s′ ⊕ a′ || · f (s′ , a′ )]

                                                                                                          (2)

5.2 I NFERRING A TASK -R ELEVANCE M EASURE FROM D EMONSTRATIONS
Diverse task-accomplishing behaviors can be learned if an appropriate energy function f can be
used to instantiate our f -relevant diversity objective. We now present an approach to derive such an
f from demonstrations, utilizing occupancies captured by the discriminator, D.
Function f should indicate regions where agent occupation is favorable for the task while also cap-
turing demonstrators’ heterogeneity. We classify these regions as: (I) regions occupied by all ex-
perts, and (II) subspaces where different experts occupy distinct smaller regions. We propose that
capturing these two types of regions in the energy function provides us with an objective that en-
courages task accomplishment and generalization over behavior factors.
While the discriminator, D, could be used to model f , it would capture type II subspace insuffi-
ciently. D is trained to capture the union of demonstration occupancies, covering all type I regions,


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Guided Strategy Discovery
Input: Dataset of diverse expert demonstrations, D = {τiξ }
Output: Latent-conditioned policy capturing diverse behaviors, π
 1: Initialize policy π, task relevance f , factor-specific residual g, bias b, and decoder q
 2: for i ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...} epoch do
 3:    Sample z π from prior, τ π using policy π(·|·, z π ); τ ξ from D, infer z ξ using decoder q
 4:    Compute discriminator outputs according to the conditioned distillation structure (Eq. 3):
       D(s, a, z) = σ(λS · [f (s, a) + g(s, a, z)] + b)
 5:    Update f , g, b with gradient ascent on the discriminator objective computed by linearly com-
       bining J GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016) and the distillation objective (Eq. 4):
       Eτ ξ [log D(s, a, z ξ )] + Eτ π [log(1 − D(s, a, z π ))] − Eτ ξ [(g(s, a, z ξ ))2 ] − Eτ π [(g(s, a, z π ))2 ]
 6:    Compute the decoder objective using policy behavior samples (Eysenbach et al., 2018):
       Eτ π [log N (z π |µq(·|s,a) , Σq(·|s,a) )]
 7:    Update decoder  with gradient ascent on the objective while enforcing task-relevance                    con-
       straints (Eq. 2): λC · ||s ⊕ a − s′ ⊕ a′ || · f (s′ , a′ ) − ||µq(·|s,a) − µq(·|s′ ,a′ ) || · f (s, a) ≤ 0

 8:    Update policy π with RL using linearly combined behavior imitation and diversity rewards,
       log(D(s, a, z π )) and log N (z π |µq(·|s,a) , Σq(·|s,a) ), respectively.
 9: end for

but only certain regions in the type II subspace that correspond to training demonstrations. f mod-
eled in this way would limit behavior discovery beyond the training dataset.
We employ the distillation of demonstration-specific occupancy measures into a common measure,
to model f and capture type II subspaces. Demonstration-specific occupancies are obtained by
conditioning the discriminator, D(s, a, z), on the inferred latent vector, z. It is further split as a
linear combination of a latent-independent measure, i.e., our desired energy function, f (s, a), and a
dependent term, g(s, a, z), in the logit space as shown in Eq. 3, where g : S × A × Z → [0, 1], σ
is the logistic function, λS , a scaling constant, and b, a learnable bias. λS and b are introduced to
transform the sum of bounded measures and enable D to capture most of the probability range [0, 1].
The discriminator is trained with an additional distillation objective, as shown in Eq. 4, to minimize
the residual, g, to only capture demonstration-specific occupancy.
                               D(s, a, z) = σ(λS · [f (s, a) + g(s, a, z)] + b)                                  (3)
                                              R                         2
                                          J       := −Ez,π [(g(s, a, z)) ]                                       (4)
                    R
The objective, J , encourages f to fully capture both type I and II regions. Type I regions are
captured by f , as g is driven to zero where occupancy is common across demonstrations and latent-
independent. g is encouraged to be close to zero even in regions with demonstration-specific occu-
pancy, causing it to capture minimal possible information and distilling the rest into f . We posit that
f indicates entire subspaces where occupancy is demonstration dependent, i.e., type II subspaces,
while g indicates regions in these subspaces specific to each demonstration. We call our procedure
for deriving f conditioned distillation (ConDist), due to its use of latent conditioning and distillation,
similar to prior reward distillation frameworks (Chen et al., 2020).
Algorithm: We combine f -relevant diversity and conditioned distillation to propose Guided Strat-
egy Discovery (GSD). High-level steps are outlined in Algorithm 1. Complete details are in Ap-
pendix C. In each epoch, we sample behaviors using the policy conditioned on latent vectors from
the prior (Line 3). Latent vectors for demonstrations are inferred using the decoder (Line 3). We
use the proposed discriminator structure (Line 4), define the imitation and distillation objectives and
update the energy function, residual, and bias, using gradients (Line 5). We optimize the variational
lower bound (Line 6) while enforcing with proposed constraints (Line 7) to update the decoder using
gradients. Finally, we update the policy with rewards from the discriminator and decoder (Line 8).
We posit that f -relevant diversity and conditioned distillation are synergistic. An accurate f function
representing demonstrations can guide latent assignments and associated behaviors to generalize
beyond demonstrations. A latent space representing diverse demonstrations can help distillation
capture regions beyond demonstrations that generalize latent behavior factors. Fig. 2d (bottom)
shows that with GSD, the learned behaviors in 2D PointMaze capture novel latent variations by
passing through waypoints along x = 0 while reaching closer to the goal of (2, 0) better than
baselines in Figs. 2b, 2c. In addition, GSD produces a higher fraction of goal-reaching trajectories
despite a low weight for the imitation objective and a weaker incentive to match the expert.

                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6     E VALUATION
We present empirical evaluation to answer the following research questions:
1. How do various methods perform in generalization to behaviors with novel latent factors while
   maintaining task performance? (Sec. 6.1)
2. How do various methods structure behaviors in the latent space? (Sec. 6.2)
3. How do various methods perform in learning diverse task-accomplishing behaviors from real-
   world human demonstrations? (Sec. 6.3)
Domains: Existing benchmark, D3IL (Jia et al., 2024), focuses on discrete behavior modes. We
instead use domains with continuous variation and clear task objectives to evaluate generalization
from limited demonstrations. For Sec. 6.1, 6.2, we use HalfCheetah (Wawrzyński, 2009), Fetch-
PickPlace (Plappert et al., 2018) and DriveLaneshift (Leurent, 2018) as they provide well-defined
tasks with distinct one-dimensional (1D) factors. We script expert policies based on these factors. In
HalfCheetah, the robot runs at various speeds; in FetchPickPlace, the arm places an objects at differ-
ent locations; and in DriveLaneshift, the ego-car overtakes at varying headway distances. 1D factors
help avoid multiple sources of heterogeneity allowing careful examination of learned policies.
Methods: We consider InfoGAIL as our base method, representative of approaches that combine
online IL with MI-based diversity. Heterogeneous online IL methods capture finite sets of behaviors
(Chen et al., 2020) are omitted due to less scope for novel behavior discovery. While we incorporate
some improvements from adversarial IL (Orsini et al., 2021) across all the evaluated methods, a
thorough evaluation of their integration with diversity objectives is left for future work. Comparison
with other online IL methods (Garg et al., 2021) is omitted as they do not directly address demon-
stration diversity. Comparison with offline IL approaches that learn without environment interaction
is presented in Appendix D. We compare the following variants of InfoGAIL.
• IG: InfoGAIL (Li et al., 2017) with a continuous two dimensional latent variable.
• IG+Lipz: IG with Lipschitz constraints for decoder q to investigate the uniform diversity.
• IG+Con: IG with a conditioned discriminator D(s, a, z) structure to investigate the effect of con-
  ditioning the discriminator.
• IG+ConDist: IG with our proposed conditioned distillation to investigate the effect of extraction
  of a task-relevance measure (Eqs. 3, 4).
• IG+ConDist+Lipz: IG+ConDist with Lipschitz to investigate the uniform diversity formulation
  alongside conditioned distillation.
• GSD (Ours): IG+ConDist with our proposed task-relevant diversity formulation (Eq. 2).

6.1   Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION
We investigate whether learned behaviors can represent factor values in the disjoint test region
Te(Ω), after training on demonstrations, D, from the train region, Tr(Ω) (see Sec. 3). We consider
factors that are measurable from trajectories (only for the sake of evaluation) to assess recovery
performance, i.e., how well the learned latent space can represent expert behavior, by comparing
desired and measured factor values. When diverse expert behaviors form distinct modes, this frame-
work checks if continuous factors underlying them can be accurately identified and generalized.
Splits: We divide the bounded 1D factor range into five consecutive equal-sized intervals:
• Interpolation: The first, third, and fifth intervals represent the train region, and the second and
  fourth are the test region. The split allows us to evaluate the ability to interpolate behaviors to two
  factor space intervals while providing three non-consecutive intervals to represent the factor.
• Extrapolation: The second and fourth intervals represent the train region, while the first and fifth
  intervals are the test region. We choose two non-consecutive intervals for the train region to have
  a sparse dataset while providing enough diversity to represent the factor.
These splits evaluate how well the latent space captures factors to interpolate and extrapolate behav-
iors. We use five demonstrations per interval (details in Appendix B).
Metrics: We search for desired behaviors using K ∈ {10, 20, 30, 40, 50} latent vector samples from
the prior pz (·), where K represents the test time search sample-complexity, varied to investigate how
well we generate desired behaviors from limited samples. We roll out policies conditioned on the
sampled vectors, measure the factors of the sampled behaviors, and compute the least mean absolute
error (MAE) between the desired and the K measured values, averaging over 1500/K rounds. We

                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                IG      IG+Lipz      IG+Con      IG+ConDist       IG+ConDist+Lipz       GSD (Ours)


Figure 4: The figure shows average and worst-case recovery errors over the three domains and two
factor space splits corresponding to interpolative and extrapolative generalization. Shaded regions
are standard errors over five train seeds. GSD outperforms baselines in recovery of unseen latent
factors across most domains and splits.
refer to this metric as the recovery error. We
consider the midpoints of test intervals as the set
of desired values. We report average and worst
errors over desired values in the test region, pro-
viding estimates of closeness between desired
values and closest available behavior’s factor, on
average and worst case. We report mean and
standard errors over five train seeds in Fig. 4. We
                                                                             Higher
evaluate task performance by averaging environ-                             return is
ment returns over 1500 latent samples. We show                   Lower       better
recovery and task performance tradeoff in Fig. 5.                error is
                                                                 better
Exact numbers are provided in Appendix H.
Lipschitz constraints: For HalfCheetah (Fig. 4,
top row), IG+Lipz and IG+ConDist+Lipz have
worse recovery errors compared to IG and
IG+ConDist, indicated by the dark blue curve
above magenta, and green above black, re-
spectively. For DriveLaneshift (middle row),
IG+Lipz and IG+ConDist+Lipz exhibit the same
trend against IG and IG+ConDist: for inter-
polation, errors are improved shown by dark                           Normalized return (log scale)
blue falling below magenta and green below                       IG     IG+Lipz    IG+Con        IG+ConDist
                                                                     IG+ConDist+Lipz      GSD (Ours)
black; and for extrapolation, the errors are
worsened. For FetchPickPlace (bottom row), Figure 5: The figure shows the tradeoff between
IG+Lipz and IG+ConDist+Lipz improve over task and recovery performance for three domains
IG and IG+ConDist indicated by dark blue and and two splits. Error bars show standard errors
green consistently below magenta and black re- over five seeds. High returns (x-axis) and low er-
spectively. Lipschitz constraints seem to be ben- rors (y-axis) are better. GSD (circled in red) im-
efiting FetchPickPlace alone, which might be proves recovery while retaining or improving task
due to “uniform diversity” aligning with object- performance across most domains and splits.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


position factors, that is absent in other domains. This supports our hypothesis that relevant factors
for diversity must be inferred from demonstrations to benefit all domains.
Conditioning: For HalfCheetah (top row), IG+Con improves errors compared to IG, indicated by
the light blue curve below magenta. However, DriveLaneshift and FetchPickPlace, IG+Con seems
to worsen performance, with light blue largely above magenta in the bottom two rows. Worsened
errors may be a result of conditioning on a latent variable capturing arbitrary factors.
Conditioned Distillation: For HalfCheetah (top row), IG+ConDist and IG+ConDist+Lipz improve
over IG and IG+Lipz for extrapolation, indicated by black and green curves below magenta and
dark blue respectively. They remain on par for interpolation. For DriveLaneshift as well (middle
row), IG+ConDist and IG+ConDist+Lipz improve over IG and IG+Lipz for extrapolation (K ≥ 30)
and remain on par for/slightly improve interpolation. For FetchPickPlace (bottom row), the trends
are interesting. IG+ConDist worsens errors over IG for interpolation and extrapolation, indicated
by black above magenta. However, with Lipz’s addition, IG+ConDist+Lipz tends close to IG+Lipz
for interpolation and outperforms it for extrapolation. The patterns firstly suggest that conditioned
distillation can improve extrapolation performance. In addition, for FetchPickPlace where Lipschitz
constraints are particularly effective, conditioned distillation can further improve extrapolation.
Task-relevant Diversity: GSD improves recovery over other approaches across most domains and
splits, shown by the red curve below others in all plots, except for interpolation with HalfCheetah
(top row, first two columns). In HalfCheetah (top row), the close performance across methods may
be attributed to wide differences in gait styles across velocities that are challenging to interpolate or
extrapolate. In DriveLaneshift (middle row), GSD reduces recovery error considerably over other
approaches. In FetchPickPlace, GSD is closely matched by IG+Lipz or IG+ConDist+Lipz as Lips-
chitz constraints already capture relevant factors. Nevertheless, GSD can further improve recovery.
Tradeoff between Task and Recovery Performance: Across all domains, GSD either matches or
improves average normalized returns over the latent prior, as indicated in Fig. 5 by the red cross
generally being aligned with or positioned further right than others in all domain-split combinations
but one. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of GSD’s task-relevant diversity formulation in
learning behaviors that reduce recovery error while maintaining task performance.

6.2   Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION
We visualize the nature of the learned latent spaces for extrapolation in FetchPickPlace in Fig. 6.
IG+ConDist learns a large behavior set for placing the object in the red test region (indicated by red
cells in Fig. 6b), but ignores the dark-blue test region. While IG+ConDist+Lipz learns behaviors for
all regions, it learns several that fail to place the object quickly enough (indicated by white cells in
Fig. 6c). GSD learns behaviors that achieve the task (few white cells in Fig. 6d) while representing
all place locations equally in proximity to each other (roughly equal number of cells across colors
nearby each other). GSD exhibits potential for improving the accountability of policy learning by
enabling well structured latent spaces.


       (a) Fetch            (b) IG+ConDist          (c) IG+ConDist+Lipz           (d) GSD (Ours)
Figure 6: Fig.6a shows FetchPickPlace with object placement locations color-coded. Solid and
dotted boundaries indicate train and test regions respectively. Figs.6b,6c,6d: Policy behaviors are
shown in the 2D latent space through colors for resulting place-locations shown in 6a. White regions
indicate failed placements or placements with low task reward. Behaviors with IG+ConDist (6b),
IG+ConDist+Lipz (6c) either represent the relevant regions disproportionately or fail to accomplish
the task. Behaviors with GSD (6d) accomplish the task (low presence of white cells) and repre-
sent all regions well (roughly equal number of cells across colors).

                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.3   E VALUATION WITH REAL - WORLD HUMAN DEMONSTRATIONS
We further evaluate our                                             1.0
approach to test scalabil-
ity to complex tasks with                                           0.8
human demonstrations in


                                                                      Success Rate
                                                                       Ball Strikes
a Table Tennis (TT) do-                                             0.6

main. TT represents a
                                                                    0.4
dynamic domain that re-
quires precise robot mo-                                            0.2
tion and fast reaction times
while acting on noisy ob-                                           0.0
                                                                      -7.0 -6.6 -6.1 -5.5 -4.8 -3.9 -2.5 -0.0
servations. Our physical                                                    Entropy in Max. Ball Heights
                                                                            (Particle estimate, log scale)
setup consists of a Barrett                                      IG              IG+Con            IG+ConDist+Lipz
WAM Arm mounted to the                                           IG+Lipz         IG+ConDist        GSD (Ours)


ceiling in front of a TT ta- Figure 7: Left: The images visualize ball trajectories achieved by an
ble, and a racquet attached expert kinesthetically demonstrating two types of strokes. Right: The
as the arm’s effector. Balls figure shows the tradeoff between ball striking success rate and diversity
are launched using a But- in ball heights achieved. GSD outperforms baselines for both metrics.
terfly Amicus launcher at a
fixed orientation and velocity with some noise. Balls are detected and tracked using a YOLO ob-
ject detector and a Kalman Filter. An expert provides kinesthetic demonstrations of push and lob
strokes. We recreate the setup in simulation with PyBullet for behavior learning. Ball initialization
and observation noise levels in the simulation match real data. Complete details are in Appendix E.
While multiple continuous factors may exist underlying TT stroke styles, we evaluate generalization
for maximum ball height, which we assume to be one of the underlying continuous factors. We eval-
uate various methods in simulation for achieving high diversity in ball heights. We compute entropy
in ball height values using particle estimates (Singh et al., 2003), after disregarding unsuccessful
trials that fail to strike the ball over the table. We report the success rate traded off with diversity
in ball heights in Fig. 7 (right). Our method GSD outperforms all baselines in both measures of
success rate and entropy.


7     C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
We study the problem of generalization from diverse demonstrations over underlying latent factors.
We investigate the shortcomings of prior MI-based methods and propose a novel diversity formu-
lation. Our empirical evaluation shows that our approach improves the recovery of factors over the
next best baseline (for K=50) by 18.3% and 24.6% for interpolation and extrapolation respectively
while retaining task performance in three domains with synthetic demonstrations. Our qualitative
analysis shows our potential in improving the accountability of learned policies. Lastly, our experi-
ments with real-world human demonstrations shows that our framework can capture a diverse range
of task-accomplishing behaviors in a challenging domain requiring quick response times.
Limitations: Our experiments focus on demonstrations with one-dimensional latent factors. Our
approach may struggle with higher dimensional or non-Markovian factors, which could require spe-
cialized designs for disentangling dimensions or capturing observation history dependence. Scaling
to visual domains, where continuous factors must be inferred from sparsely distributed demonstra-
tions, may also be challenging, as simple architectures for the energy function f may not generalize
well. Furthermore, our assumption that demonstration occupancies correlate with task success may
be violated with non-expert demonstrators or partial observability, which may require state estima-
tion models. While current work prioritizes validating our core contributions, we plan to evaluate
scalability in future work.
Our evaluation with human demonstrations is further limited to quantitative metrics. We aim to
conduct user studies to subjectively evaluate behaviors in human robot interaction settings. Our
evaluation is further limited to simulated domains. We aim to explore the efficacy of our diversity
formulation for learning novel behaviors in physical robot systems with improved data-sample effi-
ciency. We further aim to explore the theoretical implications of our formulation and its alignment
with the imitation objective. Further limitations are discussed in Appendix F.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Data generation and collection is detailed in Appendices A, B, E.1. Implementation details, hy-
perparameters and evaluation procedures are detailed in Appendices C, E.2. Code is available at
github.com/CORE-Robotics-Lab/GSD.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Manisha Natarajan for feedback on the manuscripts. This work was supported by MIT
Lincoln Laboratory grant FA8702-15-D-0001, NIH grant 1R01HL157457-01A1, NSF grant CPS-
2219755, ONR grant N00014-22-1-2834, and a grant from Ford Motor Company.

R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.

Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-
  crete problems in ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

David Barber and Felix Agakov. The IM algorithm: a variational approach to Information Maxi-
  mization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 16(320):201, 2004.

Sumeet Batra, Bryon Tjanaka, Stefanos Nikolaidis, and Gaurav Sukhatme. Quality diversity for
  robot learning: Limitations and future directions. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
  Computation Conference Companion, pp. 587–590, 2024.

Carolin Benjamins, Theresa Eimer, Frederik Schubert, Aditya Mohan, Sebastian Döhler, André
  Biedenkapp, Bodo Rosenhahn, Frank Hutter, and Marius Lindauer. Contextualize me–the case
  for context in reinforcement learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.

Marcel Binz and Dominik M. Endres. Where do human heuristics come from? ArXiv,
 abs/1902.07580, 2019.   URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
 67769766.

Gisela Böhm and Hans-Rüdiger Pfister. How people explain their own and others’ behavior: a
  theory of lay causal explanations. Frontiers in psychology, 6:109763, 2015.

Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.

Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arxiv. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 10, 2016.

Zhangjie Cao, Yilun Hao, Mengxi Li, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning feasibility to imitate demonstra-
  tors with different dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15142, 2021.

Letian Chen, Rohan Paleja, Muyleng Ghuy, and Matthew Gombolay. Joint goal and strategy infer-
  ence across heterogeneous demonstrators via reward network distillation. In Proceedings of the
  2020 ACM/IEEE International Conference on human-robot interaction, pp. 659–668, 2020.

Letian Chen, Rohan Paleja, and Matthew Gombolay. Learning from suboptimal demonstration via
  self-supervised reward regression. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1262–1277. PMLR, 2021.

Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shu-
  ran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jongwook Choi, Archit Sharma, Honglak Lee, Sergey Levine, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Variational
  empowerment as representation learning for goal-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.01404, 2021.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.
Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Chris Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying generaliza-
  tion in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1282–1289.
  PMLR, 2019.
Antonio Coronato, Muddasar Naeem, Giuseppe De Pietro, and Giovanni Paragliola. Reinforcement
  learning for intelligent healthcare applications: A survey. Artificial intelligence in medicine, 109:
  101964, 2020.
Wojciech M Czarnecki, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero, Siddhant Jayakumar, Grzegorz Swirszcz,
 and Max Jaderberg. Distilling policy distillation. In The 22nd International Conference on artifi-
 cial intelligence and statistics, pp. 1331–1340. PMLR, 2019.
Allan Dafoe, Edward Hughes, Yoram Bachrach, Tantum Collins, Kevin R McKee, Joel Z
  Leibo, Kate Larson, and Thore Graepel. Open problems in cooperative ai. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2012.08630, 2020.
Anca Dragan and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Generating legible motion. Frontiers in psychology, 2013.
Danny Driess, Jung-Su Ha, and Marc Toussaint. Deep visual reasoning: Learning to predict
  action sequences for task and motion planning from an initial scene image. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.05398, 2020.
Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly Stadie, OpenAI Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya
  Sutskever, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. One-shot imitation learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Marco Ewerton, Guilherme Maeda, Gerrit Kollegger, Josef Wiemeyer, and Jan Peters. Incremental
 imitation learning of context-dependent motor skills. In IEEE-RAS 16th International Conference
 on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), pp. 351–358. IEEE, 2016.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2018.
Chelsea Finn, Paul Christiano, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. A connection between generative
  adversarial networks, inverse reinforcement learning, and energy-based models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1611.03852, 2016.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International Conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR,
  2017a.
Chelsea Finn, Tianhe Yu, Tianhao Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. One-shot visual imita-
  tion learning via meta-learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 357–368. PMLR, 2017b.
Pete Florence, Corey Lynch, Andy Zeng, Oscar A Ramirez, Ayzaan Wahid, Laura Downs, Adrian
  Wong, Johnny Lee, Igor Mordatch, and Jonathan Tompson. Implicit behavioral cloning. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 158–168. PMLR, 2022.
Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine. Learning robust rewards with adverserial inverse rein-
  forcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Kanishk Gandhi, Siddharth Karamcheti, Madeline Liao, and Dorsa Sadigh. Eliciting compatible
  demonstrations for multi-human imitation learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1981–
  1991. PMLR, 2023.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yapeng Gao, Jonas Tebbe, and Andreas Zell. Optimal stroke learning with policy gradient approach
  for robotic table tennis. Applied Intelligence, 53(11):13309–13322, 2023.
Divyansh Garg, Shuvam Chakraborty, Chris Cundy, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Iq-learn:
  Inverse soft-q learning for imitation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  4028–4039, 2021.
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Richard Zemel, and Shixiang Gu. A divergence minimization
  perspective on imitation learning methods. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1259–1277.
  PMLR, 2020.
Diego Gomez, Michael Bowling, and Marlos C Machado. Proper laplacian representation learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10833, 2023.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 27, 2014.
Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Variational intrinsic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.07507, 2016.
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville. Im-
   proved training of wasserstein gans. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
   2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In International Conference on machine learning, pp. 1352–1361.
  PMLR, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Steven Hansen, Will Dabney, Andre Barreto, Tom Van de Wiele, David Warde-Farley, and
  Volodymyr Mnih. Fast task inference with variational intrinsic successor features. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.05030, 2019.
Mahta HassanPour Zonoozi and Vahid Seydi. A survey on adversarial domain adaptation. Neural
 Processing Letters, 55(3):2429–2469, 2023.
Karol Hausman, Yevgen Chebotar, Stefan Schaal, Gaurav Sukhatme, and Joseph J Lim. Multi-modal
  imitation learning from unstructured demonstrations using generative adversarial nets. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Alexander Herzog, Kanishka Rao, Karol Hausman, Yao Lu, Paul Wohlhart, Mengyuan Yan, Jessica
  Lin, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, Ted Xiao, Daniel Kappler, et al. Deep rl at scale: Sorting waste
  in office buildings with a fleet of mobile manipulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03270, 2023.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are uni-
  versal approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
Maxence Hussonnois, Thommen George Karimpanal, and Santu Rana. Controlled diversity with
 preference: Towards learning a diverse set of desired skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04592,
 2023.
Sagar Imambi, Kolla Bhanu Prakash, and GR Kanagachidambaresan. Pytorch. Programming with
  TensorFlow: Solution for Edge Computing Applications, pp. 87–104, 2021.
Rohit Jena, Changliu Liu, and Katia Sycara. Augmenting gail with bc for sample efficient imitation
  learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 80–90. PMLR, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiaogang Jia, Denis Blessing, Xinkai Jiang, Moritz Reuss, Atalay Donat, Rudolf Lioutikov, and
  Gerhard Neumann. Towards diverse behaviors: A benchmark for imitation learning with human
  demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14606, 2024.

Liyiming Ke, Sanjiban Choudhury, Matt Barnes, Wen Sun, Gilwoo Lee, and Siddhartha Srinivasa.
  Imitation learning as f-divergence minimization. In Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XIV:
  Proceedings of the 14th Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics 14, pp. 313–329.
  Springer, 2021.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of zero-shot gener-
  alisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:201–264,
  2023.

W Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. Tamer: Training an agent manually via evaluative reinforcement.
 In 7th IEEE International Conference on development and learning, pp. 292–297. IEEE, 2008.

W Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. Interactively shaping agents via human reinforcement: The tamer
 framework. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Knowledge Capture, pp. 9–16,
 2009.

Ilya Kostrikov, Kumar Krishna Agrawal, Debidatta Dwibedi, Sergey Levine, and Jonathan Tomp-
   son. Discriminator-actor-critic: Addressing sample inefficiency and reward bias in adversarial
   imitation learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Ashish Kumar, Zipeng Fu, Deepak Pathak, and Jitendra Malik. Rma: Rapid motor adaptation for
  legged robots. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2021.

Saurabh Kumar, Aviral Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. One solution is not all you need:
  Few-shot extrapolation via structured maxent rl. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:8198–8210, 2020.

Michael Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang, Lerrel
 Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Urlb: Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2110.15191, 2021.

Michael Laskin, Hao Liu, Xue Bin Peng, Denis Yarats, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Pieter Abbeel. Cic:
 Contrastive intrinsic control for unsupervised skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00161,
 2022.

Edouard Leurent. An environment for autonomous driving decision-making. https://github.
  com/eleurent/highway-env, 2018.

Chenhao Li, Sebastian Blaes, Pavel Kolev, Marin Vlastelica, Jonas Frey, and Georg Martius. Ver-
  satile skill control via self-supervised adversarial imitation of unlabeled mixed motions. In 2023
  IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 2944–2950. IEEE, 2023.

Chenhao Li, Elijah Stanger-Jones, Steve Heim, and Sangbae Kim. Fld: Fourier latent dynamics for
  structured motion representation and learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13820, 2024.

Yunzhu Li, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Infogail: Interpretable imitation learning from visual
  demonstrations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

Minghuan Liu, Tairan He, Minkai Xu, and Weinan Zhang. Energy-based imitation learning. In Pro-
 ceedings of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems,
 pp. 809–817, 2021.

Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and
  Pierre Sermanet. Learning latent plans from play. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1113–
  1132. PMLR, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-
  Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n. What matters in learning from offline
  human demonstrations for robot manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1678–1690.
  PMLR, 2022.
Russell Mendonca, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Discover-
  ing and achieving goals via world models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:24379–24391, 2021.
Josh Merel, Leonard Hasenclever, Alexandre Galashov, Arun Ahuja, Vu Pham, Greg Wayne,
  Yee Whye Teh, and Nicolas Heess. Neural probabilistic motor primitives for humanoid control.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.11711, 2018.
Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization
  for generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Eduardo F Morales and Claude Sammut. Learning to fly by combining reinforcement learning with
  behavioural cloning. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine learning,
  pp. 76, 2004.
Suraj Nair, Eric Mitchell, Kevin Chen, Silvio Savarese, Chelsea Finn, et al. Learning language-
  conditioned robot behavior from offline data and crowd-sourced annotation. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, pp. 1303–1315. PMLR, 2022.
Tianwei Ni, Harshit Sikchi, Yufei Wang, Tejus Gupta, Lisa Lee, and Ben Eysenbach. f-irl: Inverse
  reinforcement learning via state marginal matching. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 529–
  551. PMLR, 2021.
OpenAI. o1. https://openai.com/index/learning-to-reason-with-llms/,
  2024. Learning to reason with Large Language Models.
Manu Orsini, Anton Raichuk, Léonard Hussenot, Damien Vincent, Robert Dadashi, Sertan Girgin,
 Matthieu Geist, Olivier Bachem, Olivier Pietquin, and Marcin Andrychowicz. What matters for
 adversarial imitation learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14656–
 14668, 2021.
Takayuki Osa, Joni Pajarinen, Gerhard Neumann, J Andrew Bagnell, Pieter Abbeel, Jan Peters, et al.
  An algorithmic perspective on imitation learning. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 7(1-2):
  1–179, 2018.
Takayuki Osa, Voot Tangkaratt, and Masashi Sugiyama. Discovering diverse solutions in deep
  reinforcement learning by maximizing state–action-based mutual information. Neural Networks,
  152:90–104, 2022.
Charles Packer, Katelyn Gao, Jernej Kos, Philipp Krähenbühl, Vladlen Koltun, and Dawn Song.
  Assessing generalization in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12282, 2018.
Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander
  Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anikait Singh, Anthony Brohan, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic
  learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.
Rohan Paleja, Andrew Silva, Letian Chen, and Matthew Gombolay. Interpretable and personalized
  apprenticeship scheduling: Learning interpretable scheduling policies from heterogeneous user
  demonstrations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6417–6428, 2020.
Seohong Park, Jongwook Choi, Jaekyeom Kim, Honglak Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Lipschitz-
  constrained unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Seohong Park, Kimin Lee, Youngwoon Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Controllability-aware unsupervised
  skill discovery. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27225–27245. PMLR,
  2023.

Seohong Park, Oleh Rybkin, and Sergey Levine. METRA: Scalable unsupervised RL with metric-
  aware abstraction. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Tim Pearce, Tabish Rashid, Anssi Kanervisto, Dave Bignell, Mingfei Sun, Raluca Georgescu, Ser-
  gio Valcarcel Macua, Shan Zheng Tan, Ida Momennejad, Katja Hofmann, et al. Imitating human
  behaviour with diffusion models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR 2023), 2023.

Jian-Wei Peng, Min-Chun Hu, and Wei-Ta Chu. An imitation learning framework for generat-
   ing multi-modal trajectories from unstructured demonstrations. Neurocomputing, 500:712–723,
   2022a.

Xue Bin Peng, Yunrong Guo, Lina Halper, Sergey Levine, and Sanja Fidler. Ase: Large-scale
  reusable adversarial skill embeddings for physically simulated characters. ACM Transactions On
  Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–17, 2022b.

Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Pow-
 ell, Jonas Schneider, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, et al. Multi-goal reinforce-
 ment learning: Challenging robotics environments and request for research. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1802.09464, 2018.

Mariya Popova, Olexandr Isayev, and Alexander Tropsha. Deep reinforcement learning for de novo
 drug design. Science advances, 4(7):eaap7885, 2018.

Yiwen Qiu, Jialong Wu, Zhangjie Cao, and Mingsheng Long. Out-of-dynamics imitation learning
  from multimodal demonstrations. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1071–1080. PMLR,
  2023.

Deepak Ramachandran and Eyal Amir. Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning. In IJCAI, vol-
  ume 7, pp. 2586–2591, 2007.

Siddharth Reddy, Anca D Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Sqil: Imitation learning via reinforcement
  learning with sparse rewards. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Allen Z Ren, Justin Lidard, Lars L Ankile, Anthony Simeonov, Pulkit Agrawal, Anirudha Majum-
  dar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Hongkai Dai, and Max Simchowitz. Diffusion policy policy optimiza-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00588, 2024.

Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
   tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth International Con-
   ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
   Proceedings, 2011.

Sebastian Ruder. An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms.            arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1609.04747, 2016.

Stuart Russell. Human compatible: Artificial intelligence and the problem of control. Penguin,
  2019.

Penelope M Sanderson. The human planning and scheduling role in advanced manufacturing sys-
  tems: An emerging human factors domain. Human Factors, 31(6):635–666, 1989.

Mariah L Schrum, Erin Hedlund-Botti, and Matthew Gombolay. Reciprocal MIND MELD: Improv-
 ing learning from demonstration via personalized, reciprocal teaching. In Conference on Robot
 Learning, pp. 956–966. PMLR, 2023a.

Mariah L Schrum, Emily Sumner, Matthew C Gombolay, and Andrew Best. Maveric: A data-driven
 approach to personalized autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08595, 2023b.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation.  arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Zichen Cui, Ariuntuya Arty Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior
  transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:22955–22968, 2022.
Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Perceiver-actor: A multi-task transformer for
 robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 785–799. PMLR, 2023.
Andrew Silva, Nina Moorman, William Silva, Zulfiqar Zaidi, Nakul Gopalan, and Matthew Gom-
  bolay. Lancon-learn: Learning with language to enable generalization in multi-task manipulation.
  IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):1635–1642, 2021.
David Silver, Satinder Singh, Doina Precup, and Richard S Sutton. Reward is enough. Artificial
  Intelligence, 299:103535, 2021.
Özgür Şimşek and Andrew G Barto. Using relative novelty to identify useful temporal abstractions in
   reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine learning,
   pp. 95, 2004.
Harshinder Singh, Neeraj Misra, Vladimir Hnizdo, Adam Fedorowicz, and Eugene Demchuk. Near-
  est neighbor estimates of entropy. American journal of mathematical and management sciences,
  23(3-4):301–321, 2003.
Nate Soares and Benja Fallenstein. Aligning superintelligence with human interests: A technical
  research agenda. Machine Intelligence Research Institute (MIRI) technical report, 8, 2014.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep
  conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Andrew Szot, Amy Zhang, Dhruv Batra, Zsolt Kira, and Franziska Meier. Bc-irl: Learning general-
  izable reward functions from demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16194, 2023.
Adrien Ali Taiga, Rishabh Agarwal, Jesse Farebrother, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Investigating multi-task pretraining and generalization in reinforcement learning. In The 11th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Chen Tang, Ben Abbatematteo, Jiaheng Hu, Rohan Chandra, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, and Peter
  Stone. Deep reinforcement learning for robotics: A survey of real-world successes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.03539, 2024.
Voot Tangkaratt, Bo Han, Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan, and Masashi Sugiyama. Variational imitation
  learning with diverse-quality demonstrations. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 9407–9417, 2020.
Yee Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech M Czarnecki, John Quan, James Kirkpatrick, Raia Hadsell, Nicolas
  Heess, and Razvan Pascanu. Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Chen Tessler, Yoni Kasten, Yunrong Guo, Shie Mannor, Gal Chechik, and Xue Bin Peng. Calm:
  Conditional adversarial latent models for directable virtual characters. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023
  Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–9, 2023.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chen Wang, Claudia Pérez-D’Arpino, Danfei Xu, Li Fei-Fei, Karen Liu, and Silvio Savarese. Co-
  gail: Learning diverse strategies for human-robot collaboration. In Conference on Robot Learn-
  ing, pp. 1279–1290. PMLR, 2022.
Yawei Wang and Xiu Li. Reward function shape exploration in adversarial imitation learning: an
  empirical study. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Computer
  Applications (ICAICA), pp. 52–57. IEEE, 2021.
Ziyu Wang, Josh S Merel, Scott E Reed, Nando de Freitas, Gregory Wayne, and Nicolas Heess.
  Robust imitation of diverse behaviors. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.
Paweł Wawrzyński. A cat-like robot real-time learning to run. In Adaptive and Natural Computing
  Algorithms: 9th International Conference, Kuopio, Finland, Revised Selected Papers 9, pp. 380–
  390. Springer, 2009.
Annie Xie, Dylan Losey, Ryan Tolsma, Chelsea Finn, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning latent representa-
  tions to influence multi-agent interaction. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 575–588. PMLR,
  2021.
Annie Xie, Lisa Lee, Ted Xiao, and Chelsea Finn. Decomposing the generalization gap in imitation
  learning for visual robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03659, 2023.
Mengdi Xu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Yuchen Lu, Ding Zhao, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Chuang
 Gan. Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy generalization. In International Con-
 ference on machine learning, pp. 24631–24645. PMLR, 2022.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Luyao Yuan, Xiaofeng Gao, Zilong Zheng, Mark Edmonds, Ying Nian Wu, Federico Rossano,
  Hongjing Lu, Yixin Zhu, and Song-Chun Zhu. In situ bidirectional human-robot value alignment.
  Science Robotics, 7(68):eabm4183, 2022.
Tom Zahavy, Yannick Schroecker, Feryal Behbahani, Kate Baumli, Sebastian Flennerhag, Shaobo
  Hou, and Satinder Singh. Discovering policies with domino: Diversity optimization maintaining
  near optimality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13521, 2022.
Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual
  manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.
Zeyu Zhu and Huijing Zhao. A survey of deep rl and il for autonomous driving policy learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(9):14043–14065, 2021.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In AAAI, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P OINT M AZE
The PointMaze domain considered in Sec. 4 is presented
in Fig. 8. PointMaze is a two-dimensional navigation en-
vironment with continuous state and action spaces. The
state vector represents the agent’s current location’s x- and
y- coordinates in [−∞, ∞]2 . The action space is a veloc-
ity command, a two-dimensional vector in [−1, 1]2 . The
episode length is fixed to 25 steps. Expert demonstrations
are collected from a PD controller parameterized with a Figure 8: The figure visualizes expert
one-dimensional (1D) factor, ω that determines the way- demonstrations in PointMaze with vary-
point through which the agent passes (0, ω) on its way to ing waypoints along x = 0.
the goal (2, 0).

B     D OMAINS AND D EMONSTRATIONS
The bounded factor range is divided into 5 intervals for each domain, as explained in Sec. 6. For
each interval, we add Gaussian noise to the mean value of the interval to generate five samples. We
condition the expert policy on the five samples to obtain five demonstrations for each interval.

B.1   H ALF C HEETAH

The HalfCheetah environ-
ment considered in Sec. 6 is
from OpenAI Gym (Brock-
man et al., 2016). The obser-
vation vector consists of the
positions and velocities of
the robot joints, along with
height and velocities in the Figure 9: Left: The images visualizes the HalfCheetah robot. Right:
vertical and horizontal direc- The figure shows the (smoothed) velocity plotted against the timestep
tions. The reward is modi- of the demonstration. The trajectories are colored to indicate the factor
fied as shown in Eq. 5, where interval in which they belong.
rt is the reward at the time, t,
and xt is the position of the center of mass of the robot along the x-axis at time t, and I, the indicator
function that outputs 1 if and only if (iff) its argument evaluates to true. The undiscounted episode
return counts the number of steps in which the cheetah moves forward by a non-zero amount. The
return is normalized using the range, [0, 1050]. The episode length is fixed at 1000 steps. The
environment is stochastic with the robot initialized at random configurations.
                                       rstep = I(xt+1 − xt > 0)                                        (5)

The factor is the mean velocity measured as the net change in the x-coordinate over the elapsed time.
Due to environment stochasticity, we use five sampled trajectories per conditioning latent vector
during evaluation and consider the mean value. Demonstrations consist of the robot running at
different mean velocities [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] m/s, collected using RL policies trained using SAC (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) and auxiliary rewards for target velocities.

B.2   D RIVE L ANESHIFT

The DriveLaneshift environment is built from the highway-env library (Leurent, 2018). The highway
consists of two lanes. The scenario includes the ego-car in the right lane controlled by the agent,
and another car in front, in the same lane, that maintains a constant speed of 25 m/s. The task of the
ego-car is to shift to the left lane, overtake the other car, and reach the target speed of 30 m/s. The
reward at each step is as shown in Eq. 6, where rt is the reward at the time, t, bonroad , evaluates
to true iff the car is within the road bounds at time t, bsaf e evaluates to true iff the ego-car has not
crashed until time t, blef tlane evaluates to true iff the ego-car is in the left lane at time t, vt is the
speed at time t, and clip(x, a, b) clips the value x to lie between a and b. The return is normalized


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


using the range [0, 175]. The state vector includes positions (absolute for the ego-car, relative for
the other), velocities, heading angles, and longitudinal, latitudinal, and angular offsets to the closest
lane for both cars. The episode length is fixed at 50 steps. The environment is deterministic.

                                                                            |vt − 30|
                rstep = I(bonroad ) + I(bsaf e ) + I(blef tlane ) + clip(             , 0, 1)        (6)
                                                                                5

The factor is the min headway distance, i.e., the distance between the ego-car and the other, at which
the ego-car shifts to the left lane before overtaking. Demonstrations consist of the ego-car perform-
ing overtaking maneuvers at varying min headway distances [10.92, 18.28, 25.62, 32.91, 40.27] m,
collected using a scripted PD controller.


Figure 10: Top: The images visualize the highway overtaking scenario with the ego-car (green)
starting behind the other car (yellow) in the right lane. Bottom: The figure visualizes the position of
the ego-car relative to the other car as recorded in the demonstrations. The trajectories are colored
to indicate the factor interval in which they belong.


B.3   F ETCH P ICK P LACE

The FetchPickPlace environment con-
sidered is from the gym library
(Brockman et al., 2016). The task is
to move the object from its initial lo-
cation on the table at [1.20, 0.75] to
along the line x = 1.40, with reward at
each step measured as shown in Eq. 7,
where rt is the reward at the time, t,
and xt is the position of the center of
mass of the object along the x-axis at
time t. The return is normalized using
the range [−20, −5]. The state vec-
tor includes the end effector position
and velocity, object position and veloc-
ity, finger gripper position and veloc-
ity, and object position relative to the
gripper. The episode length is fixed at Figure 11: Left: The images visualize the Fetch robot with
100 steps. The environment is deter- an object on the table. Right: The figure shows the object
ministic.                                trajectories (from the top down) recorded in the demonstra-
                                         tions. The trajectories are colored to indicate the factor in-
         rstep = −|xt+1 − xt |       (7) terval in which they belong.


The factor is the y-coordinate of the
final object position. Demonstrations consist of the robot arm picking the object up from
the initial location and placing it at the target x-coordinate and varying y-coordinates, 0.75 +
[−0.32, −0.16, 0, 0.16, 0.32] m, collected using a scripted state-based PD controller.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A LGORITHM AND I MPLEMENTATION

C.1    A LGORITHM - D ETAILED V ERSION

A detailed version of Algorithm 1 can be found in Algorithm 2, with objectives and gradient steps
for all components explicitly written down.

Algorithm 2 Guided Strategy Discovery
Input: D = {τiξ }
Output: π
 1: Initialize policy π, task relevance f , factor-specific residual g, decoder q, with parameters θπ ,
    θf , θg , θq , Lagrange multiplier λ, bias b, and learning rates ηπ , ηf , ηg , ηq , ηλ , ηb
 2: for i ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...} epoch do
 3:    Sample z π from prior, τ π using policy π(·|·, z π ); τ ξ from D, infer z ξ using decoder q
 4:    Define objective for functions f , g and bias b:
       D(s, a, z) = σ(λS · [f (s, a) + g(s, a, z)] + b)
       J I ← Eτ ξ [log D(s, a, z ξ )] + Eτ π [log(1 − D(s, a, z π ))]
                                                                − Eτ ξ [(g(s, a, z ξ ))2 ] − Eτ π [(g(s, a, z π ))2 ]
 5:    Update f , g, b using gradients: [θf , θg , b] := [θf , θg , b] + [ηf ∇θf J I , ηg ∇θg J I , ηb ∇b J I ]
 6:    Define objective  for decoder q:
       δ(s, a, s′ , a′ ) ← λC · ||s ⊕ a − s′ ⊕ a′ || · f (s′ , a′ ) − ||µq(·|s,a) − µq(·|s′ ,a′ ) || · f (s, a)


       qL (z, s, a) ← N (z|µq(·|s,a) , Σq(·|s,a) )
       J E ← Eτ π [log qL (z, s, a) + λ · min(δ(s, a, s′ , a′ ), ϵ)]
 7:    Update decoder q and λ using gradients: [θq , λ] := [θq , λ] + [ηq ∇θq J E , −ηλ ∇λ J E ]
 8:    Update policy π with RL using rewards: r(s, a, z) = log(D(s, a, z)) + λI · log qL (z, s, a)
 9: end for

C.2    I MPLEMENTATION

We implement our approach on top of the public code-base for VILD (Tangkaratt et al., 2020)
that implements adversarial IL algorithms using PyTorch (Imambi et al., 2021): github.com/voot-
t/vild code. We use implementation tricks from their codebase to ensure convergence across meth-
ods, such as gradient penalty (Gulrajani et al., 2017) with a weight of 0.1 for the discriminator/task
relevance, and the positive logarithmic function (Wang & Li, 2021) for discriminator rewards, i.e.,
r(s, a) = − log(1 − D(s, a)) instead of r(s, a) = log(D(s, a)).
We use a normal prior for the latent space across all approaches. The decoder q outputs the mean
and diagonal elements of the covariance matrix of the approximate posterior distribution, which is
assumed to be Gaussian.
Conditioned Discriminator To infer latent code τ ξ for a demonstration trajectory τ ξ , we make
a simplifying assumption that the posterior distributions across transitions are independent. Thus,
the product of the individual distributions gives us the posterior distribution for the demonstration
trajectory.
We add expert transitions with mismatched demonstration latent vectors as fake samples to the
discriminator dataset to ensure that the conditioned discriminator, D(s, a, z), does not ignore the
input latent vector. We upsample “real” data points in a batch to avoid imbalanced classes for
discriminator gradient updates.
Decoder Regularization We perform spectral normalization (Miyato et al., 2018) using the Py-
Torch function nn.utils.parametrizations.spectral_norm. We scale the inputs to
the decoder to implement Lipschitz constraint scaling with λS .
Reinforcement Learning We use PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for policy learning from rewards.
For some domains, we use PPOBC (Jena et al., 2021). PPOBC augments the policy objective with
a behavior cloning (BC) loss term which improves learning stability without directly affecting the
discriminator or decoder. We highlight that using the BC term comes at no additional human cost, as
demonstrations are already available in the IL setting. Furthermore, we make no assumptions about
the demonstrations’ behavior factors either and use the decoder network to infer the latent factor.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3   D OMAIN - SPECIFIC VARIATIONS AND TUNING


The hyperparameters used in our optimization are listed in Tables 1, 2. Each method is independently
tuned for λI (and λC for Lipz, GSD) over the specified ranges, to maximize MAE over the test split
for K=10 over averaged over four rounds of evaluation and five train seeds. All hyperparameters
omitted from the tables are set to default values from our base implementation.

                                 Hyperparameter                       Value
                            NN update minibatch size                   256
                                Policy learning rate                   3e-4
                                  Entropy bonus                       0.0001
                                      Gamma                            0.99
                       GAE coefficient (Schulman et al., 2015)         0.97
                                 NN architectures                      FCN
                                 Policy activation                     Tanh
                              BC warmstart epochs                     10000
                                  Disc. activation                     Tanh
                                Disc. learning rate                    1e-3
                               Disc. gradient steps                      5
                             Dec. hidden dimensions                 [100, 256]
                                  Dec. activation                     ReLU
                                Dec. gradient steps                      5
                                         λS                             10
                                   b initial value                      -5
                                Constraint slack (ϵ)                   1e-6
                              Lambda learning rate                     1e-3
                                    Optimizers                        Adam

Table 1: The table contains the list of hyperparameters, common across domains and generalization
settings. GAE: Generalized Advantage Estimation, NN: Neural Network, FCN: Fully connected
network, BC: Behavior cloning, Disc.: Discriminator, Dec.: Decoder
   Hyperparam. \ Domain              HalfCheetah           DriveLaneshift        FetchPickPlace
           Env. steps                   1.5e7                   0.5e7                  1e7
         RL algorithm                    PPO                  PPOBC                  PPOBC
      BC halflife, weight                 -                    0.1, 0.2              0.1, 0.1
           (PPOBC)
   NN update interval (steps)           10000                    1000                  10000
    NN hidden dimensions              [100, 100]              [100, 100]              [32, 32]
      Observation norm.                 False                   False                   True
          (w/ demos.)
     Policy weight decay               (0, 1e-3)                  1e-4              (1e-4, 5e-5)
      Dec. learning rate                 1e-3                     1e-4                  1e-3
     Lambda initial value             (100, 500)                  500                   5000
    Dec. gradient norm clip                ∞                       25                    ∞
      Dec. rewards clip                [-∞, ∞]                  [-20, 5]              [-∞, ∞]
          Distillation               (0.02, 0.001)          (0.001, 0.001)       (0.0001, 0.0005)
       objective weight
         λS sweep list           [0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2]   [0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 5.0]   [0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 5.0]
         λI sweep list                ([0.9, 0.8],           ([0.99, 0.97],          ([0.9, 0.8],
                                      [0.8, 0.7])            [0.99, 0.97])           [0.8, 0.7])

Table 2: The table contains the list of hyperparameters, specific to each domain (indicated by the
column) and generalization setting (indicated by a 2-tuple (left, right), where left and right corre-
spond to interpolation and extrapolation respectively).

                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    C OMPARISON AGAINST OFFLINE IL APPROACHES


We compare GSD against offline IL approaches that learn solely from data without any environment
interaction. We use implementations open-sourced by D3IL (Jia et al., 2024). We focus on mul-
timodal action distribution modeling by excluding architectures that incorporate state histories or
predict action sequences, such as action chunking (Zhao et al., 2023). We use fully connected neural
network backbones with two hidden layers each containing 100 units. Unless otherwise specified,
we use default hyperparameters that are most common across tasks in D3IL. We use demonstrations
corresponding to held-out factor intervals as the validation dataset for early stopping.
• Behavior cloning (BC): Policy NN takes state as input and outputs actions, and is trained with a
  mean squared error (MSE) loss.
• BC with VAE (BC-VAE): BC-VAE uses a state-conditioned encoder-decoder setup to model the
  action distribution (Sohn et al., 2015). Latent space dimension is set to size 2, same as our ap-
  proach. A weight of 5.0 is used for scaling KL-divergence loss.
• Implicit BC (IBC): Florence et al. (2022) propose energy models that implicitly capture the action
  distribution at each state. The action is inferred by optimizing the energy function using Markov
  chain Monte-carlo sampling at each inference step.
• K-Means Discretization (BeT): Shafiullah et al. (2022) propose an approach to capture multimodal
  action distributions using a learned discretization with K predicted action means and offsets. K
  is set to 64.
• Diffusion Policy (Diffusion): Chi et al. (2023); Pearce et al. (2023) propose modeling action
  distributions with a diffusion model conditioned on the state. Timestep embeddings of size 16 and
  24 denoising steps are used.
We show the recovery and performance trade-
off of offline IL and our approach in Fig. 12.
With regard to task performance (x-axis), for
HalfCheetah (top row) and FetchPickPlace (bot-
tom), GSD outperforms offline approaches (ex-
cept for interpolation in HalfCheetah) indicated
by the red cross being positioned further right
than others. For DriveLaneShift (middle row),
offline approaches other than BC and BC-VAE
are competitive with GSD. The result sug-
gests that in domains with complex dynamics
like HalfCheetah and FetchPickPlace, environ-
ment interaction is necessary for task completion
when learning from few demonstrations.
With regard to recovery performance (y-axis),
for HalfCheetah (top row) and FetchPickPlace                                                       Higher
(bottom), GSD outperforms all offline ap-                                                         return is
proaches, indicated by the red cross being po-                                          Lower      better
sitioned below others. For interpolation in Driv-                                       error is
eLaneShift (middle row, left), approaches IBC,                                          better
BeT and Diffusion are comparable to GSD. For
extrapolation (middle row, right), GSD outper-                         Normalized return (log scale)
forms all methods. Poor performance of offline                           BC      BC-VAE        IBC
approaches in domains with complex dynamics                          BeT     Diﬀusion      GSD (Ours)

like HalfCheetah and FetchPickPlace may be at- Figure 12: The figure shows the tradeoff between
tributed to the absence of environment interac- task and recovery performance for three domains
tion. In simpler domains, IBC, BeT or Diffu- and two splits for offline IL approaches and GSD
sion may be able to interpolate diverse behaviors. (indicated with red circles). Error bars show stan-
However, for extrapolation, environment interac- dard errors over five seeds.
tion is necessary, even for simpler domains.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     E VALUATION WITH H UMAN D EMONSTRATIONS IN TABLE T ENNIS

E.1   S ETUP

Demonstrations: The WAM arm is enabled with gravity compensation for collecting kinesthetic
demonstrations. Messages published to a ROS interface are collected for two seconds (starting after
the ball is detected to move over the table) which is enough time to capture the return trajectory.
Joint states (R7 ) and ball positions (R3 ) are matched over time, and concatenated to construct state
vectors (R10 ). Action vectors are constructed by calculating the displacements at corresponding
timesteps. We collect five demonstrations for each of the two-stroke types considered.
Simulation: We use position control for the WAM arm at 100hz with the control gains tuned to
match real robot demonstrations visually when replaying action commands open loop. We tune ball
flight parameters such that the ball flight paths (before being struck) visually match those from the
real demonstrations when launched from a similar position, velocity, and noise as the ball launcher.
We add Gaussian noise to the ball positions in the observation vector to mimic real recorded ball
positions. We use an episode length of 200 steps that corresponds to a real-life execution period of
two seconds.

E.2   M ETRICS

We detect if the ball has been returned by checking if the velocity component along the long edge
of the TT table has reversed. Once a returning ball is detected, we check if the ball remains above
the table plane and within 10 cm beyond the sides of the table for the following 0.5 seconds. If
the trajectory satisfies both criteria, we deem it a success. We calculate the factor value for each
successful return which is the maximum height the ball reaches in the return trajectory.
We sample five trajectories per sampled latent vector due to the stochastic nature of the ball observa-
tions. However, not every sampled trajectory for a particular latent vector is guaranteed to succeed
due to the stochasticity in the domain and optimization. Thus, we consider a latent vector successful
if the ball is returned in at least three out of five trials. We consider the factor value for the successful
latent vector to be the mean of the values of the successful trajectories.
For each method and train seed, we sample 200 latent vectors from the prior, and sample five trajec-
tories per latent vector. We report the fraction of successful latent vectors to evaluate if behaviors can
accomplish the underlying task. Among the set of latent vectors, we subsample 100 successful la-
tent vectors (after ensuring each method has at least 50% success rate) and report the entropy (based
on particle estimates (Singh et al., 2003)) among the calculated factors using the equation shown
in Eq. 8 where V = {vi }M   i=0 is the set of factor values vi , M = 100, K = 50 and NNeK,V (vi )
returns the Kth nearest neighbor to vi from the set of values V . The entropy measure is up to a
proportionality constant, as we use it to compare diversity achieved in return ball trajectory heights
across methods.
                                               M
                                           1 X
                              HK (V ) =           log ||vi − NNeK,V (vi )||                            (8)
                                           M i=0


F     F URTHER L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Our approach requires a task-relevance measure, f , which we derived from demonstration occupan-
cies. IL approaches that do not explicitly model expert occupancy (Reddy et al., 2020; Garg et al.,
2021) may not be readily compatible for integration with our regularization. However, Q functions
learned during policy optimization may act as suitable alternatives for f .
Our regularization is implemented through approximately enforced constraints using Lagrange mul-
tipliers. Approximate enforcement may permit spurious behaviors that drastically vary from demon-
strations. Parametric approaches akin to spectral normalization for Lipschitz continuity (Miyato
et al., 2018) are desirable.
Instead of using diversity objectives, approaches that learn generalizable reward functions (Szot
et al., 2023) could also be explored in the context of generalizable heterogeneous IL.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The efficacy of our regularization could be explored with offline and non-MI-based diversity frame-
works that use latent space modeling.



G    G ENERALITY OF f - RELEVANT DIVERSITY

Our f -relevant diversity for- 20.0 0.5 1.0 2                       2                  2
mulation discussed in Sec. 5.1                   1                  1                  1
is designed to encourage be- 1
                                                 0                  0                  0
havior diversity with respect 0
to any defined energy measure -1-1 0 1 2 -1-1          0     1
                                                                   -1
                                                                  2 -1    0     1
                                                                                      -1
                                                                                     2 -1     0       1    2
f . We briefly demonstrate the a) Example f fn.     b) No               c) Lipschitz       d) f -relevant
                                                   regularization      constraints        diversity (Ours)
generality of our formulation
in the simple 2D PointMaze Figure 13: The figure visualizes behaviors in 2D PointMaze learned
domain with a user-defined with a predefined energy function f shown in 13a. f is used to
energy function as shown in specify rewards in 13b-d and additionally formulate our diversity
Fig. 13. Our formulation has objective in 13d. With no regularization (13b) or Lipschitz con-
a potential application in di- straints (13c), trajectories visit low f -energy regions of the state-
verse solution discovery (Ku- space. However, with f -relevant diversity (ours, 13d), a larger por-
mar et al., 2020; Osa et al., tion of trajectories cover diverse high energy states.
2022), where a bounded form
of the estimated Q function can be used as f to encourage diversity in high value regions.



H    E VALUATION R ESULTS

We provide the numerical figures for recovery errors used to plot the graphs in Fig. 4 below. We
further abbreviate Con, ConDist and Lipz as CO, CD and LZ respectively due to width constraints.
HalfCheetah: Interpolation, Average:
 Model               K = 10             K = 20              K = 30           K = 40             K = 50
 IG               0.258 ± 0.007      0.147 ± 0.006       0.106 ± 0.004    0.080 ± 0.004      0.063 ± 0.004
 IG+LZ            0.265 ± 0.009      0.156 ± 0.010       0.111 ± 0.008    0.089 ± 0.008      0.069 ± 0.006
 IG+CO            0.229 ± 0.015      0.114 ± 0.007       0.074 ± 0.004    0.058 ± 0.003      0.049 ± 0.003
 IG+CD            0.266 ± 0.014      0.142 ± 0.007       0.101 ± 0.006    0.077 ± 0.005      0.060 ± 0.005
 IG+CD+LZ         0.307 ± 0.004      0.177 ± 0.005       0.124 ± 0.004    0.091 ± 0.003      0.077 ± 0.003
 GSD (Ours)       0.226 ± 0.007      0.120 ± 0.003       0.081 ± 0.003    0.065 ± 0.001      0.052 ± 0.002
HalfCheetah: Interpolation, Worst:
 Model               K = 10             K = 20              K = 30           K = 40             K = 50
 IG               0.298 ± 0.004      0.177 ± 0.002       0.134 ± 0.003    0.103 ± 0.003      0.076 ± 0.003
 IG+LZ            0.348 ± 0.020      0.212 ± 0.021       0.159 ± 0.019    0.131 ± 0.017      0.099 ± 0.013
 IG+CO            0.291 ± 0.029      0.142 ± 0.014       0.092 ± 0.007    0.072 ± 0.007      0.061 ± 0.005
 IG+CD            0.339 ± 0.024      0.181 ± 0.013       0.133 ± 0.011    0.102 ± 0.009      0.082 ± 0.008
 IG+CD+LZ         0.373 ± 0.007      0.223 ± 0.010       0.158 ± 0.008    0.117 ± 0.006      0.100 ± 0.006
 GSD (Ours)       0.287 ± 0.007      0.151 ± 0.005       0.106 ± 0.004    0.084 ± 0.002      0.069 ± 0.002
HalfCheetah: Extrapolation, Average:
 Model               K = 10             K = 20              K = 30           K = 40             K = 50
 IG               0.841 ± 0.010      0.766 ± 0.014       0.737 ± 0.016    0.710 ± 0.017      0.697 ± 0.019
 IG+LZ            0.891 ± 0.004      0.829 ± 0.005       0.804 ± 0.005    0.788 ± 0.005      0.779 ± 0.005
 IG+CO            0.741 ± 0.007      0.618 ± 0.002       0.560 ± 0.004    0.525 ± 0.006      0.505 ± 0.007
 IG+CD            0.801 ± 0.024      0.642 ± 0.020       0.581 ± 0.019    0.538 ± 0.019      0.513 ± 0.020
 IG+CD+LZ         0.686 ± 0.008      0.597 ± 0.008       0.559 ± 0.010    0.539 ± 0.010      0.525 ± 0.011
 GSD (Ours)       0.682 ± 0.028      0.556 ± 0.032       0.512 ± 0.033    0.484 ± 0.034      0.472 ± 0.034

                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


HalfCheetah: Extrapolation, Worst:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            0.910 ± 0.013    0.854 ± 0.016       0.837 ± 0.017   0.828 ± 0.017   0.821 ± 0.017
 IG+LZ         0.999 ± 0.004    0.909 ± 0.007       0.880 ± 0.009   0.869 ± 0.009   0.860 ± 0.010
 IG+CO         0.875 ± 0.019    0.779 ± 0.021       0.725 ± 0.024   0.685 ± 0.027   0.661 ± 0.030
 IG+CD         0.963 ± 0.031    0.750 ± 0.017       0.686 ± 0.012   0.656 ± 0.008   0.634 ± 0.007
 IG+CD+LZ      0.797 ± 0.012    0.719 ± 0.011       0.699 ± 0.011   0.689 ± 0.011   0.682 ± 0.011
 GSD (Ours)    0.808 ± 0.039    0.679 ± 0.038       0.646 ± 0.040   0.632 ± 0.041   0.621 ± 0.041
DriveLaneshift: Interpolation, Average:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            3.435 ± 0.148    2.305 ± 0.132       1.808 ± 0.122   1.489 ± 0.105   1.277 ± 0.098
 IG+LZ         3.193 ± 0.096    2.101 ± 0.097       1.631 ± 0.101   1.345 ± 0.078   1.111 ± 0.073
 IG+CO         5.246 ± 0.500    3.153 ± 0.375       2.377 ± 0.333   1.936 ± 0.302   1.712 ± 0.278
 IG+CD         3.619 ± 0.200    2.246 ± 0.151       1.749 ± 0.154   1.419 ± 0.163   1.221 ± 0.154
 IG+CD+LZ      2.785 ± 0.196    1.652 ± 0.172       1.302 ± 0.156   1.114 ± 0.142   0.985 ± 0.128
 GSD (Ours)    2.343 ± 0.134    1.299 ± 0.094       0.877 ± 0.061   0.685 ± 0.058   0.530 ± 0.045
DriveLaneshift: Interpolation, Worst:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            4.528 ± 0.262    3.294 ± 0.226       2.693 ± 0.228   2.280 ± 0.193   2.008 ± 0.190
 IG+LZ         4.702 ± 0.179    3.315 ± 0.187       2.675 ± 0.192   2.253 ± 0.152   1.859 ± 0.140
 IG+CO         6.843 ± 0.690    4.304 ± 0.507       3.329 ± 0.441   2.754 ± 0.397   2.469 ± 0.380
 IG+CD         5.057 ± 0.307    3.329 ± 0.249       2.657 ± 0.269   2.171 ± 0.282   1.878 ± 0.271
 IG+CD+LZ      3.895 ± 0.314    2.581 ± 0.310       2.079 ± 0.291   1.797 ± 0.269   1.637 ± 0.241
 GSD (Ours)    3.009 ± 0.246    1.709 ± 0.171       1.138 ± 0.104   0.911 ± 0.106   0.687 ± 0.079
DriveLaneshift: Extrapolation, Average:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            5.807 ± 0.231    4.889 ± 0.269       4.446 ± 0.288   4.144 ± 0.297   3.943 ± 0.302
 IG+LZ         6.435 ± 0.124    5.692 ± 0.193       5.375 ± 0.224   5.134 ± 0.244   4.977 ± 0.257
 IG+CO         6.347 ± 0.769    4.335 ± 0.584       3.588 ± 0.567   3.166 ± 0.542   2.967 ± 0.521
 IG+CD         3.902 ± 0.185    2.480 ± 0.185       1.886 ± 0.172   1.559 ± 0.166   1.399 ± 0.168
 IG+CD+LZ      5.588 ± 0.511    3.809 ± 0.400       2.902 ± 0.369   2.472 ± 0.362   2.206 ± 0.369
 GSD (Ours)    2.803 ± 0.108    1.545 ± 0.074       1.019 ± 0.053   0.815 ± 0.046   0.695 ± 0.048
DriveLaneshift: Extrapolation, Worst:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            6.386 ± 0.219    5.527 ± 0.246       5.102 ± 0.268   4.805 ± 0.289   4.624 ± 0.291
 IG+LZ         6.908 ± 0.125    6.222 ± 0.224       6.071 ± 0.244   5.923 ± 0.259   5.836 ± 0.269
 IG+CO         8.599 ± 1.302    6.673 ± 1.140       5.827 ± 1.107   5.324 ± 1.069   5.033 ± 1.026
 IG+CD         5.326 ± 0.338    3.606 ± 0.341       2.907 ± 0.339   2.438 ± 0.322   2.206 ± 0.328
 IG+CD+LZ      8.723 ± 1.105    6.473 ± 0.890       5.038 ± 0.790   4.340 ± 0.764   3.945 ± 0.766
 GSD (Ours)    4.067 ± 0.225    2.283 ± 0.156       1.534 ± 0.105   1.238 ± 0.091   1.034 ± 0.094
FetchPickPlace: Interpolation, Average:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            0.071 ± 0.004    0.045 ± 0.004       0.034 ± 0.003   0.027 ± 0.003   0.022 ± 0.002
 IG+LZ         0.044 ± 0.002    0.024 ± 0.001       0.016 ± 0.001   0.012 ± 0.001   0.010 ± 0.001
 IG+CO         0.072 ± 0.009    0.053 ± 0.010       0.046 ± 0.010   0.041 ± 0.011   0.040 ± 0.011
 IG+CD         0.083 ± 0.011    0.067 ± 0.012       0.060 ± 0.012   0.055 ± 0.012   0.052 ± 0.012
 IG+CD+LZ      0.050 ± 0.001    0.027 ± 0.001       0.019 ± 0.001   0.015 ± 0.001   0.012 ± 0.001
 GSD (Ours)    0.037 ± 0.001    0.020 ± 0.001       0.014 ± 0.000   0.011 ± 0.000   0.008 ± 0.000


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FetchPickPlace: Interpolation, Worst:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            0.084 ± 0.005    0.058 ± 0.005       0.046 ± 0.005   0.037 ± 0.004   0.031 ± 0.004
 IG+LZ         0.056 ± 0.003    0.032 ± 0.002       0.021 ± 0.002   0.016 ± 0.001   0.013 ± 0.001
 IG+CO         0.081 ± 0.009    0.061 ± 0.011       0.054 ± 0.011   0.048 ± 0.011   0.047 ± 0.011
 IG+CD         0.088 ± 0.010    0.072 ± 0.012       0.064 ± 0.012   0.059 ± 0.012   0.056 ± 0.012
 IG+CD+LZ      0.053 ± 0.002    0.030 ± 0.001       0.021 ± 0.001   0.017 ± 0.001   0.014 ± 0.001
 GSD (Ours)    0.042 ± 0.001    0.022 ± 0.001       0.015 ± 0.001   0.013 ± 0.001   0.009 ± 0.000
FetchPickPlace: Extrapolation, Average:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            0.137 ± 0.003    0.103 ± 0.003       0.087 ± 0.003   0.075 ± 0.003   0.068 ± 0.003
 IG+LZ         0.083 ± 0.003    0.057 ± 0.003       0.045 ± 0.003   0.038 ± 0.003   0.034 ± 0.003
 IG+CO         0.210 ± 0.016    0.183 ± 0.018       0.167 ± 0.018   0.158 ± 0.018   0.152 ± 0.018
 IG+CD         0.264 ± 0.012    0.246 ± 0.013       0.233 ± 0.014   0.225 ± 0.014   0.220 ± 0.015
 IG+CD+LZ      0.078 ± 0.003    0.046 ± 0.002       0.032 ± 0.002   0.026 ± 0.002   0.022 ± 0.002
 GSD (Ours)    0.068 ± 0.002    0.037 ± 0.002       0.027 ± 0.002   0.021 ± 0.002   0.018 ± 0.002
FetchPickPlace: Extrapolation, Worst:
 Model            K = 10           K = 20              K = 30          K = 40          K = 50
 IG            0.182 ± 0.004    0.143 ± 0.004       0.120 ± 0.003   0.105 ± 0.003   0.097 ± 0.003
 IG+LZ         0.097 ± 0.003    0.071 ± 0.004       0.057 ± 0.004   0.049 ± 0.004   0.044 ± 0.004
 IG+CO         0.249 ± 0.012    0.223 ± 0.015       0.208 ± 0.017   0.196 ± 0.017   0.191 ± 0.018
 IG+CD         0.303 ± 0.003    0.286 ± 0.006       0.275 ± 0.008   0.266 ± 0.009   0.260 ± 0.010
 IG+CD+LZ      0.092 ± 0.003    0.057 ± 0.003       0.042 ± 0.004   0.035 ± 0.004   0.031 ± 0.004
 GSD (Ours)    0.094 ± 0.005    0.056 ± 0.005       0.041 ± 0.004   0.033 ± 0.003   0.028 ± 0.004


                                               27
