Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   F ROM AN LLM S WARM TO A PDDL- EMPOWERED
H IVE : P LANNING S ELF - EXECUTED I NSTRUCTIONS IN
A M ULTI - MODAL J UNGLE
 Kaustubh Vyas† , Damien Graux† , Yijun Yang† , Sébastien Montella† , Chenxin Diao†
 Wendi Zhou¶ ‡ , Pavlos Vougiouklis† , Ruofei Lai† , Yang Ren† , Keshuang Li† , Jeff Z. Pan† ¶
 †
   Huawei Technologies Ltd., UK ¶ University of Edinburgh, UK
 {firstname.lastname}@huawei.com {wendi.zhou,j.z.pan}@ed.ac.uk

                                              A BSTRACT
            In response to the call for agent-based solutions that leverage the ever-increasing
            capabilities of the deep models’ ecosystem, we introduce H IVE – a comprehen-
            sive solution for knowledge-aware planning of a set of atomic actions to address
            input queries and subsequently selecting appropriate models accordingly. H IVE
            operates over sets of models and, upon receiving natural language instructions (i.e.
            user queries), schedules and executes explainable plans of atomic actions. These
            actions can involve one or more of the available models to achieve the overall
            task, while respecting end-users specific constraints. Notably, H IVE handles tasks
            that involve multi-modal inputs and outputs, enabling it to handle complex, real-
            world queries. Our system is capable of planning complex chains of actions while
            guaranteeing explainability, using an LLM-based formal logic backbone empow-
            ered by PDDL operations. We introduce the MUSE benchmark in order to offer a
            comprehensive evaluation of the multi-modal capabilities of agent systems. Our
            findings show that our framework redefines the state-of-the-art for task selection,
            outperforming other competing systems that plan operations across multiple mod-
            els while offering transparency guarantees while fully adhering to user constraints.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Within the past few years, the number of available models—either through commercial paywalls or
open-sourced—has exploded both in terms of intrinsic performances and in terms of tasks handled
by them, ranging from text generation (Achiam et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2023; Team et al., 2023;
He et al., 2025) to more specific actions such as code generation (Becker et al., 2023; Dong et al.,
2024) or image generation (Wang et al., 2023b; Zhu et al., 2023). This rapid growth has unlocked
unprecedented potential for real-world applications, inspiring practitioners, especially in industry,
to envision new use cases that leverage these powerful models (Liu et al., 2023c; Shen et al., 2024a;
Lu et al., 2024; Xing et al., 2024). However, if creativity and possibility have been unleashed by
such a surge, implementing pipelines that involve multiple models remains a complex and largely
manual (and often cumbersome) process, particularly when addressing tasks beyond the original
design of these models. This often leads developers to create ad hoc modules to manage these
complexities. In addition, a significant number of models available in the wild are either advanced
proof-of-concept or very specialised ones, see e.g. the hundreds of thousands of models available on
the HuggingFace platform1 . As a consequence of this abundance, navigating through this jungle to
select the appropriate models for a set of tasks has become very challenging. This complexity arises
both in terms of performance and compatibility. Connecting models’ input and output formats is
complex, as the generated results are often difficult to control (Scholak et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2022).
Moreover, planning and chaining tasks for real-world use-cases present a significant challenge too.
In this study, we present a comprehensive solution to tackle the aforementioned two challenges,
i.e. (I) selecting appropriate models and then (II) planning a set of atomic actions to achieve the
objectives in the end-users’ instructions (i.e., user queries). Our knowledge-aware planning system,
H IVE, takes natural language instructions (potentially involving multi-modal inputs and outputs)
    ‡
        Work done while at Huawei Technologies Ltd.
    1
        1 016 247 models on https://huggingface.co/models as of October 1st , 2024.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and can effectively schedule, execute and explain plans composed of atomic actions. These plans
may involve one or more models, carefully orchestrated to accomplish the overall task while adher-
ing to users-specific constraints, such as model size or licensing, to name a few.
One of our key contributions addresses the first challenge: the lack of machine-understandable in-
terface that consolidates comprehensive information about available models. To bridge this gap,
we propose a Capability Knowledge Graph (C-KG), a knowledge graph (Pan et al., 2017) with all
dimensions needed to for automated planning and execution. For each model, inter alia, C-KG cap-
tures critical details such as supported tasks, performance metrics from state-of-the-art benchmarks,
and minimal code snippets for inference. Additionally, to enable the planning of complex action
sequences with guaranteed explainability, we developed a novel planning approach which, instead
of relying solely on LLM reasoning capabilities (Pan et al., 2023), also employs formal logic to
reach its conclusions. To achieve this, we took advantage of PDDL—a formal language widely used
in robotics for defining planning problems (Aeronautiques et al., 1998), mapping the end-users’ in-
structions with atomic actions, thereby enabling the conversion of natural language instructions into
a PDDL problem space. This approach allows us to formally plan before executing the tasks using
code snippets from the C-KG. As a result, it has enabled us to generate detailed reports that provide
end-users with fine-grained and reliable explanations.
In the absence of standard publicly available benchmarks for solving real-world tasks, we intro-
duce MUSE and share it as a Github repository2 , a new evaluation benchmark of complex queries
involving multi-modal inputs and outputs, to assess our proposed framework. Using MUSE, we
reviewed the closest existing solutions, namely HuggingGPT (Shen et al., 2024a) and ControlLLM
(Liu et al., 2023c), which only tackle sub-problems of our broader objectives. The results indicate
that H IVE not only surpasses these competitors but also consistently outperforms them across all
benchmark dimensions. H IVE demonstrates a 30% higher accuracy in task selection and respects
user constraints in 100% of cases, while being more reliable.

2       P RELIMINARIES
Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) (Aeronautiques et al., 1998) is a standardised lan-
guage extensively used in the field of artificial intelligence (AI) planning to represent planning do-
mains and problems. PDDL provides a formal syntax and semantics for defining the components of
a planning task, including actions, predicates, objects, and their relationships. It enables the clear
specification of the initial state, goal conditions, and permissible actions within a domain, facilitating
the development and comparison of planning algorithms. In our work, PDDL plays a critical role in
task decomposition and planning. By defining tasks as actions within PDDL domains, we leverage
established planning techniques to generate coherent and feasible plans. The use of PDDL allows us
to formally model complex tasks, ensuring that the system can reason about the preconditions and
effects of actions within a well-defined framework.

Let D = d1 , d2 , . . . , d|D| be a set ofn PDDL domains. oEach PDDL domain dj ∈ D is associated
                                             d    d        d
                                     dj
with a set of PDDL actions s.t. a = a1j , a2j , . . . , aAjj , where j ∈ [1, |D|] and Aj ∈ N the num-
ber of actions included within the PDDL domain dj . Furthermore, let T be a set of different tasks,
                                                                                                 |D|
                                                                                                  S dj
consisting of all PDDL actions across the available PDDL domains ∈ D, as follows: T =                 a .
                                                                                                 j=1

Finally, we define M = m1 , m2 , . . . , m|M | as the set of all models available for completing a set
of different tasks T or combinations thereof.

3       H IVE — G ENERAL A RCHITECTURE
3.1      C APABILITY K NOWLEDGE G RAPH

We extract model cards3 directly from HuggingFace and incorporate an OpenIE extraction route for
converting the textual descriptions from each model card into a structured representation. We align
    2
        https://github.com/dgraux/Hive-ICLR-2025
    3
        https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/model-cards


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                        Offline
         User                                                    Task Planner                                                                                Model Cards


        Query             Parsing &

                         Rephrasing
                                             Domain

                                           Classification
                                                                               PDDL
                                                                               Domain
                                                                                                                         Action
                                                                                                                        Selection
                                                                       (Rule-based
                                            (Rule-based
                                                                         Merger)                                               Reconstruction)
                                                                                          PDDL Space


                                            PDDL Library
                                                                                                                        PDDL Problem                       PapersWithCode


                            Plan Executioner                                                PLAN
   Preferences                 Model
                              Selection
                                                                                                           Python                       C-KG
                                                                                    Stable-                               Whisper-
                            Code Snippet                                           diffusion-                             large-v2


                                               For each action
                                                                                       2-1                  Stability
                             Extraction                                                                                                                 </> Code Snippets


                                                 in the plan
                                                                                                               AI


       Response
                                                                                                                                              Audio-
                                                                                                                                              to-text

                             Argument                                                           Text-to-
                                                                                                 Image
                                                                                                                          Apache-
                                                                                                                            2.0
                             Mapping
                                                                                                           Mistral-7B
                                                                                       Python              -Instruct-
         Report                                                                                                                     Mistral
                               Code                                                                           v0.3                   AI

                             Execution
                                                                                                                            Text-to-
                                                                                           MMLU                               Text


                                       Figure 1: H IVE modular architecture.


the models with Papers With Code4 , which enables us to collect information about how a particular
model performs across different benchmarks. Our goal is to build a Capability Knowledge Graph,
denoted as C-KG, which is a graph G (M, T, E), such that each model mj ∈ M is associated with
one or more tasks from T along with its relevant performance, and different types of edges ∈ E
with various properties (e.g., number of parameters or supported languages). We search each model
card collected by HuggingFace for potential arXiv5 paper ID. We make use of the arXiv paper ID in
order to bridge models from HuggingFace with their corresponding performances in different tasks
and benchmarks. When we identify an arXiv paper ID within the knowledge base of Papers With
Code, we extract all model versions6 and their performances across the different benchmarks.
Each different model version is represented as a separate vertex within the C-KG. A model
vertex mj ∈ C-KG is aligned with its model card if the model’s ID can be matched (e.g.,
flan-t5-base7 ) in both the original model card and the ID of at least one of the retrieved records
from Paper With Code. This enables us to build a knowledge graph in which different models are
associated with different benchmarks and tasks. Apart from the relevant performance scores in the
various benchmarks and the models’ properties extracted from HuggingFace, we extract from the
model cards coding snippets that describe how each model can be loaded and executed. These ex-
ecution snippets enable on-demand loading of a chosen model and execution of its inference step
based on the provided parameters, if selected by model selection pipelines (see Section 3.2.2).
When processing the HuggingFace model card, we leverage a combination of keywords (see Ap-
pendix D) and regular expressions to identify coding blocks that showcase simplified examples of
loading and executing a particular model mj . After the coding blocks are extracted, we prompt (see
Appendix D) an LLM that is proficient in code generation, such as DeepSeek-Coder8 , to generate
a suitable Python function invoking mj and running inference while taking into consideration input
arguments of the originally extracted coding block. The resulting Python function, together with its
signature (returned type, variable types and default values), is finally stored within the C-KG and
connected with its corresponding model using an execution ∈ E edge.

3.2     P LANNING MODEL ACTIONS

Having extracted and systematically structured the information pertinent to models associated with
various tasks, we are now positioned to delineate the specific actions required to accomplish the
objectives in the user query, as depicted in Figure 1.
   4
     https://paperswithcode.com/
   5
     https://arxiv.org/
   6
     arXiv papers may report results of different model variants, e.g. performance across different models sizes.
   7
     https://huggingface.co/google/flan-t5-base
   8
     https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Base


                                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2.1   TASK P LANNER
Parsing User Query User queries are often vague and unstructured, making it challenging for sys-
tems to understand the user’s intent accurately. To overcome this, we introduce a parsing-rephrasing
stage that bridges the gap between the ambiguous query and the system’s structured requirements.
This initial step sets the foundation for the subsequent stages, enabling the system to extract relevant
information.
We parse an input user query q into distinct components: instruction (i: str), input text (t: str),
question (s: str), URL (u: str), data (x: dict), and categories (g: list), as follows:
                                        P(q) = {i, t, s, u, x, g}                               (1)
with P the parsing function. The ability of LLMs to parse user queries into structured formats,
like JSON, has been highlighted across multiple research efforts (Petroni et al., 2019; Wei et al.,
2023). Using prompt engineering with a few-shot setting Brown (2020) (see Appendix D), we guide
the LLM to convert an unstructured user input into structured data. Additionally, we ask the LLM
to rewrite the user instruction to enhance clarity, simplifying complex directives and converting
implicit information into explicit statements.
The instruction is crucial as it is used in the later stages to decompose the user query into smaller
parts and determine objectives in the user query, q. By transforming vague queries into well-defined
components, our system becomes more robust to handle diverse and complex user inputs.

Task Decomposition Given the resulting instruction, after processing the input user query q, we
proceed to decompose it into smaller, manageable steps to identify a specific plan to attain the
objectives (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023b) and understand how each part of the instruction is
associated with achievable goals within the system’s capabilities. We utilise an LLM as a classifier
(Zhang et al., 2024) in a few-shot example setting (Brown, 2020) (see Appendix D) to identify the
relevant domains from the original set of PDDL domains, D.
By providing the LLM with examples of instructions and their associated domains, we guide it to
select the pertinent subset D∗ ⊆ D that aligns with the instruction. We prioritise recall in this
classification step to ensure that all potentially relevant domains are considered, minimizing the
risk of missing critical actions required to fulfil the user’s objectives. This approach enhances the
system’s robustness by accounting for a wider range of possible actions.
Once we determine the subset of relevant PDDL domains, D∗ , we leverage the predefined PDDL
structures of each classified domain. These domain structures are then mergedto create a unified
PDDL domain file inclusive of all actions from D∗ , s.t.
                                            |D|
                                      D∗
                                            [
                                    a =         adj dj ∈ D∗ .                                (2)
                                              j=1
This method ensures that the combined domain file encompasses all necessary actions while main-
taining consistency and comprehensibility. Next, we exploit the parsed instruction i and the com-
                                 ∗
piled set of actions from D∗ , aD , with an LLM to determine the specific actions required to achieve
                                                             ∗
                                                                   D∗
                                                            i ⊆a .
the instruction’s objectives (see Appendix D), as follows: aD
This allows to precisely map high-level user intents to concrete actions. Following this selection, the
                                      ∗                                         ∗
combined PDDL domain file (i.e. aD ) and the identified actions set (i.e. aD   i ) help to reconstruct
the corresponding PDDL problem. Finally, a Best First Width Search (Lipovetzky & Geffner, 2017)
                                                                                ∗
logical reasoner computes a detailed Plan of Actions ordering the actions ∈ aD i such that the system
can execute step-by-step, ensuring coherent execution in line with the user’s intent.
This hierarchical approach not only enhances the system’s robustness in parsing and understand-
ing diverse and complex user inputs but also guarantees the accuracy and feasibility of generated
actionable plans by rigorously structuring them within established domain constraints.

3.2.2   M ODEL S ELECTION
Following the task planning, the next stage is the selection of appropriate models capable of per-
forming the specified actions in the plan. Utilising the information from our C-KG (see Sec-
tion 3.1), our goal is to identify a model combination M⋆ ⊆ M that would satisfy a set of conditions


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C = c1 , c2 , . . . , c|C| imposed by the user while offering guarantees that the selected model com-
bination will be suitable to generate an output y that addresses the original input query q, s.t.
                                  M⋆ = arg max p (y|q, M, C) .                                    (3)
                                             M

For instance, if licensing is a concern, we filter out models that do not meet the required licensing
terms. Similarly, if there are limitations on computational resources, we prioritise models that are
efficient in size and cost. Additionally, we consider performance scores from relevant benchmarks
to guide our selection. By analyzing these performance metrics, we can choose models that have
demonstrated high effectiveness on tasks similar to those required, ensuring that the selected models
are not only compliant with user constraints but also optimal for the specific tasks at hand.
By balancing these factors: model capabilities, licensing requirements, resource constraints, and
performance metrics, we systematically select the most suitable model for each action. This ensures
that the execution of the plan is aligned with both the technical requirements of the tasks and the
practical considerations of the user. Ultimately, this careful selection enhances the system’s effi-
ciency and effectiveness, enabling it to perform complex tasks while adhering to user constraints.

3.2.3       P LAN E XECUTION
With the appropriate models selected for each action, we proceed to the plan execution phase. The
execution involves retrieving the Python code snippets associated with execute relation with the
chosen models, which are stored in the C-KG. More specifically, we map the arguments of the
Python functions to the relevant components extracted from the parsed user query—{i, t, s, u, x, g}
(cf. Eq. 1) —using a complex similarity mapping algorithm. This mapping ensures that the models
receive the correct inputs derived from the user’s query, accurately capturing the user’s intent. In
cases where the Python code snippet for the selected model is not available, we employ a fallback
strategy. We search for code snippets from other models that have been assigned to the same task
and possess similar functionalities. This approach leverages the semantic and functional similarities
between models within the same domain, allowing us to substitute models when necessary without
compromising the action’s intended outcome. By orchestrating the retrieval of code snippets and
the fine-grained mapping of arguments, our system seamlessly transforms high-level plans into exe-
cutable code, ensuring that the models operate on the intended data and parameters. This execution
phase is critical as it bridges the gap between planning and action, which guarantees that each step
of the plan is performed correctly and efficiently.


4        E XPERIMENTS

4.1       BASELINES

Addressing complex, multi-modal real-world tasks presents substantial challenges, and current so-
lutions are limited. For our experiments, we compare our proposed method against the most relevant
state-of-the-art techniques: HuggingGPT (Shen et al., 2024a) and ControlLLM (Liu et al., 2023c).
These represent significant advancements in integrating LLMs with task planning and execution
frameworks.
We propose two innovative methods: H IVE and H IVE light . H IVE leverages the advanced capabil-
ities of ChatGPT for parsing user queries and decomposing tasks. To address the computational
challenges associated with ChatGPT-based systems, we designed H IVE light as an efficient alterna-
tive that can be deployed on local servers. H IVE light employs InterLM2.5-7B-chat9 Cai et al. (2024)
for parsing user queries and Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.310 for task decomposition, both of which have
been subjected to 8-bit quantization. We selected a chat-oriented model for parsing, as conversa-
tional models excel at understanding subtle queries. Additionally, an instruction fine-tuned model
was chosen for task decomposition due to its capability to deliver precise instruction clarity. By
employing this dual-method setup, we ensure a thorough performance evaluation, positioning H IVE
and H IVE light as strong competitors to existing state-of-the-art frameworks.
     9
         https://huggingface.co/internlm/internlm2_5-7b-chat
    10
         https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 1: Comparison of Task Selection, Flow of Tasks, and Output across all competitors.
  Query Types        HuggingGPT             ControlLLM                 H IVE light                 H IVE
                    TS    FoT      O      TS     FoT      O      TS       FoT         O     TS     FoT      O
  Single Task      0.47   0.47    0.83    0.74   0.74    0.74   0.80      0.80       0.72   0.88   0.88    0.79
  Two Tasks        0.64   0.55    0.44    0.33   0.33    0.38   0.67      0.62       0.52   0.71   0.69    0.58
  Three Tasks      0.42   0.42    0.30    0.36   0.36    0.33   0.57      0.43       0.33   0.67   0.67    0.46
  Overall          0.57   0.51    0.53    0.43   0.43    0.47   0.69      0.64       0.55   0.74   0.73    0.62


4.2    M U SE — M ULTI - MODAL S UB - TASK E XECUTION B ENCHMARK

In the absence of standard publicly available benchmarks for solving real-world tasks, and recogniz-
ing that HuggingGPT (Shen et al., 2024a) did not release their evaluation dataset, we developed a
new benchmark to assess our proposed framework alongside state-of-the-art methods like Hugging-
GPT (Shen et al., 2024a) and ControlLLM (Liu et al., 2023c). Although ControlLLM (Liu et al.,
2023c) released their benchmark, it utilises a fine-tuned task decomposer, which could introduce
bias if used for our evaluation. Therefore, to ensure a fair and unbiased comparison, we collaborated
with experts from diverse linguistic backgrounds to create a set of 100 heterogeneous, real-world
user queries (see Appendix Table 5) These queries are categorised into three types: Single-task,
Two-task, and Three-task queries. In order to facilitate a fair comparison, we included only those
tasks and models that are supported by all three systems. The benchmark is designed to cover vari-
ous task domains, such as automatic speech recognition, question answering, and image generation,
involving 15 models across different modalities11 . This comprehensive benchmark enables us to
rigorously evaluate the performance and generalisability of our framework.

Metrics. To assess our framework against state-of-the-art methods, we evaluate performance on
three fronts, using binary metrics for simplicity and clarity:

• Task Selection (TS): Determines whether the system accurately identifies the required tasks from
  the user’s query. We assign a binary score of 1 if the system selects all the tasks correctly, and 0 if
  it does not or if it selected irrelevant tasks. Correct task selection is crucial as it lays the foundation
  for successful execution and directly impacts the relevance of the final output.
• Flow of Thought (FoT): We evaluate the logical sequence and integration of the selected tasks.
  A binary score is given based on whether the system establishes the correct flow—1 for a proper
  flow that respects task dependencies and order, and 0 for an incorrect sequence. This ensures that,
  especially in multi-task queries involving two or three tasks, the system processes tasks in an order
  that leads to the desired outcome.
• Final Output (O): Assesses the correctness of the system’s final response to the user’s query. We
  adopt a binary evaluation—1 if the output fulfills the user’s requirements, and 0 if it falls short.
  This includes evaluating the relevance of generated content, and the overall satisfaction of the
  user’s intent. Note that we do not evaluate the quality of the output, that is we do not judge if the
  output is accurate but only focus on whether the expected task has been performed.

By employing these binary metrics for each query, we simplify the evaluation process while effec-
tively capturing the essential aspects of each system’s performance.

4.3    OVERALL R ESULTS

The results of the experiment are presented in Table 1. The scores highlight the effectiveness of
our proposed approach in handling complex multi-modal tasks. H IVE consistently outperforms
the baseline methods in overall performance across all evaluation metrics: TS, FoT, and O. This
performance is evident in both single-task and multi-task scenarios. Remarkably, H IVE light , which
   11
      MUSE involves 10 domains leading to 10 distinct PDDL domain files covering 15 tasks. 67% of the queries
are multi-modal [text,image,audio], see also Appendix A and the supplementary material.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                      4.28
        Table 2: Cross-Modality Performances.                     Single          3.2
                                                                                                              10.97
 In↓     Out→                     Text                                               4.05
                  HuggingGPT    ControlLLM     H IVE light                              5.02
                                                                    Two                4.7
 Image               0.48           0.45          0.52                                                            12.14
 Audio               0.25           0.25          0.67                                4.31
                                                                                             6.4
                                                                  Three                    6.06
                                                                                                               11.13
 In↓     Out→                    Image                                                        6.59
                                                                                        5.05
                  HuggingGPT    ControlLLM     H IVE light       Overall              4.52
 Text                0.36          0.18           0.75                                                           11.71
                                                                                      4.52
 Audio               0.50          0.25           1.00                                                        seconds
                                                                           0          5                10
                                                                     HuggingGPT   ControlLLM    H IVE light   H IVE
 In↓     Out→                    Audio
                  HuggingGPT    ControlLLM     H IVE light
 Text                0.33          0.14           0.71
 Image               0.80          0.00           0.00           Figure 2: Average times (s) before execution.


is based on 8-bit quantised models with only 7 billion parameters, surpasses both HuggingGPT and
ControlLLM in the overall evaluation. This underscores the effectiveness of our approach even with
reduced computational resources.
In the case of single-task queries, all methods perform relatively well in generating correct final
outputs. Though, H IVE stands out by achieving the highest performance in Task Selection and
Flow of Thought, indicating a more accurate and coherent understanding and reasoning process.
Conversely, HuggingGPT attains the highest Final Output performance but performs poorly in Task
Selection and Flow of Thought metrics. This discrepancy arises because HuggingGPT tends to
collect as many relevant tasks as possible, even if a query requires only a single task, leading to
over-selection. Despite this over-selection, its strong ChatGPT backbone enables it to produce high-
quality final outputs. Nevertheless, this approach may reduce the trustworthiness of the results, as it
does not align precisely with the intended tasks (further discussed in Section 4.4.2). When it comes
to multi-task queries, as expected, H IVE distinctly outperforms its competitors across all metrics.
PDDL planning in H IVE light allows it to surpass HuggingGPT and ControlLLM, demonstrating
proficiency in task selection, task flow management and execution. In contrast, ControlLLM strug-
gles considerably with multi-task queries, exhibiting the weakest performance among the evaluated
methods. While H IVE, H IVE light , and HuggingGPT employ prompt-based strategies to provide flex-
ibility and adaptability, ControlLLM relies on a fine-tuned task decomposer. This approach limits its
capacity to generalise to queries that deviate even slightly from its training set, leading to significant
performance declines in multi-task scenarios.

4.4      D ISCUSSIONS

4.4.1      C ROSS - MODALITY P ERFORMANCES
To gain a better understanding of the multi-modality of these systems’ capabilities, we dig deeper
into the Final Output (O) results from Table 1. We divide this investigation into three distinct parts
based on the output modality and analyze the performance when the other two modalities are in-
volved in the input (Table 2).
When it comes to text output, H IVE light demonstrates a substantial lead over its competitors when the
input includes any image or audio. This showcases H IVE light ’s ability to integrate visual and auditory
data to enhance text outputs. In the context of image output, H IVE light once again outperforms
the other systems, illustrating its proficiency in converting textual and audio inputs into coherent
visual responses. Lastly, although our system shows commendable performance in text-based audio
generation, it falls short of achieving the desired objective in the image-to-audio scenario, indicating
an area for potential improvement in future iterations.

4.4.2      T RUSTWORTHINESS
In order to review the connection between justifications (i.e. the conjunction12 of TS and FoT)
and outputs (O), we group in Figure 3 the results based on (justification, output) scores which can
  12
       ⊤ iff TS AND FoT are both 1; ⊥ in all other cases.


                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                58
                           50           HuggingGPT        ControlLLM
                                                                                    42
         40                              H IVE light         H IVE
                      33                                                                 33
                 25                                                                           26
                                                                               21
         20                           15                  13
                                                 10
                                           6 9                 9
                                                                   1 0
          0
                      ⊤⊤                   ⊤⊥                  ⊥⊤                   ⊥⊥

           Figure 3: Correlations between justifications (TS AND FoT) and outputs (O).


respectively be correct ⊤ or incorrect ⊥. The failure cases Err are further discussed in Section 4.4.3.
There are thereby four distinct cases. First, ⊤⊤ which corresponds to fully correct cases having
both justifications and outputs, in this H IVE solutions (50+) outperform both HuggingGPT (25) and
ControlLLM (33). Then, ⊤⊥ means that the plans were correct but the execution did not go through.
In this category the four reviewed systems perform similarly, ranging from 6 to 15 cases. On the
right-end side of Figure 3, the plain-wrong case ⊥⊥ witnesses ControlLLM as the “worst” system
(see results in Section 4.3), having the highest score. Finally, the critical ⊥⊤ case indicates a lack
of trustworthiness across all the baseline systems that may result in misleading outcomes. This case
involves an incorrect plan or justification, despite the output being correct. Such cases have been
recorded 9 times for ControlLLM and 13 times for HuggingGPT while being absent from H IVE and
singleton in H IVE light showcasing the reliability of the results produced by H IVE.
Overall, this discussion allowed us to highlight two aspects. One, unlike other solutions, Hugging-
GPT exhibits results ranging from 13 to 25 in the four categories, meaning that it is hard to rely
on it. Second, H IVE (s) tend not to fall in incoherent cases where results are correct without the
corresponding plan being correct—in other words, when results are good their explanations can be
trusted as well.

4.4.3   ROBUSTNESS

Since most of MUSE’s queries require multiple models to interact together in a compatible manner,
we noticed that sometimes the tested systems fail at dealing with either the justification or the output
parts. In Table 3, we list the different cases encountered. The first point to be highlighted is that,
among the four systems, HuggingGPT is the less robust one by far: 22 Err against 10, 7 and 6
for the other solutions. Second, even more critical, is that HuggingGPT, unlike the competition, is
able to generate correct results (⊤) while failing (Err) in its plan construction. This exacerbates
the fact that its justifications cannot be trusted, as the executed actions tend in many cases not to be
consistent with the compiled plan, using GPT-3.5 at most places. This last finding is coherent with
the ⊥⊤ discussion in Section 4.4.2.

4.4.4   L ATENCY FOR PLANNING

Lastly, in this discussion section, we analyse the time performances (in seconds) of the systems
to come up with a plan and select suitable models. As the chosen models may differ and no en-
forced rules such as “the quicker the better” (see Section 4.5 for discussion about model selection
capabilities) were added, we measure the latencies up to the model selection stage.
Figure 2 presents these latencies according to the split already presented in Section 4.3 as per the
number of tasks involved in the queries. First of all, HuggingGPT and H IVE (s) share the same orders
of magnitude whereas ControlLLM is a magnitude slower (always 10+ seconds). Next, as expected,
the more tasks within the query the slower the systems become until they reach an execution plan.
On this, it is interesting to note that HuggingGPT’s scaling law does not seem “linear” as the slope
increases greatly between two- and three-task queries. This behaviour is compatible with the internal
implementation of HuggingGPT: when other systems are rule-based (see the C-KG for H IVE (s) to
select models), HuggingGPT needs to prompt (together with model descriptions) to select which
models to use for each task.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 3: Failing case enumeration (Err), either as justifications (TS AND FoT) or outputs (O).
                Failure Type HuggingGPT ControlLLM H IVE light H IVE
                   Err, ⊤              8                 0               0        0
                   ⊤, Err              3                 1               3        3
                   ⊥, Err              3                 1               1        0
                  Err, Err             8                 8               3        3
                   Overall            22                10               7        6


4.5      TAKING INTO ACCOUNT U SERS ’ C ONSTRAINTS IN TERMS OF MODEL SELECTION

As depicted in Section 3.2.2, once a plan of actions is established, H IVE selects the best models
to realise them. Obviously, depending on the circumstances, the definition of what is “best” may
vary a lot, e.g. when resources are sparse, one may decide to use the smallest models possible
even if the resulting quality is reduced, alternatively users might choose to select models based on
their respective (recorded) results for specific benchmarks. In order to respect these various cases,
H IVE allows users to specify selection criteria. In this Section13 , we review the capabilities of H IVE
against HuggingGPT when users want to force some conditions of their own in the model selection.
Since ControlLLM has one-to-one mappings of models for each task, it is de facto excluded.
Practically, we use the following query14 : “Transcribe the audio from .audio 1.wav
and find entity tokens”. Regarding the task-model mappings, we let both H IVE and Hug-
gingGPT have access to: openai/whisper-large-v2 and nvidia/parakeet-rnnt-1.1b (having respec-
tively Apache-2.0 and CC-By-4.0 for licenses) for the ASR; and to dslim/bert-base-NER (MIT
license) for NER. We first run the query without any constraints (control run, see Appendix B):
both systems, H IVE and HuggingGPT, were able to transcribe the audio file and perform NER (even
though HuggingGPT result set was empty). We then applied the following model selection con-
straints sequentially:

1. License restrictions: only use Openrail++ and Deepseek — H IVE returned nothing which was
   the expected behaviour as the available models were not having the requested licenses; on the
   other hand, HuggingGPT performed the task as in the control therefore infringing the restrictions
   (see Appendix B).
2. Uses the “smallest possible” model15 — H IVE complied with the user choice and used the
   smaller models whereas HuggingGPT kept using openai/whisper-large-v2 as in the control run
   (see Appendix B).
3. Filter for the model having the best results at the speech recognition on common
   voice english16 benchmark — Using the benchmark records from the C-KG, H IVE was
   able to select the correct model unlike HuggingGPT which chose models like in the control run
   (see Appendix Table B).

Overall, H IVE answered each time while properly taking into account the given constraints. While
HuggingGPT failed every time, misleading even the users with regards to its justifications (refer to
Section 4.4.2 for further justifications on this).

5        R ELATED W ORK
Automated Planning. The cognitive ability to organize and coordinate actions toward a specific
goal is referred to as planning. While humans innately possess this capacity, machines lack such
a capability. Automated planning has garnered significant interest from researchers across various
domains, including robotics (Guo et al., 2023), autonomous vehicles (Madridano et al., 2021), and
dialogue systems (Wang et al., 2023a). The methodologies employed to devise sequences of actions
have evolved considerably, particularly in light of recent breakthroughs in deep learning. Before the
    13
       See also Appendix B for an extensive result description.
    14
       A multimodal one involving two tasks: ASR and NER.
    15
       We use the model disk footprint as a proxy for its size.
    16
       Introduced in “Common Voice: A Massively-Multilingual Speech Corpus” Ardila et al. (2019).


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


advent of large language models (LLMs), planning frameworks such as STRIPS (Fikes & Nilsson,
1971) or HTN (Erol et al., 1994) were developed to decompose tasks into a series of actions (or
sub-tasks) leading to the desired outcomes (Sacerdoti, 1975). Building upon these frameworks, the
Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) (Aeronautiques et al., 1998) emerged as a widely
adopted standardized language for defining planning problems and domains. However, LLMs have
superseded those frameworks to stand as a planner on their own (i.e. the LLM-as-planner paradigm).
Multiple prompt engineering techniques (Liu et al., 2023b; Graux et al., 2024) were designed to
leverage in-context learning aiming to directly generate the multi-step problem solutions. More
specifically, the Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022) has revealed the promising reasoning capabil-
ities of LLMs, and therefore new techniques were fashioned such as the self-consistency decoding
strategy (Wang et al., 2022), Tree-of-Thought (Yao et al., 2023a), Program-of-Thought (Chen et al.,
2023) or Graph-of-Thought (Yao et al., 2023c; Besta et al., 2024). However, LLMs are still strug-
gling to produce acceptable and logical plans, especially as the complexity of the problem increases
(Valmeekam et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024) Thus, numerous initiatives have
therefore sought to integrate problem-specific languages like PDDL along LLMs to maximize their
effectiveness and leverage their full potential (Vyas et al., 2025; Pallagani et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023a; Oswald et al., 2024).

LLM-as-Agent. The genesis of large language models (LLMs) primarily stemmed from textual
content, which initially narrowed the research focus to text generation. However, to address the
diversity of real-world scenarios, significant efforts have been directed toward developing vision or
speech LLMs, thereby aligning with a multi-modal paradigm (Zhu et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023b). Additionally, to expand the capabilities of LLMs, there has been an increasing
trend to integrate them with external tools incorporating retrieval (Shen et al., 2024c;b) or other tool
learning strategies (Wang et al., 2024) Toolformer (Schick et al., 2024) pioneered the invocation of
tool calls within generated sequences via special tokens giving rise to tool-augmented LLMs (Qin
et al., 2023a;b; Guo et al., 2024; Qu et al., 2024). Then, ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) introduced such
intermediate tool calls during the reasoning process by incorporating intermediate outcomes within
the prompt to better guide the final resolution of the problem. In contrast to ReAct, Reflexion (Shinn
et al., 2023) adds verbal feedback on those intermediate results to further assess and verify outcomes,
In the meantime, a plethora of fine-tuned LLMs tailored for specific tasks has become ubiquitous
on platforms such as Hugging Face Hub (Wolf et al., 2019), alongside proprietary models such as
GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), Claude (Anthropic, 2023), and Gemini (Team et al., 2023) offering
the opportunities to consider these LLMs as distinct agents. Indeed, the gathering of technical
details for each parametric model stands as a critical component in the reporting and tracking efforts
underlined by the use of Model Cards Mitchell et al. (2019). HuggingGPT (Shen et al., 2024a),
leverages such a large pool of LLMs using ChatGPT as the core controller. Following a similar
approach, ControlLLM (Liu et al., 2023c) and Chameleon Lu et al. (2024) explore task planning via
prompt engineering and integrate a more diverse pool of tools. While HuggingGPT, ControlLLM
or Chameleon appoint appropriate models for each sub-task, however, their model selection process
remains sub-optimal as they do not identify the most accurate model. Thus, if these frameworks can
fulfil their plans, the resulting performance may be unsatisfactory if the best agent is not utilized. To
the best of our knowledge, our work represents the first attempt to address this gap.

6   C ONCLUSION
Our research introduces H IVE, an innovative and comprehensive knowledge-aware planning solu-
tion designed to navigate the complexities of model selection and task planning using a diverse set of
deep learning models. By leveraging a Capability Knowledge Graph and an LLM-based formal logic
planner, we transcend the limitations of the existing systems. H IVE stands out for its capability to
plan and explain complex action chains while respecting user-specific constraints –thereby achiev-
ing both high performance and full transparency. Empirical evaluations on our newly designed
benchmark reveal H IVE’s superior performance, consistently outperforming competing platforms
like HuggingGPT and ControlLLM. This breakthrough underscores H IVE’s potential to redefine the
state-of-the-art in task selection and planning, ultimately facilitating more efficient and user-friendly
applications of advanced deep models. H IVE thus advances the handling of multi-modal tasks.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Constructions Aeronautiques, Adele Howe, Craig Knoblock, ISI Drew McDermott, Ashwin Ram,
  Manuela Veloso, Daniel Weld, David Wilkins Sri, Anthony Barrett, Dave Christianson, et al.
  Pddl— the planning domain definition language. Technical Report, Tech. Rep., 1998.

Anthropic. Claude (oct 8 version). Accessed: 2023-10-08, 2023.          URL https://www.
  anthropic.com/. Large language model.

Junyi Ao, Rui Wang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Shuo Ren, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Tom Ko, Qing Li,
  Yu Zhang, Zhihua Wei, Yao Qian, Jinyu Li, and Furu Wei. SpeechT5: Unified-modal encoder-
  decoder pre-training for spoken language processing. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5723–5738, May
  2022.

Rosana Ardila, Megan Branson, Kelly Davis, Michael Henretty, Michael Kohler, Josh Meyer,
  Reuben Morais, Lindsay Saunders, Francis M Tyers, and Gregor Weber. Common voice: A
  massively-multilingual speech corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06670, 2019.

Brett A. Becker, Paul Denny, James Finnie-Ansley, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, James Prather, and Ed-
  die Antonio Santos. Programming is hard - or at least it used to be: Educational opportunities
  and challenges of ai code generation. In Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium
  on Computer Science Education V. 1, SIGCSE 2023, pp. 500–506, New York, NY, USA, 2023.
  Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450394314. doi: 10.1145/3545945.3569759.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569759.

Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gian-
 inazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al. Graph of
 thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 17682–17690, 2024.

Tom B Brown. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.

Zheng Cai, Maosong Cao, Haojiong Chen, Kai Chen, Keyu Chen, Xin Chen, Xun Chen, Zehui
  Chen, Zhi Chen, Pei Chu, et al. Internlm2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17297,
  2024.

Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
  Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. CoRR, abs/2005.12872, 2020.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.12872.

Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. Program of thoughts prompt-
 ing: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. Transactions on
 Machine Learning Research, 2023.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. CoRR, abs/1810.04805, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.

Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. Self-collaboration code generation via chatgpt. ACM
  Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 33(7), September 2024. ISSN 1049-331X. doi: 10.1145/3672459.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3672459.

Kutluhan Erol, James A Hendler, and Dana S Nau. Semantics for hierarchical task-network plan-
  ning. Citeseer, 1994.

Richard E Fikes and Nils J Nilsson. Strips: A new approach to the application of theorem proving
  to problem solving. Artificial intelligence, 2(3-4):189–208, 1971.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Damien Graux, Sébastien Montella, Hajira Jabeen, Claire Gardent, and Jeff Z Pan. [prompteng] first
  international workshop on prompt engineering for pre-trained language models. In Companion
  Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024, pp. 1311–1312, 2024.
Huihui Guo, Fan Wu, Yunchuan Qin, Ruihui Li, Keqin Li, and Kenli Li. Recent trends in task and
  motion planning for robotics: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(13s), jul 2023. ISSN 0360-0300.
  doi: 10.1145/3583136. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3583136.
Zhicheng Guo, Sijie Cheng, Hao Wang, Shihao Liang, Yujia Qin, Peng Li, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
  Sun, and Yang Liu. Stabletoolbench: Towards stable large-scale benchmarking on tool learning
  of large language models, 2024.
Jie He, Yijun Yang, Wanqiu Long, Deyi Xiong, Victor Gutierrez-Basulto, and Jeff Z. Pan. Evaluat-
   ing and Improving Graph to Text Generation with Large Language Models. In In the Proceedings
   of 2025 Annual Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Com-
   putational Linguistics (NAACL 2025), 2025.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-
  lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril,
  Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training
 for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension, 2019a. URL https://
 arxiv.org/abs/1910.13461.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
 training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. CoRR, abs/1910.13461,
 2019b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13461.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation, 2022a. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2201.12086.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation, 2022b. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2201.12086.
Nir Lipovetzky and Hector Geffner. Best-first width search: Exploration and exploitation in
  classical planning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 31(1), Feb.
  2017. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v31i1.11027. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/
  AAAI/article/view/11027.
B. Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qian Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter
  Stone. Llm+p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. ArXiv,
  abs/2304.11477, 2023a.   URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  258298051.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(9), jan 2023b. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3560815. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3560815.
Zhaoyang Liu, Zeqiang Lai, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Zhiheng Li, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, Qifeng
  Chen, Yu Qiao, Jifeng Dai, and Wenhai Wang. Controlllm: Augment language models with tools
  by searching on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023c.
Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large language mod-
  els. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ángel Madridano, Abdulla Al-Kaff, David Martı́n, and Arturo de la Escalera. Trajectory plan-
   ning for multi-robot systems: Methods and applications. Expert Systems with Applications, 173:
   114660, 2021. ISSN 0957-4174. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114660. URL https:
   //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417421001019.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson,
 Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards for model reporting. In
 Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 220–229, 2019.
James Oswald, Kavitha Srinivas, Harsha Kokel, Junkyu Lee, Michael Katz, and Shirin Sohrabi.
  Large language models as planning domain generators. Proceedings of the International Confer-
  ence on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 34(1):423–431, May 2024. doi: 10.1609/icaps.
  v34i1.31502. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICAPS/article/view/
  31502.
Vishal Pallagani, Bharath Muppasani, Biplav Srivastava, Francesca Rossi, Lior Horesh, Keerthiram
  Murugesan, Andrea Loreggia, Francesco Fabiano, Rony Joseph, and Yathin Kethepalli. Plans-
  former tool: Demonstrating generation of symbolic plans using transformers. In Edith Elkind
  (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  IJCAI-23, pp. 7158–7162. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organiza-
  tion, 8 2023. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2023/839. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.
  2023/839. Demo Track.
Jeff Z. Pan, Simon Razniewski, Jan-Christoph Kalo, Sneha Singhania, Jiaoyan Chen, Stefan Di-
   etze, Hajira Jabeen, Janna Omeliyanenko, Wen Zhang, Matteo Lissandrini, Russa Biswas, Gerard
   de Melo, Angela Bonifati, Edlira Vakaj, Mauro Dragoni, and Damien Graux. Large Language
   Models and Knowledge Graphs: Opportunities and Challenges. pp. 1–38, 2023.
J.Z. Pan, G. Vetere, J.M. Gomez-Perez, and H. Wu (eds.). Exploiting Linked Data and Knowledge
   Graphs for Large Organisations. Springer, 2017. ISBN 978-3-319-45652-2.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H Miller,
  and Sebastian Riedel. Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066,
  2019.
Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Daniel Khashabi, and Yejin Choi. Cold decoding: Energy-
  based constrained text generation with langevin dynamics. In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 9538–9551. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/3e25d1aff47964c8409fd5c8dc0438d7-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, . . . , and Maosong Sun. Tool learning with foundation models,
  2023a.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, . . . , and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Facilitating large language
  models to master 16000+ real-world apis, 2023b.
Changle Qu, Sunhao Dai, Xiaochi Wei, Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, Jun Xu,
  and Ji-Rong Wen. Tool learning with large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.17935, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2212.04356.
René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Vision transformers for dense prediction.
  CoRR, abs/2103.13413, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.13413.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Earl D. Sacerdoti. The nonlinear nature of plans. In Proceedings of the 4th International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Volume 1, IJCAI’75, pp. 206–214, San Francisco, CA,
  USA, 1975. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. In NeurIPS EMC2 Workshop, 2019.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can
  teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for
  constrained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In EMNLP, pp. 9895–9901, Online
  and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.779. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.779.
Tim Schopf and Florian Matthes. Nlp-kg: A system for exploratory search of scientific literature in
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), pp. 127–135, 2024.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugging-
  gpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Zhili Shen, Chenxin Diao, Pavlos Vougiouklis, Pascual Merita, Shriram Piramanayagam, Damien
  Graux, Dandan Tu, Zeren Jiang, Ruofei Lai, Yang Ren, and Jeff Z. Pan. GeAR: Graph-enhanced
  agent for retrieval-augmented generation, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.
  18431.
Zhili Shen, Pavlos Vougiouklis, Chenxin Diao, Kaustubh Vyas, Yuanyi Ji, and Jeff Z. Pan. Improv-
  ing retrieval-augmented text-to-SQL with AST-based ranking and schema pruning. In Yaser Al-
  Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Em-
  pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7865–7879, Miami, Florida, USA, Novem-
  ber 2024c. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.449.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.449/.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
  Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning.  In Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 8634–8652. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao
  Kambhampati. Planbench: An extensible benchmark for evaluating large language mod-
  els on planning and reasoning about change. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 36, pp. 38975–38987. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.   URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  7a92bcdede88c7afd108072faf5485c8-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.
  pdf.
Kaustubh Vyas, Damien Graux, Sébastien Montella, Pavlos Vougiouklis, Ruofei Lai, Keshuang Li,
  Yang Ren, and Jeff Z. Pan. An Extensive Evaluation of PDDL Capabilities in off-the-shelf LLMs,
  2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.20175.
Hongru Wang, Minda Hu, Yang Deng, . . . , and Kam-Fai Wong. Large language models as source
  planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogues. In EMNLP, pp. 9556–9569, Singapore,
  2023a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.641.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.641.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hongru Wang, Yujia Qin, Yankai Lin, Jeff Z. Pan, and Kam-Fai Wong. Empowering Large Language
  Models: Tool Learning for Real-world Interaction. In SIGIR, pp. 2983 – 2986, 2024.
Xinyu Wang, Bohan Zhuang, and Qi Wu. Switchgpt: Adapting large language models for non-text
  outputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07623, 2023b.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Xiang Wei, Xingyu Cui, Ning Cheng, Xiaobin Wang, Xin Zhang, Shen Huang, Pengjun Xie, Jinan
  Xu, Yufeng Chen, Meishan Zhang, et al. Zero-shot information extraction via chatting with
  chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10205, 2023.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arxiv. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Chenfei Wu, Sheng-Kai Yin, Weizhen Qi, Xiaodong Wang, Zecheng Tang, and Nan Duan. Visual
  chatgpt: Talking, drawing and editing with visual foundation models. ArXiv, abs/2303.04671,
  2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257404891.
Ruixuan Xiao, Wentao Ma, Ke Wang, Yuchuan Wu, Junbo Zhao, Haobo Wang, Fei Huang, and
  Yongbin Li. Flowbench: Revisiting and benchmarking workflow-guided planning for llm-based
  agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14884, 2024.
Mingzhe Xing, Rongkai Zhang, Hui Xue, Qi Chen, Fan Yang, and Zhen Xiao. Understanding the
 weakness of large language model agents within a complex android environment. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2402.06596, 2024.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In
  A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 11809–11822. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/271db9922b8d1f4dd7aaef84ed5ac703-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023b.
Yao Yao, Zuchao Li, and Hai Zhao. Beyond chain-of-thought, effective graph-of-thought reasoning
  in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16582, 2023c.
Yazhou Zhang, Mengyao Wang, Chenyu Ren, Qiuchi Li, Prayag Tiwari, Benyou Wang, and Jing
  Qin. Pushing the limit of llm capacity for text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07470,
  2024.
Yilun Zhao, Linyong Nan, Zhenting Qi, Rui Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. ReasTAP: Injecting table
  reasoning skills during pre-training via synthetic reasoning examples. In EMNLP, pp. 9006–9018,
  Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.615.
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Hugh Zhang, Xinyun Chen, Minmin Chen, Azade Nova,
  Le Hou, Heng-Tze Cheng, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, et al. Natural plan: Benchmarking llms on
  natural language planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04520, 2024.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        M U SE E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Table 4 provides a comprehensive overview of the domains and tasks encompassed within the MUSE
benchmark. All three competing systems have access to the models associated with each task listed
in Table 4. It should be noted that both HuggingGPT and ControlLLM utilise ChatGPT as their
backbone model, leveraging it for the execution of certain tasks. Since ControlLLM permits only
one-to-one mappings, to maintain an unbiased benchmark, we assign one model per task (for de-
tails, please refer to the Supplementary Material repository17 ). Moreover, to preserve the
naturalness of the queries, we have refrained from making any grammatical or spelling corrections
in the dataset.

                                    Table 4: AI Tasks and Associated Models.
 Domain                  Task                               Model
                         Automatic Speech Recognition       openai/whisper-large-v2 (Radford et al., 2022)
 Audio
                         Text to Speech                     microsoft/speecht5 tts (Ao et al., 2022)
 Image Generation        Text to Image                      stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1(Rombach et al., 2022)
                         Image Captioning                   Salesforce/blip-image-captioning-base(Li et al., 2022b)
 Image to Text           Object Detection                   facebook/detr-resnet-101(Carion et al., 2020)
                         Visual Question Answering          Salesforce/blip-vqa-base(Li et al., 2022a)
 Image to Image          Depth Estimation                   Intel/dpt-hybrid-midas(Ranftl et al., 2021)
 Machine Translation     Translation from xx to yy          mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1(Jiang et al., 2023)
                         Answer based on Context            distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-distilled-squad(Sanh et al., 2019)
 Question Answering      Open QA                            mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1(Jiang et al., 2023)
                         Table QA                           Yale-LILY/reastap-large(Zhao et al., 2022)
 Summarisation           Abstractive Summarisation          facebook/bart-large-cnn(Lewis et al., 2019b)
 Text Generation         Text Generation                    mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1(Jiang et al., 2023)
 Text Classification     Text Classification                facebook/bart-large-mnli (Lewis et al., 2019a)
 Token Classification    Named Entity Recognition           dslim/bert-base-NER(Devlin et al., 2018)



                        Table 5: Small sample of queries from the MUSE benchmark.
 Domain                                              Queries
 “object detection”                                  How many people is in the image? ./data/images/image 6.jpg
 “image to text”, “text generation”                  Write me a sonnet about this image ./data/images/image 11.jpg
 “image to text”, “image generation”                 Build a pictorial presentation of the flower after deciphering the audio
                                                     ./data/audios/audio 4.wav
 “audio”, “question answering”                       Use audio transcription as context and answer ‘what is the country start-
                                                     ing the war whom the associated speech is about?’ from ./data/audios/au-
                                                     dio 6.wav
 “audio”, “summarisation”, “image generation”        Extract a summary from the audio transcript ./data/audios/audio 8.wav, and
                                                     generate an image based on the summary


    17
         https://github.com/dgraux/Hive-ICLR-2025


                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B       S CENARIOS D ETAILS FOR M ODEL S ELECTION VALIDATION
                                              ↓↓           No Constraints (Cold run)                       ↓↓

    H IVE light                                                                    HuggingGPT
    We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect           Based on the inference results, I have transcribed the audio file
    Union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the         “.[Audio]” and obtained the following text: “We, the people of the
    common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the bless-             United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish jus-
    ings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish        tice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense,
    this Constitution for the United States of America.                            promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to
                                                                                   ourselves United States of America.”
    {                                                                              For the named entity recognition task, I have used the model
          "LOC": [                                                                 “dslim/bert-base-NER.” However, the inference result for this task
              "United States",                                                     is empty, indicating that no named entity tokens were found in the
              "United States of America"                                           transcribed text.
          ],                                                                       Here is the complete workflow for your request:
          "MISC": [
              "Constitution"                                                       1. Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) Task:
          ]                                                                           Model used: “openai/whisper-large-v2”
    }                                                                                 Inference result: The audio file“.[Audio]” was transcribed, and
                                                                                      the resulting text is the one mentioned above.

                                                                                   2. Named Entity Recognition (NER) Task:
    Comment: Successfull!                                                             Model used: “dslim/bert-base-NER”
                                                                                      Inference result: No named entity tokens were found in the
                                                                                      transcribed text.
                                                                                   Please note that the inference results are based on the models used,
                                                                                   and there is a possibility of errors or incomplete detection.


                                                                                   Comment: Unsuccessful: the system failed to pass the output from
                                                                                   the previous task as input to the subsequent one, preventing the NER
                                                                                   model from identifying any entities


         ↓↓           Specifically asked to use the smallest model available for each task                                                      ↓↓

    H IVE light                                                                    HuggingGPT
    We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect           Based on the inference results, I have transcribed the audio file
    Union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the         “.[Audio]” and found the following named entity tokens:
    common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the bless-             “We the people of Unites States” – ORGANISATION
    ings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish        “the United States of America” – LOCATION
    this Constitution for the United States of America.                            To accomplish this, I followed the following workflow:

    {                                                                              1. Task 1: Audio-to-Audio Transcription Model: No suitable
          "LOC": [                                                                    model found for this task
              "United States",                                                        Inference Result Error: “audio-to-audio” not found in avail-
              "United States of America"                                              able tasks
          ],
          "MISC": [                                                                2. Task 2: Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) Task:
              "Constitution"                                                          Model: I used the “openai/whisper-large-v2” model
          ]                                                                           Inference result: “We, the people of the United States, in order
    }                                                                                 to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic
                                                                                      tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general
                                                                                      welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves United
                                                                                      States of America.”
    Comment: Successful!
                                                                                   3. Task 3: Named Entity Recognition (NER) Task:
                                                                                      Model: I used the “dslim/bert-base-NER” model
                                                                                      Inference result: No named entity tokens were found in the
                                                                                      transcribed text.
                                                                                   I apologize for not being able to provide any named entity tokens
                                                                                   in the transcribed text. If you have any further questions or need
                                                                                   assistance with anything else, please let me know!


                                                                                   Comment: Unsuccessful: the system failed in task selection and
                                                                                   selected “audio-to-audio“ as the first task, which is irrelevant to the
                                                                                   user query. The system also failed to identify any entities


                                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


↓↓         Specifically ask the systems to use openrail++ & deepseek licensed models                                                                              ↓↓

     H IVE light                                      HuggingGPT
                                                      I apologize for any confusion caused. Based on the inference results, here is the detailed workflow for
                                                      your request:
     Comment:      Successful:    as                  1. Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) Task:
     there were no models with
     openrail++ and deepseek                              Task: Transcribing the audio file “[Audio]”.
     for ASR or NER, no model should                      Model used: “openai/whisper-large-v2”
     be selected                                          Inference result: The transcribed text is as follows: “We, the people of the United States, in
                                                          order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the
                                                          common defense, promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and
                                                          our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.”

                                                      2. Named Entity Recognition (NER) Task:

                                                          Task: Finding named entity tokens in the transcribed text.
                                                          Model used: “dslim/bert-base-NER”.
                                                          Inference result: Unfortunately, there is no available inference result for this task.

                                                      3. Zero-shot Classification Task: Task: Classifying named entity tokens.
                                                         Model used: “gpt-3.5-turbo-0613”
                                                         Inference result: I apologize, but as an AI language model, I am unable to access or transcribe
                                                         audio directly. However, once the audio is transcribed, I can assist you with the zero-shot classifi-
                                                         cation task. Could you please provide the transcription of the audio file, and I’ll be happy to help
                                                         you with the classification task using the provided text and image information?

                                                      4. Text-to-Image Task: Task: Generating images based on named entity tokens.
                                                         Model used: “stability/stable-diffusion-v1”
                                                         Inference result: Unfortunately, there was an error in the inference process for this task.
                                                      Please note that the inference results are based on the available models and their capabilities. If there
                                                      are any specific requirements or modifications you would like to make, please let me know.


                                                      Comment: Unsuccessful: first the system performed an incorrect selections of tasks and then also
                                                      misguided the user by selecting models that do not aligned with the users license contraints


  ↓↓         Specifically asked to choose the Automatic speech recognition model based on best
         performance on speech recognition on common voice english                      ↓↓

     H IVE light                                              HuggingGPT
     we the people of the united states in or-                Based on the Inference results, I will directly answer your request and provide a detailed
     der to form a more perfect union establish               workflow for your specific task. Here is the complete path or URLs of the files in the inference
     justice insure domestic tranquillity provide             results:
     for the common defense promote the gen-
     eral welfare and secure the blessings of lib-            1. Transcribing the audio file “[Audio]” Model used: “openai/whisper-large-v2”
     erty to ourselves and our posterity do ordain               Inference Result: The transcribed text is as follows: “We, the people of the United
     and establish this constitution for the united              States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquility,
     states of america                                           provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings
                                                                 of liberty to ourselves United States of America.”
     {
           "LOC": [                                           2. Finding named entity tokens in the transcribed text:
               "united States",                                  Model used: “dslim/bert-base-NER”
               "united States of                                 Inference result: No named entity tokens were found in the transcribed text.
                     ,→ america"
           ],                                                 3. Zero-shot classification for the task of “named entity tokens”:
           "MISC": [                                             Model used: “gpt-3.5-turbo-0613”
               "constitution"                                    Inference result: As an AI language model, I don’t have direct access to external files or
           ]                                                     the ability to process audio. Therefore, I am unable to perform zero-shot classification on
     }                                                           the named entity tokens.

                                                              4. Generating a response for the task of selecting models based on scores from “speech-
                                                                 recognition-on-common-voice-english”:
     Comment: Successful: to test the model                      Model used: “gpt-3.5-turbo-0613”
     selection on benchmark performances, we                     Inference result: Based on the input the following response is generated:
     added a “parakeet-rnnt“ model in the                        “To select models for speech recognition on Common Voice English, you can use the
     mix as on this specific benchmark it per-                   scores obtained from the speech recognition systems trained on the Common Voice En-
     forms better than the “whisper-large-v2“.                   glish dataset. By evaluating the performance of different models using these scores, you
     H IVE light successfully selects this for the               can determine which models are most suitable for the task. This allows you to choose
     ASR task                                                    the best models for your specific speech recognition needs. Factors such as accuracy,
                                                                 robustness and language coverage should be considered when selecting these models.
                                                                 THe scores provide a valuable metric for comparing and evaluating different models, ul-
                                                                 timately assisting in the decision-making process.”
                                                              Please not that the information provided is based on the inference results from the models
                                                              used. If you have any specific concerns or further questions, feel free to let me know!


                                                              Comment: Unsuccessful: the system fails at the task selection state while also ignoring the
                                                              requirements to selected model for the ASR based on the benchmark performance


                                                                             18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    H IVE COMPARED TO CURRENT TOP MONOLITHIC LLM S
The recent advancements in models have shown that foundational model capabilities progressed a
lot over the past years. This surge could lead to believe that at some point in the future only having
one-single-large model to-do-everything would be enough. Such a hope, has two issues:
      1. such a powerful model does not exist yet, and no one knows when it could arise;
      2. it is barely impossible that such a model could exist and cover all the “niche” use cases and
         tasks which are currently populating the model landscape (e.g. protein folding or other rare
         scenarios).
To go further with the first aforementioned point, we ran MUSE over variants of some of the best
models currently available18 : o1-preview and GPT-4o both from OpenAI and DeepSeek-v3 from
the eponymous company. The results are as follows:
Since o1-preview does not support image and                           Table 6: o1-preview.
audio modality, we only test the cases whose                Domains     FS FoT O Support
input, output and any expected intermediate re-                One      11 11        10 12
sult only contains text. Overall, o1-preview was               Two      10 10        11 12
able to properly answer (O) 24% of the time                   Three     5     5      3     5
and properly justify (TS & FoT) its choices                   Total     26 26        24 29
26% of the time.
                 Table 7: GPT-4o.                         Once again, since GPT-4o only supports text
     Domains      FS FoT O             Support            and image input and textual output, we filtered
        One       16 16       15       20                 out all the entries from MUSE involving unsup-
        Two       24 24       23       24                 ported modalities. Overall, GPT-4o was able to
       Three      4     4     5        7                  properly answer (O) 43% of the time and prop-
       Total      44 44       43       51                 erly justify (TS & FoT) its choices 44% of the
                                                          time.
Since DeepSeek-v3 handles modalities simi-                         Table 8: DeepSeek-v3.
larly to GPT-4o, we filtered MUSE the same                  Domains FS FoT O Support
way. After running, it exhibits good planning                  One 19 20          11 20
performances (45% and 47% for FS and FoT                       Two 20 21          11 24
respectively) but as compared to OpenAI tested                Three 6       6     3     7
models, output quality felt down to 25%.                      Total 45 47         25 51
Unsurprisingly, even if all models are able to
plan and to perform over MUSE for some of its queries, they are not yet able to deal with the
richness of real-world multi-modal scenarios as depicted in MUSE.
More generally, when it comes to the second point about the “niche” tasks, the essence of the
Capability-KG lies in the fact that its richness allows to retrieve candidate models for a large set
of tasks (more than 100 at the moment) and does not limit users to envision instructions revolving
around a handful of popular tasks.
Finally, we would like to mention a direction we are currently exploring. So far, the presented C-
KG gathers information related to models, but structurally, nothing prevents us from collecting and
structuring information related to other objects. For instance, the graph nature of the C-KG led us
starting the exploration of having sub-nodes for adapters attached to main-principal-models; these
adapter-nodes still carry the same type of information as the main nodes currently listed in the C-
KG, gathering performance information for instance. In the future, we think this addition would also
allow building complex instruction pipelines which would rely mainly on a single backbone model
and this could be a solution for some specific actors having access to only one model.
More generally, we would wrap up emphasising on the fact that even if the big models available
at the moment aren’t yet capable like a group of selected specialised models, the overall technical
architecture of H IVE is still appropriate to tackle scenarios where only one model and associated
variants (through adapters for instance) is available.
   18
      In this setting, both planning and execution parts are performed by the tested monolithic models, which
slightly differs from the H IVE setting which delegates the execution to specialized models.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    H IVE ’ S PROMPTS


    Usage Snippet Extraction                                                                (§3.1)

    You are a python programming expert, mainly used to convert python code snippets into
    python functions. Follow the rules:
    1. You also make sure all the function variables have default value.
    2. There should always be input variable with default value that takes the input for the model.
    3. Take Model path as a variable with default value of model name
    4. Return the model response in the python function

    Transform the code snippets in the text into one signed Python function including all the
    potential variables and default values for all. Only respond with code and in markdown
    format “‘python“‘. {code}



    Parsing & Rephrasing                                                                    (§3.2)

    Task Decomposition stage: The AI assistant can parse user input into multiple inputs and
    fill the relevant keys in the following JSON.
    {"instruction": None, "input_text": None, "question": None,
       ,→ "url": None, "data_dict": { }, "categories": []}
    Example 1
    User: What is the date mentioned in this audio www.google.com/audio file.mp3?
    Response: {{”instruction”: ”Convert the audio to text and then answer the question”, ”url”:
    ”www.google.com/audio file.mp3”, ”input text”: ”What is the date?”}}
    ...

    ...

    Example 5
    User: Please transcribe the voice into text ./audio/audio 1.mp3 and classify the transcribed
    text into categories such as ’movie’, ’music’, ’painting’, or ’Other’.
    Response: {”instruction”: ”Convert the audio to text, and perform text classification”, ”url”:
    ”./audio/audio 1.mp3”, ”categories”: [’movie’, ’music’, ’painting’, ’Other’]}

    Based on the above example, parse the following:
    User: {USER INPUT}
    Response:

    Only return a JSON
    The JSON keys are defined below:
    instruction: textitwhat are the tasks asked in the question, it maybe one, two or three tasks.
    Try to find the implicit tasks as well
    input text: extract the original text or context in the input. Do not generate on your own
    question: extract if there is any question asked
    url: extract url passed in the user query
    data dict: extract dictionary passed in the user query
    categories: extract ALL categories mentioned in the user query

    Do not generate anything other than a parsable JSON


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain Classification                                                                (§3.2)

   You are professional in natural language processing task. Find which domains are re-
   lated with the provided user query? You should pick domains from the following list
   {domains}. You MUST NOT output other domains not in the provdied list. Here are the
   examples:

   Example 1: Answer the following questions in detail and give me a summarisation
   for the answer
   Domains: question answering; summarisation
   ...
   Example 11: Summarise the transcript of the audio and find entities in it
   Domains: audio; summarisation; token classification


   Provided Query: {query}. ’The order matters’
   Domains:



   Action Selection                                                                     (§3.2)

   You are an action selector. Given a Task and a list of Actions,
   Select the crucial/mandatory actions. Follow the instructions below:
   1. Pick the least amount of actions that can do the job in Task
   2. Only select actions that are REQUIRED and NECESSARY for Task
   3. Focus on precision of selection
   4. Do not select EVALUATION or SCORE actions unless explicitly asked for in Task

   Example 1
   Task: I want to select a schema and then generate a SQL query for the a question
   Actions: [”Schema-Selection”, ”generate SQL”, ”execute query”, ”validate SQL”]
   Can you understand the requirements of the Task and select necessary actions from the
   Actions. Do not give any explanations, only return a list and nothing else. Select at most
   three diverse, yet relevant actions.
   Selected Actions: [”Schema-Selection”, ”generate SQL”]
   ...
   ...
   Example 3
   Task: Retrieve documents on renewable energy advancements and summarise the latest
   technologies
   Actions:               [”query based summarization”,        ”rank documents”,          ”re-
   trieve most relevant document”,      ”keyphrase extraction”, ”summarization evaluation”,
   ”get extractive summarization”,         ”get abstractive summarization”,               ”re-
   trieve multiple documents”]
   Can you understand the requirements of the Task and select necessary actions from the
   Actions. Do not give any explanations, only return a list and nothing else. Select at most
   three diverse, yet relevant actions.
   Selected Actions: [”retrieve multiple documents”, ”get extractive summarization”]


   Task: {user instruction}
   Actions: {actions}
   Can you understand the requirements of the Task and select necessary actions from the
   Actions. Do not give any explanations, only return a list and nothing else. Select at most
   three diverse, yet relevant actions.
   Selected Actions:


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Figure 4: Capability Knowledge Graph in use for the MUSE Benchmark.


E         M U SE C APABILITY-KG VISUALISATION
As described in Section 4.2, we introduced the MUSE benchmark in order to compare the per-
formances of HuggingGPT, ControlLLM and H IVE. The latter was declined in two sub-versions:
H IVE light having an 8-bit quantised 7B model for planning tasks and H IVE relying on GPT-3.5 for
the same action. In particular, MUSE comes with 100 multi-modal, multi-task, complex, natural-
language queries19 .
In this Appendix, we provide, in Figure 4, a snapshot of the Capability Knowledge Graph which
corresponds to the models and their associated pieces of data used by H IVE to tackle the MUSE
benchmark20 . It is an excerpt, containing 461 triples involving 381 entities, of the complete C-KG
which contains 125k triples for 39k distinct entities. The complete C-KG was formulated by extract-
ing metadata from over 600,000 models listed on HuggingFace, with 26,806 models retained based
on popularity metrics. In Figure 4, model nodes are depicted in yellow and are at the core of the
knowledge graph, in the sense that it is around models that the C-KG building process was designed,
starting from the HuggingFace model cards (see Section 3.1 for more details on this process).
Visually, this graph is twofold, indeed the two stable-diffusion models (xl-base-1.0 & 2-1) are dis-
connected from the rest of the graph. The remaining 13 models, on the other hand, are making
a single piece of graph and organisation nodes (in red) or license nodes (in black) are often con-
nection hubs. Interestingly, one could see that the main part of the C-KG is “bordered” by gray
and purple nodes which corresponds to metrics and respective scores for the various benchmark
(in bright green) data points retrieved from the paperswithcode API. Finally, the image-to-text
block composed of blip-image-captioning-base and blip-vqa-base is somewhat separated from the
main graph and the whisper-large-v2 which is completely surrounded by all the languages it covers
(light blue nodes).
    19
         See the supplementary material            repository for all the query details and their associated data.
    20
         A Web-interface to explore the MUSE C-KG is available as supplementary material                  too.


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F        TAXONOMY CONSTRUCTION OF NLP TASKS IN THE C APABILITY-KG
In this Appendix, we present how we group various tasks –coming from HuggingFace’s Model
Cards– into a comprehensive taxonomy of model actions, starting from a seed taxonomy manually
curated (see in Figure 5). This taxonomy can be used to structure the PDDL domain files and to
have finer domain classification while planning.
Practically, in order to reach a comprehensive and detailed taxonomy, with a useful hierarchy,
we started the process by gathering manually various major tasks in NLP. For instance (cf. Fig-
ure 5 which represents only an excerpt of the seed taxonomy used), we put summarisation and
paraphrasing within the text generation larger category. We then iteratively go through
the tasks in the Capability-KG, themselves extracted from HuggingFace Model Cards tasks, and try
to integrate them within the taxonomy.


    Figure 5: Taxonomy extension protocol: enriching a seed taxonomy with tasks from the C-KG.

The step-by-step process (Figure 5) undertaken can be described as follows:

         1. Encode all the elements of NLP taxonomy using Sentence-Transformer
         2. Extract all the unique tasks present in the Capability-KG into a list
         3. For each task, we search for the most similar element from the taxonomy (and its similarity)
               • if similarity score ≥ 0.9, we consider that the task (or something very close
                 to it) is already present in the taxonomy so we ignore it
               • if 0.9 > similarity score ≥ 0.8, we consider the task to be relevant and
                 add it to the taxonomy
               • if similarity score < 0.8, we ignore the task considering it irrelevant

Furthermore, when a new task meets the relevant threshold (0.9 > similarity score ≥
0.8), it is integrated into the taxonomy under the most similar existing category. This hierarchical
structure is traversed to locate the appropriate level, and the new task is added as a sub-category
while preserving the nested format. At the end, the taxonomy is flattened to level-3 to maintain a
balance between granularity and usability.
Overall, the constructed taxonomy21 (Figure 6) comprises 420 concepts over 3 hierarchical levels.
It goes from high-level conceptual tasks, e.g. syntactic text processing, to very specific
tasks like morphological tagging. To the best of our knowledge22 , we are not aware of such
a fine-grained taxonomy of NLP tasks focusing on practical applications.

    21
    Available as a .json file in the supplementary material               .
    22
    Schopf & Matthes (2024) explored the fields of study in NLP, and even built a classifier; but it does not
dive as deep and technical as our taxonomy, but rather uses it to order Academic articles and extract research
trends.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Figure 6: Full taxonomy of the NLP tasks included in the Capability-KG.

                                               24
