Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ODEL - AGNOSTIC META - LEARNERS FOR ESTIMATING
HETEROGENEOUS TREATMENT EFFECTS OVER TIME

 Dennis Frauen∗, Konstantin Hess & Stefan Feuerriegel
 LMU Munich
 Munich Center of Machine Learning (MCML)
 {frauen,hess,feuerriegel}@lmu.de



                                                A BSTRACT

            Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs) over time is crucial in many
            disciplines such as personalized medicine. Existing works for this task have mostly
            focused on model-based learners that adapt specific machine-learning models
            and adjustment mechanisms. In contrast, model-agnostic learners – so-called
            meta-learners – are largely unexplored. In our paper, we propose several meta-
            learners that are model-agnostic and thus can be used in combination with arbitrary
            machine learning models (e.g., transformers) to estimate HTEs over time. We
            then provide a comprehensive theoretical analysis that characterizes the different
            learners and that allows us to offer insights into when specific learners are preferable.
            Furthermore, we propose a novel IVW-DR-learner that (i) uses a doubly robust
            (DR) and orthogonal loss; and (ii) leverages inverse-variance weights (IVWs) that
            we derive to stabilize the DR-loss over time. Our IVWs downweight extreme
            trajectories due to products of inverse-propensities in the DR-loss, resulting in a
            lower estimation variance. Our IVW-DR-learner achieves superior performance in
            our experiments, particularly in regimes with low overlap and long time horizons.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs) from observational data over time is crucial when
randomized experiments are costly or infeasible (Lim et al., 2018; Bica et al., 2020a; Melnychuk
et al., 2022). A typical example is personalized medicine (Feuerriegel et al., 2024). Here, medications
are commonly prescribed over the course of several days, and it is nowadays standard that patient
responses are captured within electronic health records (Allam et al., 2021). Hence, clinicians can use
electronic health records to estimate HTEs over time and thereby analyze the safety and effectiveness
of treatments across different patient profiles (Hamburg & Collins, 2010). For example, in cancer
care, clinicians are commonly interested in which sequence of chemotherapy and immunotherapy has
the largest expected benefit for patients with a specific age, gender, or medical history.
Estimating HTEs over time (also referred to as the time-varying setting) poses unique challenges due to
the complex underlying data-generating process and time-varying confounding structure. In particular,
estimation is hard because of the following three challenges: (i) Time-varying confounding: the
existence of post-treatment confounders biases naïve estimators and requires adjustment mechanisms
tailored to the time-varying setting (Robins et al., 2000; van der Laan & Gruber, 2012). (ii) Growing
history: this means that one must adjust for entire patient histories growing over time (Bica et al.,
2020a). (iii) Low overlap: sequences of treatments are less likely observed in observational data from
time-varying settings (as compared to single treatments in static settings), which thus increases the
variance of estimators (Hess et al., 2024b). This problem increases with the length of the time-horizon.
Existing works for estimating HTEs over time are almost entirely model-based (see Table 1). That is,
these works propose specific model architectures and/or losses designed to address the challenges
(i)–(iii) from above, or at least some of them (Lim et al., 2018; Bica et al., 2020a; Melnychuk et al.,
2022). Furthermore, these model-based learners build upon a certain set of adjustment mechanisms
(e.g., history adjustment, inverse propensity weighting). In contrast, other important adjustment
    ∗
        Corresponding author


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mechanisms such as doubly robust adjustment (which typically offers favorable theoretical properties)
remain overlooked. This is surprising, since model-agnostic methods – so-called meta-learners –
are commonly used in the static setting (i.e., without time dimension) and implemented popular in
software packages (Battocchi et al., 2019), whereas a comprehensive toolbox of meta-learners for the
time-varying setting is still missing.
In this paper, we take a model-agnostic view on estimating HTEs over time. To this end, we propose
several meta-learners for this task that can be used in combination with arbitrary machine-learning
models and come with theoretical guarantees such as Neyman-orthogonality and double robustness.
Our meta-learners address the challenges (i)–(iii) from above as follows: (i) they leverage adjustment
strategies tailored to the time-series setting to ensure unbiased estimation, including regression
adjustment (G-computation), propensity adjustment, and doubly robust adjustment; (ii) they can be
instantiated using state-of-the-art models such as transformers to effectively learn representations
from high-dimensional, time-varying data; and (iii) we show that certain meta-learners (e.g., the
doubly robust learner) can suffer from high variance under violations of overlap due to division
by propensity scores (or products thereof). As a remedy, we derive time-varying inverse-variance
weights to stabilize the doubly robust loss, which yields the inverse-variance-weighted doubly robust
learner (called IVW-DR-learner).
Our contributions1 are: (1) We propose several meta-learners for estimating HTEs over time by
leveraging various adjustment mechanisms. They are model-agnostic; i.e., they can be instantiated
using any machine learning model of choice such as transformers. (2) We analyze the meta-learners
theoretically and provide insights for when specific learners are preferable over others. We also
structure the literature by showing that some existing model-based learners are instantiations of
certain meta-learners, while model-based learners corresponding to other meta-learners have not been
proposed yet (see Tables 1 and 5). (3) We derive inverse variance weights to stabilize the loss of the
DR-learner, yielding a novel IVW-DR-learner. We also perform various experiments to confirm the
effectiveness of our IVW-DR-learner as well as the validity of our theoretical results.


2       R ELATED WORK

Related works on estimating HTEs can be grouped along two dimensions (see Table 1): (a) whether a
method is model-based or model-agnostic, and (b) whether a method is for the static or time-varying
setting.
Learners in the static set-            Table 1: Key learners for heterogeneous treatment effects.
ting: Both (i) model-based                  Static setting                                           Time-varying setting
and (ii) model-agnostic                     CFR-Net (Johansson et al., 2016),                        RMSNs (Lim et al., 2018),
meta-learners have been Model-based TARNet            (Shalit et al., 2017),
                                            Causal forest (Wager & Athey, 2018), etc.
                                                                                                     CRN (Bica et al., 2020a),
                                                                                                     CT (Melnychuk et al., 2022)
proposed in the static                                                                               G-Net (Li et al., 2021), GT (Hess et al., 2024a)

setting, but without consid- Model-agnostic DR (Kennedy, 2023)-, IVW-DR- (Fisher, 2024),
                                            Plug-in-,  RA-, IPW    (Curth &  van der Schaar, 2021)-, R-learner (Lewis & Syrgkanis, 2021),
                                                                                                     PI-HA-, PI-RA-, RA-, IPW-,
ering the time dimension.                   R-learner (Nie & Wager, 2021)                            DR-, IVW-DR-learner

(i) Prominent model-based
learners include the causal forest (Wager & Athey, 2018) and TARNet (Shalit et al., 2017).
(ii) Meta-learners in the static setting leverage different adjustment mechanisms. Examples include
the RA- or X-learner (Künzel et al., 2019; Curth & van der Schaar, 2021), the IPW-learner (Curth
& van der Schaar, 2021), the DR-learner (Kennedy, 2023), the R-learner (Nie & Wager, 2021),
the EP-learner (van der Laan et al., 2024), and the recently proposed inverse-variance-weighted
DR-leaner (IVW-DR-learner) (Fisher, 2024). Note that these learners focus on the static setting (and
not the time-varying setting). As a result, these are inherently biased for estimating HTEs over time
because runtime confounding renders static adjustment mechanisms insufficient. Meta-learners are
often based on semiparametric theory and come with theoretical guarantees (Chernozhukov et al.,
2018; Foster & Syrgkanis, 2023). Despite being well-established in the static setting (Acharki et al.,
2023; Curth & van der Schaar, 2021; Kennedy, 2023; Nie & Wager, 2021), similar learners for the
time-series setting are missing.
Model-based learners for HTEs in the time-varying setting: Several model-based learners have
been proposed for estimating HTEs over time. These learners leverage (i) specific model architec-
    1
        Code is available at https://github.com/DennisFrauen/CATEMetaLearnersTime.


                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tures (e.g., recurrent neural networks or transformers with balancing representations (Bica et al.,
2020a; Hess et al., 2024a; Melnychuk et al., 2022)) or (ii) specific adjustment mechanisms (e.g.,
G-computation (Li et al., 2021) or inverse propensity weighting (Lim et al., 2018)). However, these
learners are not model agnostic. To the best of our knowledge, none of these learners uses a doubly
robust adjustment mechanism. Further, a theoretical analysis comparing the different learners is
missing.
Meta-learners for HTEs in the time-varying setting: We are only aware of a single meta-learner
for the time-varying setting: the R-learner proposed in (Lewis & Syrgkanis, 2021). While it is model-
agnostic, it imposes parametric assumptions on the data-generating process (e.g., linear Markov
assumptions). In contrast, our meta-learners are completely nonparametric. We provide a detailed
comparison of our meta-learners with the R-learner in Table 5 and Appendix B.
Meta-learners in reinforcement learning (RL): The time-varying setting for estimating HTEs can
be viewed as a model-free off-policy learning problem in RL, where we are interested in estimating
advantage functions (A-learning (Murphy, 2003)) in a non-Markovian decision process (NMDP)
(Uehara et al., 2022). Recently, meta-learners have been proposed to estimate the average reward of
a policy in NMDPs (Kallus & Uehara, 2019; 2020; 2022). However, these works differ from ours
in two ways: (i) they do consider a different estimand and are not directly applicable for advantage
functions/ HTEs; and (ii) to the best of our knowledge, no previous work in RL has leveraged inverse
variance weights to deal with the widespread problem of low overlap.

3    P ROBLEM SETUP
Data-generating process: We build upon the standard setting for estimating HTEs from ob-
servational data over time (Bica et al., 2020a; Melnychuk et al., 2022). That is, we con-
sider covariates Xt ∈ X , discrete treatments At ∈ A, and continuous outcomes Yt ∈ R
that are observed over several time periods t. In medical settings, Xt may denote (time-
varying) patient characteristics such as heart rate and blood pressure, At may denote whether
a drug is administered, and Yt may denote a health outcome such as the blood sugar level.

For each time period t, the treat-
ment At is assigned based on the
history H̄t = {X̄t , Āt−1 , Ȳt−1 },
where X̄t         =         (X1 , . . . , Xt ),
Ȳt−1    =      (Y1 , . . . , Yt−1 ), and
Āt−1 = (A1 , . . . , At−1 ).             The
outcome Yt depends on both the
history H̄t and the assigned treatment
At . Furthermore, the time-varying
covariates Xt (e.g., blood pressure)
and treatments At may depend on Figure 1: Setting for estimating treatment effects over time.
arbitrary past variables. A possible
causal graph is shown in Fig. 1. Note that w.l.o.g. we do not consider separate static covariates
(e.g., age, gender) as these can be part of Xt . We are further given an observational dataset
         (i) (i) (i) (i) n
D = {xt , at , yt }Tt=1 i=1 consisting of n ∈ N patient trajectories sampled i.i.d. from an
unknown probability distribution P of potentially different lengths T (i) .
Causal estimands: We build upon the potential outcomes framework (Rubin, 1974) for time-varying
settings (Robins et al., 2000; Robins & Hernán, 2009) to formally define HTEs. For a time t, we
consider a fixed sequence of treatment interventions āt:t+τ = (at , . . . , at+τ ) of length τ + 1. We
denote the potential outcome Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) as the τ -step-ahead outcome that would be observed when
intervening on the treatments Āt:t+τ and setting them to āt:t+τ . We are then interested in estimating
the conditional average potential outcome (CAPO)

                               µā (h̄t ) = E Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) | H̄t = h̄t                             (1)
and the conditional average treatment effect (CATE)

                     τā,b̄ (h̄t ) = E Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) − Yt+τ (b̄t:t+τ ) | H̄t = h̄t ,               (2)


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where b̄t:t+τ denotes another sequence of treatment interventions. Both CAPO (and CATE) are
functions that predict (differences in) the τ -step-ahead potential outcomes based on the history at
time period t.
Identifiability. We impose the following assumptions to ensure the identifiability of both CAPO and
CATE from observational data (for a proof we refer to Appendix C). These assumptions are standard
in the causal inference literature (Bica et al., 2020a; Lim et al., 2018; Melnychuk et al., 2022).
Practically, they exclude spillover effects, deterministic treatment assignments, and unobserved
confounders (Frauen et al., 2023b).
Assumption 1 (Identifiability (Robins et al., 2000)). We assume that the following conditions hold
for all āt:t+τ and h̄t : (i) consistency: Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) = Yt+τ whenever Āt:t+τ = āt:t+τ ; (ii) overlap:
P(At = at | H̄t = h̄t ) > 0 whenever P(H̄t = h̄t ) > 0 ; and (iii) sequential ignorability:
At ⊥ Yt+δ (at+δ ) | H̄t = h̄t for all δ ∈ {t, . . . , t + τ }.

Time-varying confounding and adjustments. A key challenge of the time-varying setting is that
the unbiased estimation of CAPO and CATE is non-trivial. Under Assumption 1, both CAPO and
CATE are identified and can thus be expressed as a function of the observational data distribution
(Robins, 1999; Robins et al., 2000). However, the time-varying nature of the confounding structure
gives rise to adjustment mechanisms that are different from the static setting whenever τ > 0. In
particular, adjusting for only the history Ht is generally insufficient for unbiased estimation (van der
Laan & Gruber, 2012). That is, for τ > 0, it holds that

               E Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) | H̄t = h̄t ̸= E Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = āt:t+τ .             (3)
Importantly, Eq. (3) implies that static meta-learners that only condition on the history H̄t are biased
in the time-varying setting. The reason is that the history adjustment in Eq. (3) ignores to adjust for
the post-treatment confounders Xℓ for ℓ > t, which are not observed during inference time. This
phenomenon is also known as time-varying confounding2 . Adjusting for post-treatment confounders
requires leveraging custom adjustment formulas for the time-varying settings. This includes iterated
conditional expectations (G-computation) (van der Laan & Gruber, 2012) and products of propensity
scores (inverse-propensity weighting) (Robins et al., 2000). In the next section, we leverage such
time-varying adjustment formulas to construct unbiased meta-learners for estimating both CAPO and
CATE.

4    M ETA - LEARNERS FOR ESTIMATING HTE S OVER TIME
In this section, we propose several meta-learners for estimating CAPO and CATE. The gen-
eral idea of meta-learners is to first estimate so-called nuisance functions that capture impor-
tant aspects of the observational data distribution (e.g., response functions or propensity scores).
Then, the estimated nuisance functions are used
for estimating the quantity of interest (e.g.,
CAPO or CATE). Both nuisance functions and
meta-learners are defined in terms of conditional
expectations and probabilities that can be esti-
mated using arbitrary machine learning models.
Our meta-learners can be grouped along two cri-
teria: (a) which adjustment mechanism is lever-         Observational data Nuisance estimators Meta-learners
aged; and (b) whether the learner is a plug-in
learner or a two-stage learner. For (a), we lever-
age different adjustment mechanisms, including Figure 2: Overview of the different nuisance esti-
history adjustment, regression adjustment (G- mators and meta-learners proposed in this paper.
computation), propensity adjustment, and dou-
bly robust adjustment. For (b), the difference between plug-in and two-stage learners is as follows:
Plug-in learners “plug” the nuisance functions into the corresponding adjustment formula to estimate
the quantity of interest. In contrast, two-stage learners estimate the treatment effect directly by
performing a second-stage regression on a pseudo-outcome constructed from the estimated nuisance
   2
     This is closely related to runtime confounding (Coston et al., 2020), where confounders are unavailable
during inference time.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


functions. Two-stage learners often outperform plug-in learners if the target quantity (e.g., CATE) is
of simpler structure and thus easier to estimate than the nuisance parameters involved (Curth et al.,
2020; Kennedy, 2023).
In the following, we group our learners according to (a) and propose both plug-in and two-stage
learners for different adjustment mechanisms. We refer to Table 5 for a detailed overview and
comparison of our meta-learners.

4.1   H ISTORY ADJUSTMENT

• PI-HA-learner.
                      A naïve approach to construct      a meta-learner is to use the history adjustment
δ ā (h̄t ) = E Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = āt:t+τ . As a result, this learner controls only for the history
Ht , while it thus ignores post-treatment confounders. Hence, for some arbitrary estimator δ̂ ā (h̄t ), we
define the plug-in history-adjustment learner (PI-HA-learner) for CAPO and CATE as
                                                            ā,b̄
                    µ̂āPI-HA (h̄t ) = δ̂ ā (h̄t ) and   τ̂PI-HA (h̄t ) = δ̂ ā (h̄t ) − δ̂ b̄ (h̄t ).   (4)
                       ā                                       ā
Here, the estimator δ̂ (h̄t ) of the nuisance function δ (h̄t ) is plugged into the formulas for CAPO
                                             ā                 ā,b̄
and CATE, respectively. Note that both τ̂PI-HA     (h̄t ) and τ̂PI-HA (h̄t ) are biased because the history
adjustment is not sufficient for the time-varying setting (see Eq. (3)). The reason why we nevertheless
consider the PI-HA-learner is its low variance, which can lead to a relatively good performance in
low-sample settings when estimation variance has a larger impact than confounding bias.
The PI-HA-learner can also be interpreted as a plug-in learner from the static setting (i.e., ignoring
time) (Curth et al., 2020), where the history H̄t acts as confounders and the intervention sequence
Āt:t+τ acts as a discrete treatment. On this basis, one could, in principle, adopt other two-stage
learners from the static setting that can handle discrete treatments (Acharki et al., 2023) (e.g., doubly
robust versions of history adjustment). Of note, such static two-stage  learners suffer from the same
bias as the PI-HA-learner as they aim at estimating δ ā (h̄t ) but not E Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) | H̄t = h̄t .

4.2   R EGRESSION ADJUSTMENT (G- COMPUTATION )

We now introduce an unbiased meta-learner for estimating CAPO and CATE based on regression
adjustment, also known as G-computation (Robins, 1999). The nuisance functions used for this are
the response functions, defined via
                          µāt+τ h̄t+τ = E Yt+τ | H̄t+τ = h̄t+τ , At+τ = at+τ

                                                                                             (5)
and iteratively via
                               µāℓ h̄ℓ = E µāℓ+1 (H̄ℓ+1 ) | H̄ℓ = h̄ℓ , Aℓ = aℓ

                                                                                             (6)
for ℓ ∈ {t, . . . , t + τ − 1}.
• PI-RA-learner. Given estimators of the response functions, we introduce the plug-in regression-
adjustment learner (PI-RA-learner) for CAPO and CATE via
                                                         ā,b̄
                   µ̂āPI-RA (h̄t ) = µ̂āt h̄t                (h̄t ) = µ̂āt h̄t − µ̂b̄t h̄t ,

                                                   and τ̂PI-RA                                        (7)
respectively. The plug-in learner is unbiased         (see Sec. 5). This is because, under Assumption 1,
CAPO can be written as τ ā (h̄t ) = µāt h̄t (van der Laan & Gruber, 2012; Frauen et al., 2023a). In
              ā
particular, τ̂PI-RA (h̄t ) adjusts for the post-treatment covariates by successively integrating them out
through an iterative regression process. This approach is also called iterative G-computation and has
been leveraged for estimating average treatment effects (van der Laan & Gruber, 2012; Frauen et al.,
2023a), while we extend the idea to estimating heterogenous treatment effects.
• RA-learner. We now introduce the regression-adjustment learner (RA-learner), which is a two-
stage learner for estimating CATE using regression adjustment. The motivation is that, in many
applications, the CATE τā,b̄ (h̄t ) is of simpler structure than the CAPO τā (h̄t ) due to cancellation
effects (Kennedy, 2023). Hence, two-stage learners that target      CATE directly may outperform the
plug-in learner in such scenarios. Given estimators µ̂āℓ h̄ℓ of the response functions, we define the
pseudo-outcomes

      ā,b̄
            = 1{At = at } µ̂āt+1 H̄t+1 − µ̂b̄t H̄t + 1{At = bt } µ̂āt H̄t − µ̂b̄t+1 H̄t+1

    ŶRA

              + 1{At ̸= at }1{At ̸= bt } µ̂āt h̄t − µ̂b̄t h̄t .

                                                                                                       (8)


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                            h                 i
                                                           ā,b̄               ā,b̄
We define the RA-learner via the second-stage regression τ̂RA    (h̄t ) = Ê ŶRA    H̄t = h̄t .

4.3    P ROPENSITY ADJUSTMENT

Another major type of adjustment is propensity adjustment (Curth et al., 2020). For this, let us define
propensity scores in the time-varying setting via
                                      πℓ (aℓ | h̄ℓ ) = P(Aℓ = aℓ | H̄ℓ = h̄ℓ )                                              (9)
for ℓ ∈ {t, . . . , t + τ }. Each propensity score πℓ (aℓ | h̄ℓ ) characterizes the treatment assignment
mechanism at time ℓ based on the history h̄ℓ .
• IPW-learner. We now propose the inverse-propensity-weighted learners (IPW-learner), which is a
two-stage learner for estimating CAPO and CATE based on propensity adjustment. Using estimators
π̂ℓ (aℓ | h̄ℓ ) of the propensity scores, we define the pseudo-outcomes

                        ā
                               t+τ
                               Y      1{Aℓ = aℓ }                                 ā,b̄      ā      b̄
                     ŶIPW =                               Yt+τ         and    ŶIPW    = ŶIPW − ŶIPW .                  (10)
                                  ℓ=t
                                      π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )

Our IPW-learner is a two-stage learner defined via the second-stage regressions
                            h                i                           h                  i
                                                        ā,b̄                ā,b̄
         µ̂āIPW (h̄t ) = Ê ŶIPW
                                ā
                                   H̄t = h̄t   and τ̂IPW      (h̄t ) = Ê ŶIPW    H̄t = h̄t .                             (11)

Inverse-propensity weighting in the time-varying setting has originally been proposed for estimating
average treatment effects (e.g., via marginal structural models (Robins et al., 2000)), however, not
explicitly for heterogeneous treatment effects.

4.4    D OUBLY ROBUST ADJUSTMENT

The above learners (i.e., the PI-HA-, PI-RA-, RA-, and IPW-leaners) have a shortcoming in that they
all utilize estimators of only some of the possible nuisance functions. While the PI-HA-, PI-RA-,
and RA-learners leverage only the response function estimators (or parts thereof), the IPW-learner
leverages only the propensity score estimators. This motivates us to construct meta-learners that
leverage both nuisance estimators and thus all components informative of the data-generating process.
• DR-learner. We propose the doubly robust learner (DR-learner), which is a two-stage learner that
can be used for estimating both CAPO and CATE. For this, we define the pseudo-outcomes

                                              1 − 1π̂{A
                                                                        k−1 1{Aℓ =aℓ }
                                                                     Q
                                                         k =ak }
      ā      ā
                     Pt+τ    ā                                                                    ā,b̄     ā     b̄
    ŶDR = ŶIPW +     k=t µ̂k     H̄k               k (ak |H̄k )       ℓ=t π̂ℓ (aℓ |H̄ℓ )   and ŶDR    = ŶDR − ŶDR .   (12)

                             ā       a,b ¯
The pseudo-outcomes ŶDR        and ŶDR  are estimators of the (uncentered) efficient influence function of
CAPO and CATE, respectively (van der Laan & Gruber, 2012). Similar to the static setting (Kennedy,
2023), we introduce our DR-learner for the time-varying setting via second-stage regressions based
on the efficient influence functions. That is, we define
                                h                 i                            h                   i
                                                              ā,b̄               ā,b̄
              µ̂āDR (h̄t ) = Ê ŶDR
                                   ā
                                      | H̄t = h̄t    and τ̂DR       (h̄t ) = Ê ŶDR    | H̄t = h̄t .   (13)

Due to the use of efficient influence functions, the DR-learner comes with theoretical properties such
as double robustness (see Sec. 5).


5     T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS

In this section, we add a theoretical analysis for the PI-HA-, PI-RA-, RA-, IPW-, and DR-learners.
For this, we employ mathematical tools from Kennedy (2023) and derive asymptotic bounds on the
point-wise risk of the corresponding learners. We start by imposing the following assumptions.
Assumption 2 (Boundedness). The response functions µāℓ (·), the propensity scores πℓ (aℓ | ·), and
its estimated versions µ̂āℓ (·) and π̂ℓ (aℓ | ·) are bounded functions for all interventions ā.


                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 3 (Estimation). The regression estimators Ên admit rates rµāℓ (n) for the response
                                                                            ā,ā
functions µ̂āℓ (·), rPI-HA
                      ā
                            (n) for the history adjustments δ̂ ā (·), and rPO    (n) for the second-stage
estimators Ê (see Appendix D for a mathematical definition and examples). We also impose the
stability assumptions from Kennedy (2023) on all regression estimators Ên (see Appendix C). Finally,
the propensity score estimators π̂ℓ (aℓ | ·) admit rates rπāℓ (n).
Assumption 4 (Sample splitting). For each learner, the observational dataset D admits a partition
D = Dtµ̂ ∪ · · · ∪ Dt+τ
                     µ̂
                        ∪ DPO , so that each response function estimator µ̂āℓ is fitted on Dℓµ̂ , all
propensity score estimators π̂ℓ are fitted on D \ DPO , and any second-stage regressor Ê is fitted on
DPO .

Boundedness assumptions such as Assumption 2 are standard in the causal inference literature to
provide theoretical guarantees for treatment effect learners (Curth et al., 2020; Foster & Syrgkanis,
2023; Frauen & Feuerriegel, 2023; Kennedy, 2023). Assumption 3 on the estimators is in line with
                                                                   ā,ā
Kennedy (2023). The rates rµāℓ (n), rπāℓ (n), rPI-HA
                                                 ā
                                                        (n), and rPO     (n) capture assumptions on the
complexity of the corresponding estimands, i.e., nuisance parameters and CATE. The assumption can
be instantiated via, e.g., enforcing smoothness or sparsity on the underlying model (Curth et al., 2020;
Kennedy, 2023). Finally, Assumption 4 (i.e., sample splitting) is standard in the literature on meta-
learners for causal inference (Chernozhukov et al., 2018; Foster & Syrgkanis, 2023; Kennedy, 2023).
While sample splitting is required for the validity of our theoretical results, we note that, in practice,
all of our learners can also be used without sample splitting. Avoiding the use of sample splitting can
result in superior finite-sample performance as more data is used to estimate nuisance parameters and
second-stage regressions (Curth et al., 2020). In our experiments, we follow established literature
(Curth & van der Schaar, 2021) and refrain from using sample splitting.
The following result establishes asymptotic rates for the risk our meta-learners for CATE under
treatment interventions ā and b̄. Rates for CAPO can be obtained by removing all terms that include
b̄. We write g(n) ≲ f (n) whenever there exist C, n0 > 0, so that g(n) ≤ Cf (n) for all n > n0 .
Theorem 1. Under Assumptions 1–4, we obtain the following rates:
       ā,b̄
  E[(τ̂PI-HA (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≲ rPI-HA
                                           ā           b̄
                                                 (n) + rPI-HA (n) + bias2ā,b̄                                                        (14)
                                            t+τ
                                            X
       ā,b̄
  E[(τ̂PI-RA (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≲         rµāℓ (n) + rµb̄ ℓ (n)                                                              (15)
                                            ℓ=t
                                                            t+τ
                                                            X
          ā,b̄                               ā,b̄
     E[(τ̂RA    (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≲ rPO    (n) +         rµāℓ (n) + rµb̄ ℓ (n)                                              (16)
                                                            ℓ=t
                                                            t+τ
                                                            X
         ā,b̄                               ā,b̄
    E[(τ̂IPW   (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≲ rPO    (n) +          rπāℓ (n) + rπb̄ ℓ (n)                                              (17)
                                                            ℓ=t
                                                            t+τ                   t+τ                            t+τ
                                                                                                                                !
          ā,b̄                               ā,b̄
                                                            X                     X                              X
     E[(τ̂DR    (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≲ rPO    (n) +             rπāℓ (n)         rµāk (n) + rπb̄ ℓ (n)         rµb̄ k (n)   , (18)
                                                            ℓ=t                   k=ℓ                            k=ℓ

biasā,b̄ = E Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = āt:t+τ − E Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = b̄t:t+τ − τā,b̄ (h̄t ).

Proof. See Appendix C.

For τ = 0, the rates of all learners coincide with the corresponding rates in the static setting (Curth &
van der Schaar, 2021; Kennedy, 2023).
Interpretation of Theorem 1. Theorem 1 provides us with the following insights, assuming the rate
 ā,b̄
rPO    (n) vanishes faster than the nuisance rates (e.g., when CATE is of simpler structure): (i) The
PI-HA-learner is biased, even asymptotically, when n → ∞. In contrast, all other learners are
unbiased (consistent) whenever n → ∞, assuming the involved rates vanish. (ii) The PI-RA- and
RA-learner are asymptotically equivalent. (iii) The rate of each meta-learner depends on the rate of
the corresponding nuisance parameters. Hence, the PI-RA- and RA-learner will generally converge
faster whenever the response functions are easier to estimate, while the IPW-learner will converge


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


faster whenever the propensity scores are easier to estimate. (iv) The DR-learner admits a doubly
robust rate. That is, the DR-learner will converge at a fast rate if each ℓ, either the propensity score
πℓ (aℓ | ·) or all response functions µāk (·) for k ≥ ℓ allow for fast rates (for both ā and b̄).

6    S TABILIZING THE DR- LOSS VIA INVERSE VARIANCE WEIGHTING
A drawback of the DR-learner is the division by propensity scores in Eq. (12), which can render
the second-stage regression unstable whenever the propensity score estimates π̂ℓ (aℓ | h̄ℓ ) are small.
While this is a well-known issue in the static setting (Kennedy et al., 2024; Morzywolek et al.,
2023), it is especially problematic in the time-varying setting where the DR-learner uses products of
inverse-propensity scores (Bica et al., 2020a). Hence, we now propose a method for reducing the
variance of the DR-learner.
Our idea is motivated by a recent work from Fisher (2024) who proposed to stabilize the DR-learner
from the static setting by using so-called inverse-variance weights (IVWs). This is analogous to the
R-learner from the static setting, which can be written as an inverse-variance weighted version of
another learner (the U-learner (Künzel et al., 2019)). We now extend the aforementioned results from
the static to the time-varying setting. The following theorem derives the inverse-variance weights for
the DR-learner in the time-varying setting.
Theorem 2. We define the weights

                               ā
                                              t+τ Y
                                              X   k
                                                    1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                                                              ā,b̄     ā      b̄
                              VDR =       2 (a | H̄ )
                                                      and VDR       = VDR  + VDR    .               (19)
                                        π
                                k=t ℓ=t ℓ     ℓ    ℓ

If it holds that Var µb̄k+1 H̄k+1 H̄k , Ak = σ 2 for all k ∈ {t, . . . , t + τ }, we obtain
                                                                                      h                i
        ā                                                 ā,b̄                        ā,b̄
           | H̄t = h̄t ) = σ 2 E VDR
                                  ā
                                                                 | H̄t = h̄t ) = σ 2 E VDR

Var(YDR                               | H̄t = h̄t and Var(YDR                                 H̄t = h̄t .

Proof. See Appendix C.

• IVW-DR-learner. Motivated by Theorem 2, we propose an inverse-variance-weighted doubly-
robust learner (IVW-DR-learner) for estimating CAPO and CATE. In contrast to our DR-learner from
above, the IPW-DR-learner is not defined via a second-stage regression on a pseudo-outcome. Instead,
we introduce it as a minimizer
                      h        of
                                i a loss weightedh with stabilized
                                                             i      inverse-variance weights. Using
             ā         ā               ā,b̄      ā,b̄
estimators ŴDR = Ê V̂DR | H̄t and ŴDR = Ê V̂DR | H̄t , we now define the IPW-DR-learner as
                                                                    2                                                                     2
                                   ā −1
                                                                                                     Ŵ ā b̄ −1

                                ŴDR                                          ā,b̄
µ̂āIVW = arg minτ ′ Ê             ā −1
                                                    ā
                                                  ŶDR − τ ′ (H̄t )     and τ̂IVW   = arg minτ ′ Ê h DR          i Ŷ ā,b̄ − τ ′ (H̄t )    .
                              Ê[ŴDR     ]                                                              ā b̄ −1
                                                                                                         Ê ŴDR      DR

                                                                                                                                       (20)
We emphasize that the assumption of constant variance in Theorem 2 is in line with the assumption
from (Fisher, 2024) to interpret the weights of the R-learner (Nie & Wager, 2021) in the static setting
as inverse-variance weights. Even if the assumption is violated, the weights may still stabilize the
doubly robust loss despite not being interpretable as inverse-variance weights.
To gain insights into the weighting mechanism of the IVW-DR-learner, we make a comparison to the
                                                            ā,b̄
static setting where τ = 0. Here, we obtain E[VDR                 | H̄t = h̄t ] = πt (aℓ | h̄t )−1 + πt (bℓ | h̄t )−1 =
πt (aℓ |h̄t )+πt (bℓ |h̄t )
 πt (a |h̄t )πt (b |h̄t )
                            for τ = 0. Hence, for binary treatments, which imply πt (aℓ | h̄t )+πt (bℓ | h̄t ) = 1,
     ℓ         ℓ

the inverse variance weights reduce to the product of propensities πt (aℓ | h̄t )πt (bℓ | h̄t ). These
weights reduce the influence of samples with low overlap, which may lead to instabilities due to a
lack of data. This corresponds to the DR-learner with inverse-variance weights in the static setting.
In particular, our IVWs are a generalization to both time-varying and multiple treatments.

7    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we compare our proposed meta-learners empirically. The purpose of our experiments
is two-fold: (i) we verify the insights from our theoretical results (Sec. 5); and (ii) we show that our


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


IVW-DR-learner improves over the DR-learner and other meta-learners, specifically in low-overlap
regimes and for long time horizons τ . Recall that all our results are model-agnostic and therefore hold
for arbitrary machine learning instantiations. To ensure a fair comparison, we estimate all nuisance
functions and instantiate all meta-learners using the same transformer-based architecture. In particular,
we refrain from comparing with model-based methods as these can be viewed as instantiations of
certain meta-learners (see Table 5) using specific models. Of note, this is consistent with established
literature on meta-learners in the static setting (Curth & van der Schaar, 2021). To empirically verify
robustness with respect to model choice, we performed additional experiments using LSTM-based
instantiations of our meta-learners in Appendix H. We also provide additional results in Appendix I
Neural instantiations. In our experiments, we use transformer-based instantiations of our meta-
learners. That is, we estimate both our nuisance function estimators and second-stage regressions
using deep neural networks, specifically transformer architectures. Transformers (Ashish Vaswani
et al., 2017) are effective at learning representations that achieve impressive performance on sequential
learning problems, including causal inference tasks (Melnychuk et al., 2022). However, we emphasize
that our implementation should be seen as a “proof-of-concept”. This means that we do not claim
that the architecture of our transformer instantiations is optimized for task-specific performance.
Rather, practitioners will need to determine the preferred model architecture based on various factors
such as sample size or data dimensionality (Curth & van der Schaar, 2021). Nevertheless, this also
pinpoints a clear advantage of our meta-learners: they can be used with arbitrary machine learning
models and allow various other extensions (e.g., balancing losses; see Appendix F for a discussion.
In Appendix H, we provide additional results using LSTM-based instantiations.
We build upon an encoder-only trans-                                 Table 2: Results for D1 .
former from Ashish Vaswani et al.                                τ =0         τ =1         τ =2         τ =3         τ =4
(2017) with a causal mask to avoid PI-HA-learner
                                              PI-RA-learner
                                                              1.57 ± 0.38
                                                              1.60 ± 0.36
                                                                          10.92 ± 1.24 16.00 ± 2.01 14.45 ± 5.30
                                                                           2.57 ± 0.53  2.62 ± 0.57 2.60 ± 0.74
                                                                                                                  7.56 ± 2.42
                                                                                                                  1.72 ± 0.25
look-ahead bias and non-trainable po- RA-learner              0.95 ± 0.46  1.32 ± 0.59 2.13 ± 0.83 2.29 ± 0.80    1.39 ± 0.29
                                              IPW-learner     0.60 ± 0.28  1.43 ± 0.81 14.77 ± 6.78  8.25 ± 4.46  5.03 ± 3.03
sitional encodings, combined with a DR-learner                0.65 ± 0.35  1.39 ± 0.70 14.60 ± 6.50  6.82 ± 2.45  5.70 ± 3.84
                                              IVW-DR-learner 0.57 ± 0.14 1.29 ± 0.23    2.40 ± 0.43 2.36 ± 1.12  1.28 ± 0.36
feed-forward neural network with lin- Reported: Average RMSE ± standard deviation (×10) over
ear or softmax activation. We perform 5 random seeds (best in bold).
training using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015). Further details regarding architecture,
training, hyperparameters, and runtime are in Appendix E.
Simulated datasets. We simulate three datasets Dj with j ∈ {1, 2, 3} from different data-generating
processes. Of note, the use of simulated data is standard in the causal inference literature (Lim et al.,
2018; Bica et al., 2020a; Curth et al., 2020; Frauen & Feuerriegel, 2023) and enables measurement
of the performance of causal inference methods due to known ground-truth. We report full details
regarding the generation of all datasets Dj in Appendix G.
                              Table 3: Results for D2 .                                 At a high level, the datasets satisfy
                         τ =0         τ =1            τ =2         τ =3        τ =4     the following properties: (i) All
  PI-HA-learner
  PI-RA-learner
                      2.52 ± 0.56
                      2.33 ± 0.30
                                   1.99 ± 0.44
                                   1.37 ± 0.06
                                                   2.65 ± 0.34
                                                   1.08 ± 0.30
                                                                2.26 ± 0.52
                                                                1.00 ± 0.39
                                                                            3.18 ± 0.39
                                                                            0.63 ± 0.39
                                                                                        datasets include time-varying con-
  RA-learner          0.51 ± 0.22  0.53 ± 0.24     0.75 ± 0.30  0.89 ± 0.43 0.56 ± 0.40 founders Xt , which should render the
  IPW-learner         0.20 ± 0.07  0.42 ± 0.13     0.58 ± 0.16  1.46 ± 0.87 2.62 ± 0.34
  DR-learner          0.14 ± 0.07  0.42 ± 0.32    0.52 ± 0.09   1.84 ± 0.89 2.69 ± 0.71 PI-HA-learner biased. (ii) The treat-
  IVW-DR-learner 0.11 ± 0.07 0.32 ± 0.31           0.57 ± 0.24 0.80 ± 0.46 0.50 ± 0.35
  Reported: average RMSE ± standard deviation (×10) over
                                                                                        ment effect mechanisms of all datasets
  5 random seeds (best in bold).                                                        are “simpler” than the response func-
tion mechanisms, which should give two-stage meta-learners an advantage over plug-in meta-learners
(see Sec. 5). (iii) The treatment assignment mechanism of D1 (D2 ) is more (less) “complex” than
the response function mechanisms, which should give learners based on regression adjustment an
advantage (disadvantage) over learners based on propensity adjustment (see Sec. 5). (iv) Both D1
and D3 contain observations with low overlap (i.e., large or small propensity scores), which should
increase the variance of the IPW- and the DR-learner and increase the relative performance of the
IVW-DR-learner. Hence, we now verify whether we can confirm these properties in our numerical
experiments.
Results for D1 and D2 . The results for D1 and D2 are reported in Table 2 and Table 3, respectively.
Here, we report the RMSE of the estimated CATEs for τ ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} using different interventions
āτ and b̄τ (see Appendix G for details). In line with the properties of the datasets, we observe
the following: (i) For τ > 0, the PI-HA achieves the worst performance as compared to the other
meta-learners, indicating a bias due to runtime confounding. (ii) The two-stage learners (RA, IPW,
DR, and IVW-DR) outperform the plugin learners (PI-HA and PI-RA) on both datasets. (iii) The


                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RA-learner outperforms the IPW-learner on D1 (except for τ = 0), while the IPW-learner is better on
D2 . In particular, the IPW-learner performs better for smaller prediction horizons τ , which is likely
due to increasing variance when dividing by products of propensity scores. The DR- and IVW-DR
learners tend to perform well on both datasets, which confirms the doubly robust convergence rate
from Theorem 1. (iv) The IPW- and DR-learners are unstable on D1 for τ = 2, which is likely due to
low overlap and divisions by products of propensity scores. Notably, the IVW-DR-learner improves
over both by a large margin, indicating a stabilizing effect of the inverse variance weights on the
DR-loss. The performance gain is particularly noticeable for larger τ where the overlap is inherently
smaller. In sum, our empirical findings confirm our theoretical results and the effectiveness of our
IVW-DR-learner in scenarios with low overlap and long time horizons..
Sensitivity to low overlap (D3 ). We further analyze the sensi-
                                                                                           '5
                                                                                           ,9:
tivity of the DR-learner to low overlap and compare it with our
IVW-DR-learner. To do so, we report the RMSE (for τ = 1) for

both learners on D3 across different levels of overlap (quantified via


                                                                                                    506(
a parameter γ; see Appendix G for details). The results are shown

in Fig 3. As expected, the DR-learner becomes unstable for lower
levels of overlap (i.e., larger γ). In contrast, the IVW-DR-learner
remains stable and outperforms the DR-learner by a large margin for
small overlap. This confirms the effectiveness of our inverse variance
weights (Theorem 2) to stabilize the DR-loss, which is crucial in the Figure 3: RMSE of DR- and
time-varying setting that comes with inherently low overlap.             IVW-DR-learner for different
                                                                         levels of overlap averaged
Real-world dataset. We sample n = 3000 patient trajectories over 5 random seeds. Larger
electronic health records over up to T = 10 time points from the γ implies lower overlap.
MIMIC III dataset (Johnson et al., 2016). Similar to Melnychuk et al.
(2022), we include 25 time-varying covariates, gender and age as static covariates, ventilation as a
binary treatment, and blood pressure as time-varying outcome (standardized with a mean of 61.09
and a standard deviation of 14.48). We train our meta-learners for CAPO and prediction horizons
τ ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} and for the treatment intervention that gives treatment at every time step. We use the
factual RMSE (i.e., RMSE between model predictions and observed outcomes whenever observed
treatments coincide with the intervention sequence) as a proxy for performance on real-world data.
However, we note that a reliable evaluation of causal models on real-world data is notoriously hard
due to the fundamental problem of causal inference (Shalit et al., 2017; Curth & van der Schaar,
2021). Hence, our results should be seen as indications and interpreted with care.
         Table 4: Results for real-world data.                            Results: Interestingly, both the PI-HA and
                                                                          the PI-RA learner perform similarly well, even
                       τ =0        τ =1           τ =2           τ =3     though the PI-HA learner suffers from bias due
 PI-HA-learner      0.36 ± 0.02 0.66 ± 0.02 0.73 ± 0.03 0.79 ± 0.02       to time-varying confounding (Theorem 1). We
 PI-RA-learner      0.36 ± 0.02 0.66 ± 0.03 0.72 ± 0.02 0.78 ± 0.04
 IPW-learner        0.53 ± 0.10 0.71 ± 0.04 0.78 ± 0.08 2.03 ± 2.03       suspect that this is due to a larger finite-sample
 DR-learner         0.52 ± 0.09 0.72 ± 0.03 0.97 ± 0.43 1.00 ± 0.43
 IVW-DR-learner 0.39 ± 0.03 0.62 ± 0.01 0.67 ± 0.01 0.71 ± 0.02           variance   of the PI-RA learner, as it requires iter-
 Reported: Average factual RMSE ± standard deviation over 5 random seeds. ative fitting τ models instead of only one. Both
the IPW and DR-learner perform relatively badly and become unstable for larger time horizons.
This is likely due to limited overlap which leads to divisions by small (products) of propensities. In
contrast, our IVW-DR-learner achieves the best overall performance. This confirms the effectiveness
of our inverse variance weights on real-world data.
Discussion. In this paper, we proposed model-agnostic meta-learners that can be used for estimating
CAPO or CATE over time using arbitrary machine learning models. Limitations. In this paper,
we studied the theoretical foundations of meta-learners and provided practical insights. However,
we did not study specific model architectures as this generally depends on the complexity of the
data-generating process, overlap, and sample size. Future directions. We believe the development of
state-of-the-art model architectures that can be used as backbones for our meta-learners for specific
applications to be a valuable direction for future research. Furthermore, future research may consider
extending our meta-learners to the continuous time setting. Broader impact. Our meta-learners
have the potential to improve various fields in which personalized sequential decision-making is of
importance. However, careful implementation is needed to ensure robustness in practice.


                                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Naoufal Acharki, Ramiro Lugo, Antoine Bertoncello, and Josselin Garnier. Comparison of meta-
  learners for estimating multi-valued treatment heterogeneous effects. In ICML, 2023.
Ahmed Allam, Stefan Feuerriegel, Michael Rebhan, and Michael Krauthammer. Analyzing patient
  trajectories with artificial intelligence. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 23(12):e29812, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Keith Battocchi, Eleanor Dillon, Maggie Hei, Greg Lewis, Paul Oka, Miruna Oprescu, and Vasilis
  Syrgkanis. EconML: A python package for ML-based heterogeneous treatment effects estimation,
  2019.
Ioana Bica, Ahmed M. Alaa, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Estimating counterfactual
  treatment outcomes over time through adversarially balanced representations. In ICLR, 2020a.
Ioana Bica, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Estimating the effects of continuous-valued
  interventions using generative adversarial networks. In NeurIPS, 2020b.
Victor Chernozhukov, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen, Whitney
  Newey, and James M. Robins. Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural
  parameters. The Econometrics Journal, 21(1):C1–C68, 2018. ISSN 1368-4221.
Victor Chernozhukov, Whitney Newey, Rahul Singh, and Vasilis Syrgkanis. Automatic debiased
  machine learning for dynamic treatment effects and general nested functionals. arXiv preprint,
  arXiv:2203.13887, 2023.
Amanda Coston, Edward H. Kennedy, and Alexandra Chouldechova. Counterfactual predictions
 under runtime confounding. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Alicia Curth and Mihaela van der Schaar. Nonparametric estimation of heterogeneous treatment
  effects: From theory to learning algorithms. In AISTATS, 2021.
Alicia Curth, Ahmed M. Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Estimating structural target functions
  using machine learning and influence functions. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2008.06461, 2020.
Alicia Curth, Changhee Lee, and Mihaela van der Schaar. SurvITE: Learning heterogeneous treatment
  effects from time-to-event data. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Stefan Feuerriegel, Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk, Jonas Schweisthal, Konstantin Hess, Alicia
  Curth, Stefan Bauer, Niki Kilbertus, Isaac S. Kohane, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Causal machine
  learning for predicting treatment outcomes. Nature Medicine, 2024.
Aaron Fisher. The connection between r-learning and inverse-variance weighting for estimation of
  heterogeneous treatment effects. In ICML, 2024.
Dylan J. Foster and Vasilis Syrgkanis. Orthogonal statistical learning. The Annals of Statistics, 53(3):
  879–908, 2023. ISSN 0090-5364.
Dennis Frauen and Stefan Feuerriegel. Estimating individual treatment effects under unobserved
  confounding using binary instruments. In ICLR, 2023.
Dennis Frauen, Tobias Hatt, Valentyn Melnychuk, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Estimating average causal
  effects from patient trajectories. In AAAI, 2023a.
Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Sharp bounds for generalized causal
  sensitivity analysis. In NeurIPS, 2023b.
Margaret A. Hamburg and Francis S. Collins. The path to personalized medicine. The New England
 Journal of Medicine, 363(4):301–304, 2010.
Konstantin Hess and Stefan Feuerriegel. Stabilized neural prediction of potential outcomes in
  continuous time. In ICLR, 2025.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Konstantin Hess, Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk, and Stefan Feuerriegel. G-transformer for
  conditional average potential outcome estimation over time. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2405.21012,
  2024a.
Konstantin Hess, Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Bayesian neural
  controlled differential equations for treatment effect estimation. In ICLR, 2024b.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997. ISSN 0899-7667.
Fredrik D. Johansson, Uri Shalit, and David Sonntag. Learning representations for counterfactual
  inference. In ICML, 2016.
Alistair E. W. Johnson, Tom J. Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H. Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G. Mark. MIMIC-III,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific Data, 3(1):160035, 2016. ISSN 2052-4463.
Nathan Kallus and Masatoshi Uehara. Intrinsically efficient, stable, and bounded off-policy evaluation
  for reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Nathan Kallus and Masatoshi Uehara. Double reinforcement learning for efficient off-policy evalua-
  tion in markov decision processes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21:1–63, 2020.
Nathan Kallus and Masatoshi Uehara. Efficiently breaking the curse of horizon in off-policy evaluation
  with double reinforcement learning. Operations Research, 70(6):3282–3302, 2022.
Edward H. Kennedy. Towards optimal doubly robust estimation of heterogeneous causal effects.
  Electronic Journal of Statistics, 17(2):3008–3049, 2023.
Edward H. Kennedy, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Larry Wasserman. Minimax rates for heteroge-
  neous causal effect estimation. The Annals of Statistics, 52(2):793–816, 2024. ISSN 0090-5364.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Sören R. Künzel, Jasjeet S. Sekhon, Peter J. Bickel, and Bin Yu. Metalearners for estimating
  heterogeneous treatment effects using machine learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences (PNAS), 116(10):4156–4165, 2019.
Greg Lewis and Vasilis Syrgkanis. Double/debiased machine learning for dynamic treatment effects
  via g-estimation. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Rui Li, Stephanie Hu, Mingyu Lu, Yuria Utsumi, Prithwish Chakraborty, Daby M. Sow, Piyush
  Madan, Jun Li, Mohamed Ghalwash, Zach Shahn, and Li-wei Lehman. G-net: A recurrent network
  approach to g-computation for counterfactual prediction under a dynamic treatment regime. In
  ML4H, 2021.
Bryan Lim, Ahmed M. Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Forecasting treatment responses over time
  using recurrent marginal structural networks. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Causal transformer for estimating
  counterfactual outcomes. In ICML, 2022.
Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Bounds on representation-induced
  confounding bias for treatment effect estimation. In ICLR, 2024.
Pawel Morzywolek, Johan Decruyenaere, and Stijn Vansteelandt. On a general class of orthogonal
  learners for the estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2303.12687,
  2023.
Susan A. Murphy. Optimal dynamic treatment regimes. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
  Series B, 65(2):331–355, 2003. ISSN 1467-9868.
Xinkun Nie and Stefan Wager. Quasi-oracle estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects. Biometrika,
  108(2):299–319, 2021. ISSN 0006-3444.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


James M. Robins. Correcting for non-compliance in randomized trials using structural nested mean
  models. Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods, 23(8):2379–2412, 1994. ISSN
  0361-0926.
James M. Robins. Robust estimation in sequentially ignorable missing data and causal inference
  models. Proceedings of the American Statistical Association on Bayesian Statistical Science, pp.
  6–10, 1999.
James M. Robins and Miguel A. Hernán. Estimation of the causal effects of time-varying exposures.
  Chapman & Hall/CRC handbooks of modern statistical methods. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2009.
  ISBN 9781584886587.
James M. Robins, Miguel A. Hernán, and Babette Brumback. Marginal structural models and causal
  inference in epidemiology. Epidemiology, 11(5):550–560, 2000.
Donald B. Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies.
 Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(5):688–701, 1974. ISSN 0022-0663.
Nabeel Seedat, Fergus Imrie, Alexis Bellot, Zhaozhi Qian, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Continuous-
  time modeling of counterfactual outcomes using neural controlled differential equations. In ICML,
  2022.
Uri Shalit, Fredrik D. Johansson, and David Sontag. Estimating individual treatment effect: General-
  ization bounds and algorithms. In ICML, 2017.
Charles J. Stone. Optimal rates of convergence for nonparametric estimators. Annals of Statistics, 8
  (6), 1980. ISSN 0090-5364.
Masatoshi Uehara, Chengchun Shi, and Nathan Kallus. A review of off-policy evaluation in rein-
 forcement learning. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2212.06355, 2022.
Lars van der Laan, Marco Carone, and Alex Luedtke. Combining t-learning and dr-learning: A
  framework for oracle-efficient estimation of causal contrasts. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2402.01972,
  2024.
Mark J. van der Laan and Susan Gruber. Targeted minimum loss based estimation of causal effects of
 multiple time point interventions. The International Journal of Biostatistics, 8(1), 2012.
Toon Vanderschueren, Alicia Curth, Wouter Verbeke, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Accounting for
  informative sampling when learning to forecast treatment outcomes over time. In ICML, 2023.
Stefan Wager and Susan Athey. Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using
  random forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523):1228–1242, 2018.
Yun Yang and Surya T. Tokdar. Minimax-optimal nonparametric regression in high dimensions. The
  Annals of Statistics, 43(2):652–674, 2015. ISSN 0090-5364.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        C OMPARISON OF META - LEARNERS FOR ESTIMATING HTE S OVER TIME
Comparison of different meta-learners. Table 5 contains an overview of both model-agnostic
and model-based learners for estimating HTEs over time. Aside from our meta-learners, the only
other model-agnostic learner is the R-learner from (Lewis & Syrgkanis, 2021), which leverages a
Neyman-orthogonal loss but imposes parametric assumptions based on structural nested mean models
(SNMMs; see Appendix B) (Robins, 1994). In contrast, our DR- and IVW-DR-learners are the only
nonparametric learners that leverage efficient influence functions.
Comparison with model-based learners. Existing model-based learners for estimating CAPO are
instantiations of either (i) the PI-HA-, (ii) the PI-RA, or (iii) the IPW-learner (see Table 5, right
column). For (i), existing model-based learners that build upon history adjustments are CRN (Bica
et al., 2020a) and the Causal Transformer (CT) (Melnychuk et al., 2022). For (ii), G-Net (Li et al.,
2021) leverages a version of G-computation and can thus be considered an instantiation of the PI-RA
learner. For (iii), RMSNs (Lim et al., 2018) are a model-based learner using inverse-propensity
weighting. To the best of our knowledge, no work has considered doubly robust adjustments for
estimating CAPO or CATE in the time-varying setting, which is a novelty of our work.

Table 5: Overview of meta-learners for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects over (discrete)
time.

 Adjustment type            Meta-learners                         Nonparametric    Unbiased    CAPO     CATE         Runtime∗∗∗∗         IVWs    Instantiations
 History adjustment         PI-HA-learner                               ✓              ✗         ✓       (✓)∗              r               ✗     CRN (Bica et al., 2020a), CT (Melnychuk et al., 2022)
                                                                                                               ∗
                            PI-RA-learner                               ✓              ✓         ✓       (✓)              τ ·r             ✗     G-Net (Li et al., 2021), GT (Hess et al., 2024a)
 Regression adjustment
                            RA-learner                                  ✓              ✓         ✗        ✓           r · (τ + 1)          ✗     —
 Propensity adjustment      IPW-learner                                 ✓              ✓         ✓        ✓              2·r               ✗     RMSNs (Lim et al., 2018)
                            DR-learner                                  ✓              ✓         ✓        ✓           r · (τ + 2)         ✗      —
 Doubly robust adjustment
                            IVW-DR-learner                              ✓              ✓         ✓        ✓           r · (τ + 2)         ✓
 SNMM                         R-learner (Lewis & Syrgkanis, 2021)       (✗)∗∗         (✓)∗∗∗      ✓         ✓     r · (2τ + (τ 2 + τ )/2)  ✗      —
 ∗
   Learners suffer from plug-in bias. ∗∗ Except when τ = 0 and the treatment is binary. ∗∗∗ If parametric assumptions hold. ∗ ∗ ∗∗ r denoting the runtime of nuisance models


                                                                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XTENDED RELATED WORK
B.1    M ODEL - AGNOSTIC METHODS FOR ESTIMATING AVERAGE TREATMENT EFFECTS OVER
       TIME

Model-agnostic estimators for the time-varying setting have been proposed for average treatment
effects. Here, prominent estimators build upon different time-varying adjustment mechanisms,
including regression-adjustment (G-computation) (Robins, 1999), propensity adjustment (Robins
et al., 2000), and doubly robust adjustment (van der Laan & Gruber, 2012; Chernozhukov et al.,
2023). Furthermore, additional estimators have been proposed that impose parametric assumptions
on the data-generating process, including estimators based on marginal structural models (MSMs
(Robins et al., 2000)) and structural nested mean models (SNMMs (Robins, 1994)). We emphasize
that these estimators are for average treatment effects but not heterogeneous treatment effects.

B.2    M ODEL - BASED METHODS FOR CONTINUOUS TIME

Orthogonal to our work is a literature stream that focuses on model-based learners for uncertainty
quantification or for estimating HTEs over continuous time (Hess et al., 2024b; Hess & Feuerriegel,
2025; Seedat et al., 2022; Vanderschueren et al., 2023). However, our paper focuses on discrete time,
and we expect extensions of our meta-learners to continuous time to be an interesting direction for
future research.

B.3    R- LEARNER FOR ESTIMATING HTE S OVER TIME

The R-learner proposed in Lewis & Syrgkanis (2021) is a model-agnostic learner for estimating
HTEs over time. In contrast to our meta-learners, it imposes parametric assumptions on the data-
generating process. More precisely, the R-learner builds upon the structural nested mean model
(SNNM) framework (Robins, 1994), which defines the so-called blip functions

  γℓā,b̄ (h̄t , x̄t:t+ℓ , ā′t:t+ℓ ) = E Yt:t+τ (ā′t:t+ℓ , āt+ℓ+1:t+τ ) − Yt:t+τ (ā′t:t+ℓ−1 , bℓ , āt+ℓ+1:t+τ ) (21)


                                        | H̄t = h̄t , X̄t:t+ℓ = x̄t:t+ℓ , Āt:t+ℓ = ā′t:t+ℓ .

                                                                                                                     (22)
The main assumption is then that the data-generating process admits a linear blip function

                            γℓā,b̄ (h̄t , x̄t:t+ℓ , ā′t:t+ℓ ) = ψℓ (h̄t )ϕā,b̄          ′
                                                                            ℓ (x̄t:t+ℓ , āt:t+ℓ ),                (23)

where ϕā, b̄
       ℓ is known.
R-learner. The R-learner proceeds by estimating the nuisance functions
              qℓ (h̄ℓ ) = E[Yt+τ | H̄ℓ = h̄ℓ ],                                                                    (24)

                          j (X̄t:t+j , Āt:t+j ) − ϕj (X̄t:t+j , (āt:t+j−1 , at+j ))1(j > ℓ), and
                  Qj,ℓ = ϕā,b̄                     ā,b̄
                                                                                                                   (25)
            pāj,ℓ (h̄ℓ ) = E[Qj,ℓ | H̄ℓ = h̄ℓ ].                                                                  (26)

Once initial estimators of the nuisance functions are obtained, the R-learner iteratively minimizes the
loss
                                                                                                                  2 
                                          Xt+τ
                                                 Qj,ℓ − p̂āj,ℓ (H̄ℓ ) ψ̂j (h̄t ) − Qℓ,ℓ − p̂āℓ,ℓ (H̄ℓ ) ψℓ′ (h̄t ) 

ψ̂ℓ = arg min  Ên Yt+τ − q̂ℓ (H̄ℓ ) −
                                                                                                                      
             ′
             ψℓ
                                                  j=ℓ+1

                                                                                                                   (27)
In the original paper (Lewis & Syrgkanis, 2021), the authors consider estimating HTEs under a linear
Markovian assumption, which they show corresponds to setting ϕā,               b̄            ′          ′
                                                                               ℓ (x̄t:t+ℓ , āt:t+ℓ ) = at+ℓ . Then,
they estimate CATE via
                                                   t+τ
                                                   X
                                 τ̂Rā,b̄ (h̄t ) =     ψ̂ℓ (h̄t ) (aℓ − bℓ ) .                                  (28)
                                                         ℓ=t



                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P ROOFS

C.1   I DENTIFIABILITY OF CATE AND CAPO

Lemma 1 (G-formula (Robins, 1999)). Under Assumption 1, both CAPO and CATE are identified
and can be expressed in terms of the observational data distribution.



Proof. Under Assumption 1, we can write the CAPO as

                   E[Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) | H̄t = h̄t ]
             (∗)
             = E[Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) | H̄t = h̄t , At = at ]                                                (29)
            (∗∗)
             = E[E[Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) | H̄t+1 = h̄t+1 ] | H̄t = h̄t , At = at ]                            (30)
              =E[E[Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) | H̄t+1 = h̄t+1 , At:t+1 = at:t+1 ] | H̄t = h̄t , At = at ]          (31)
              =...
              =E[. . . E[E[Yt+τ (āt:t+τ ) | H̄t+τ = h̄t+τ , At:t+τ = at:t+τ ]                          (32)
                      | H̄t+τ −1 = h̄t+τ −1 , At:t+τ −1 = at:t+τ −1 ] | . . . | H̄t = h̄t , At = at ]   (33)
           (∗∗∗)
            = E[. . . E[E[Yt+τ | H̄t+τ = h̄t+τ , At:t+τ = at:t+τ ]                                      (34)
                      | H̄t+τ −1 = h̄t+τ −1 , At:t+τ −1 = at:t+τ −1 ] | . . . | H̄t = h̄t , At = at ]   (35)
               ,                                                                                        (36)

where we used sequential ignorability in (∗), the tower property in (∗∗), and consistency in (∗ ∗ ∗).
The CATE is thus identified as the difference of CAPOs.


C.2   U NBIASEDNESS OF PSEUDO - OUTCOMES

Here, we show the unbiasedness of the pseudo-outcomes that we consider in our main paper when
used as a regression target.
• PI-RA-learner. Follows directly from Appendix C.1.
• RA-learner. It holds that
         h                   i
           ā,b̄
     E YRA       | H̄t = h̄t                                                                            (37)

    =E 1{At = at } µāt+1 H̄t+1 − µb̄t H̄t + 1{At = bt } µāt H̄t − µb̄t+1 H̄t+1

                                                                                                        (38)


          + 1{At ̸= at }1{At ̸= bt } µt h̄t − µt h̄t
                                            ā        b̄

                                                                 H̄t = h̄t                              (39)

    =πt (at | h̄t ) E µāt+1 H̄t+1 | H̄t = h̄t , At = at − µb̄t h̄t

                                                                                                        (40)
                                      h                                     i
     + πt (bt | h̄t ) µāt h̄t − E µb̄t+1 H̄t+1 | H̄t = h̄t , At = bt

                                                                                                        (41)

     + (1 − πt (at | h̄t )πt (bt | h̄t )) µāt h̄t − µb̄t h̄t

                                                                                                        (42)

    =πt (at | h̄t ) µāt h̄t − µb̄t h̄t + πt (bt | h̄t ) µāt h̄t − µb̄t h̄t

                                                                                                        (43)

     + (1 − πt (at | h̄t )πt (bt | h̄t )) µāt h̄t − µb̄t h̄t

                                                                                                        (44)

    =µāt h̄t − µb̄t h̄t .

                                                                                                        (45)


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• IPW-learner. It holds that
        ā
    E YIPW    | H̄t = h̄t                                                                           (46)
        Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
      "t+τ                                   #
   =E                       Yt+τ H̄t = h̄t                                                          (47)
        ℓ=t
             πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
      "       "t+τ                               #                #
   =E . . . E                       Yt+τ H̄t+τ . . . H̄t = h̄t                                      (48)
                ℓ=t
                     πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                 Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }   1{At+τ = at+τ }
      "       "t+τ −1                                                               #                #
   =E . . . E                          E                         Yt+τ H̄t+τ H̄t+τ −1 . . . H̄t = h̄t
                 ℓ=t
                        πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )      πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
                                                                                                    (49)
                 Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
      "       "t+τ −1                                           #            #
                                       µāt+τ H̄t+τ H̄t+τ −1 . . . H̄t = h̄t

   =E . . . E                                                                                       (50)
                 ℓ=t
                        πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
  =···                                                                                               (51)
  =E µāt+1 H̄t+1 | H̄t = h̄t

                                                                                                     (52)
  =µāt h̄t

                                                                                                     (53)
and hence                         h                   i
                                     ā,b̄
                                           | H̄t = h̄t = µāt h̄t − µb̄t h̄t .

                                 E YIPW                                                              (54)

• DR-learner. It holds that
      ā
   E YDR  | H̄t = h̄t                                                                                (55)
                                                       1{Ak = ak } Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                                  " t+τ                                k−1                        #
        ā                         X
                                     µāk H̄k 1 −

 =E YIPW     | H̄t = h̄t + E                                                             H̄t = h̄t (56)
                                k=t
                                                       πk (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )

                                                 1{Ak = ak } k−1     1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                 "      " t+τ                                   Y                        #               #
                          X
   ā                          ā

 =µt h̄t + E . . . E          µk H̄k 1 −                                           H̄t+τ . . . H̄t = h̄t
                          k=t
                                                 πk (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                                                                                                     (57)
                                                   1{Ak = ak } k−1  Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                 "      "t+τ −1                                                               #               #
                           X
   ā                             ā

 =µt h̄t + E . . . E             µk H̄k 1 −                                          H̄t+τ −1 . . . H̄t = h̄t
                           k=t
                                                   πk (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                                                                                                     (58)
                                   1{At = at }

 =µāt h̄t + E µāt H̄t 1 −

                                                     H̄t = h̄t                                       (59)
                                   πt (at | H̄t )
 =µāt h̄t

                                                                                                     (60)
and hence                         h                  i
                                    ā,b̄
                                          | H̄t = h̄t = µāt h̄t − µb̄t h̄t .

                                 E YDR                                                               (61)

C.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
                                                           ā,b̄                   ā
Proof. Without loss of generality, we show the result for YDR    . The result for YDR follows analogously.
By iteratively applying the law of total variance, we obtain
             ā,b̄
       Var(YDR     | H̄t = h̄t )                                                                     (62)
          h                                          i
                    ā,b̄
      = E Var(YDR         | H̄t+τ , At+τ ) H̄t = h̄t                                                 (63)

                        ā,b̄
        + Var E[YDR           | H̄t+τ , At+τ ] H̄t = h̄t                                             (64)
          h                                          i
                    ā,b̄
      = E Var(YDR         | H̄t+τ , At+τ ) H̄t = h̄t                                                 (65)


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



             h                                                            i
                    ā,b̄
         + E Var E[YDR    | H̄t+τ , At+τ ] H̄t+τ −1 , At+τ −1   H̄t = h̄t                                                                 (66)
                 h                                            i
                    ā,b̄
         + Var E E[YDR    | H̄t+τ , At+τ ] H̄t+τ −1 , At+τ −1 H̄t = h̄t                                                                   (67)
     = ...                                                                                                                                (68)
          t+τ
          X            h                                                  i
                                 ā,b̄
     =          E Var E . . . E[YDR    | H̄t+τ , At+τ ] . . . H̄k+1 , Ak+1 H̄k , Ak   H̄t = h̄t                                           (69)
          ℓ=t
                h                                              i
                          ā,b̄
         + Var E . . . E[YDR    | H̄t+τ , At+τ ] . . . H̄t , At H̄t = h̄t .                                                               (70)

For the variance term, we obtain
       h                                                 i
                  ā,b̄
     E . . . E[YDR      | H̄t+τ , At+τ ] . . . H̄t , At                                                                                   (71)

                                                        1{Ak = ak } k−1    1{Aℓ = aℓ }
        "        "            t+τ                                      Y
                      ā,b̄
                              X
                                     ā

  = E . . . E YIPW +               µk H̄k 1 −                                                                                             (72)
                              k=t
                                                        πk (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )

                                  1                    Y 1{Aℓ = bℓ }
         t+τ                                           k−1
                                                                                      #              #
         X                          {A  k =    b k }
             µb̄k H̄k 1 −

      −                                                                  H̄t+τ , At+τ . . . H̄t , At                                      (73)
         k=t
                                  πk (bk | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (bℓ | H̄ℓ )
                

                 Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }   Ā
                t+τ                !

                                       µt+τ H̄t+τ − µāt+τ H̄t+τ
       
   = E . . . E 
                                                                                                                                        (74)
                ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                 |                        {z                      }
                                                             =0

                    1{Aℓ = bℓ }
              t+τ
                                       !
              Y
                                               µĀ             b̄

      −                                         t+τ H̄t+τ   − µt+τ H̄t+τ                                                                  (75)
              ℓ=t
                    πℓ (bℓ | H̄ℓ )
          |                                         {z                                  }
                                                    =0
               Y−1    1{Aℓ = aℓ }                                           Y−1   1{Aℓ = bℓ }
              t+τ
                                            !                              t+τ
                                                                                                    !
                                      µāt+τ H̄t+τ −                             µb̄t+τ H̄t+τ

      +                                                                                                    (76)
            ℓ=t
                    π  (a
                      ℓ ℓ   | H̄ℓ )                       ℓ=t
                                                                 π  (b
                                                                   ℓ ℓ  | H̄ ℓ )
        t+τ −1
                                    1{Ak = ak } k−1      1{Aℓ = aℓ }
         X                                           Y
               µāk H̄k 1 −

      +                                                                                                    (77)
         k=t
                                    π  (a
                                      k k   | H̄k )  ℓ=t
                                                         πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
            −1
                                    1{Ak = bk } k−1      1{Aℓ = bℓ }
        t+τ                                          Y                                      #               #
         X
                  b̄

      −         µk H̄k 1 −                                                H̄t+τ −1 , At+τ −1 . . . H̄t , At
          k=t
                                    πk (bk | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (bℓ | H̄ℓ )
                                                                                                           (78)
               

                Y−1 1{Aℓ = aℓ }   Ā
               t+τ                !

                                      µt+τ −1 H̄t+τ −1 − µāt+τ −1 H̄t+τ −1
      
   = E
      . . . E 
                                                                                                                                         (79)
               ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                |                           {z                               }
                                                                       =0
               Y−1    1{Aℓ = bℓ }
              t+τ
                                            !

                                                    µĀ                 b̄

      −                                              t+τ −1 H̄t+τ −1 − µt+τ −1 H̄t+τ −1                                                   (80)
                ℓ=t
                       πℓ (bℓ | H̄ℓ )
          |                                                 {z                                           }
                                                            =0
               Y−2    1{Aℓ = aℓ }                                                 Y−2       1{Aℓ = bℓ }
              t+τ
                                            !                                    t+τ
                                                                                                             !
                                                µāt+τ −1                                                        µb̄t+τ −1 H̄t+τ −1

      +                                                     H̄t+τ −1 −
                ℓ=t
                       πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )                                             ℓ=t
                                                                                            πℓ (bℓ | H̄ℓ )
                                                                                                                                          (81)
          t+τ −2
                                            1{Ak = ak }                    1{Aℓ = aℓ }
           X                                                       k−1
                                                                   Y
                    µāk H̄k

      +                                1−                                                                                                 (82)
              k=t
                                            πk (ak | H̄k )           ℓ=t
                                                                           πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )


                                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              −2
                                                  1{Ak = bk } k−1 1{Aℓ = bℓ }
          t+τ                                                 Y                                                  #                 #
           X
                       µb̄k H̄k

      −                                     1−                                                 H̄t+τ −2 , At+τ −2 . . . H̄t , At
            k=t
                                                  πk (bk | H̄k )        ℓ=t
                                                                              πℓ (bℓ | H̄ℓ )
                                                                                                                               (83)
  = ...                                                                                                                        (84)
    1{At = at }   Ā                    1{Aℓ = bℓ }   Ā
                    µt H̄t − µāt H̄t −                  µt+1 H̄t − µb̄t H̄t

  =                                                                                                                            (85)
     πt (at | H̄t )                       πℓ (bℓ | H̄ℓ )
    |                                  {z                                     }
                                                                   =0

          µāt             − µb̄t

  +              H̄t      H̄t                                                                                                  (86)
  = µāt              b̄

               H̄t − µt H̄t ,                                                                                                  (87)
which implies

                                   h                                            i
                                             ā,b̄
                              Var E . . . E[YDR    H̄t+τ , At+τ ] . . . H̄t , At H̄t = h̄t                                     (88)

                             = Var µāt H̄t − µb̄t H̄t H̄t = h̄t = 0.

                                                                                                                               (89)

Furthermore,
                              h                                                    i
                                         ā,b̄
                         Var E . . . E[YDR      | H̄t+τ , At+τ ] . . . H̄k+1 , Ak+1 H̄k , Ak                                   (90)
                             
                               X j−1  Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                              k+1
                                                             !
                       (∗)
                                                                µāj H̄j − µāj−1 H̄j−1

                       = Var                                                                                                  (91)
                               j=t    ℓ=t
                                            π    (a
                                               ℓ ℓ   | H̄ℓ )
                                                                                                                  
                                                  1{Aℓ = bℓ }   b̄
                                            j−1
                               k+1
                                                             !
                               X            Y
                                                                 µj H̄j − µb̄j−1 H̄j−1

                           −                                                                  H̄k , Ak                        (92)
                            j=t      ℓ=t
                                           π ℓ (b ℓ | H̄ℓ )

                                         1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                                     k
                                                           !
                                   Y
                                                                µāk+1 H̄k+1 − µāk H̄k

                       = Var                                                                                                   (93)
                                   ℓ=t ℓ ℓ
                                          π (a | H̄ℓ )

                                    1{Aℓ = bℓ }   b̄
                                k
                                                      !                                            !
                              Y                                                b̄

                         −                                  µk+1 H̄k+1 − µk H̄k          H̄k , Ak                              (94)
                              ℓ=t ℓ ℓ
                                     π (b | H̄ℓ )

                                1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                            k
                                                    !
                           Y
                                                      Var µāk+1 H̄k+1 H̄k , Ak

                       =           2 (a | H̄ )
                                                                                                                               (95)
                           ℓ=t ℓ
                                 π      ℓ       ℓ

                              Y 1{Aℓ = bℓ }
                               k
                                                      !

                                                         Var µb̄k+1 H̄k+1 H̄k , Ak

                         +            2
                                                                                                                               (96)
                                    π (b | H̄ℓ )
                              ℓ=t ℓ ℓ

                                     1{Aℓ = aℓ } Y               1{Aℓ = bℓ }
                                 k                           k
                                                                             !
                               Y
                          2
                       =σ                               +                       ,                                              (97)
                               ℓ=t ℓ
                                      π 2 (aℓ | H̄ℓ ) ℓ=t πℓ2 (bℓ | H̄ℓ )
where (∗) follows from the same arguments from Eq. 71 onwards.
Hence,
           ā,b̄
     Var(YDR     | H̄t = h̄t )                                                                                                 (98)
       " t+τ                                                                              #
         X            h                                             i
                               ā,b̄
    =E         Var E . . . E[YDR | H̄t+τ , At+τ ] . . . H̄k+1 , Ak+1 H̄k , Ak   H̄t = h̄t                                      (99)
                 ℓ=t

                         1{Ak = ak }                            1{Ak = bk }
                 " t+τ ℓ                                      ℓ
                                                                                      !                #
                  X Y                                         Y
           2
    =σ E                                                  +                                H̄t = h̄t                          (100)
                   ℓ=t         k=t
                                        πk2 (ak | H̄k )       k=t
                                                                    πk2 (bk | H̄k )


                                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



             h                  i
               ā,b̄
      = σ 2 E VDR    | H̄t = h̄t .                                                                            (101)


C.4     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Before proving Theorem 1, we impose additional assumptions from Kennedy (2023).
Assumption 5 (from (Kennedy, 2023)). Let Ên be a regression estimator for either the response
functions or the pseudo-outcome regressions. Furthermore, we denote Ytar as the target variable and
                                                                                 p
Z as the conditioning variables of the corresponding regression. We assume Ŷtar → Ytar (consistency
of the target estimator) and that any regression estimator Ên satisfies
                 Ên [Ŷtar | Z = z] − Ên [Ytar | Z = z] − Ên [Ŷtar − Ytar | Z = z] p
                            s                                                          →0                     (102)
                                                                           2
                               E Ên [Ytar | Z = z] − E[Ytar | Z = z]

and                                   h                    i   h      i
                                     E Ên [b̂(Z) | Z = z]2 ≲ E b̂(z)2 ,                                      (103)

where b̂(z) = E[Ŷtar − Ytar | Z = z].

Kennedy (2023) showed that these assumptions hold, e.g., for linear smoothers. Assumption 5 implies
the following lemma.
Lemma 2. Under Assumption 5, for any regression estimator Ên , it holds that
                                                                        h     i
            E[(Ên [Ŷtar | Z = z] − E[Ytar | Z = z])2 ] ≲ rPO (n) + E b̂(z)2 .                               (104)

We now proceed with the proof of Theorem 1.

Proof. We prove the rates for each learner separately.
PI-HA-learner. Let us define
     ā,b̄
   τePI-HA (h̄t ) = E Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = āt:t+τ − E Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = b̄t:t+τ ,
                                                                                                   (105)
which is the target estimand of the PI-HA-learner in population. We then can write
         ā,b̄
    E[(τ̂PI-HA    (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ]                                                     (106)
       h                                                                    i
            ā,b̄               ā,b̄              ā,b̄                  2
   = E (τ̂PI-HA (h̄t ) − τePI-HA (h̄t ) + τePI-HA (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))                        (107)
       h                                         i
            ā,b̄               ā,b̄
   ≤ E (τ̂PI-HA     (h̄t ) − τePI-HA     (h̄t ))2 + bias2ā,b̄                                   (108)
       h                                                                                    2i
   ≤ E (E Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = āt:t+τ − Ên Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = āt:t+τ )      (109)
          h                                                                                    i
     + E (E Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = b̄t:t+τ − Ên Yt+τ | H̄t = h̄t , Āt:t+τ = b̄t:t+τ )2 + bias2ā,b̄


                                                                                                              (110)
      ā
   ≲ rPI-HA        b̄
            (n) + rPI-HA (n) + bias2ā,b̄ ,                                                                   (111)
which proves the rate for the PI-HA-learner.
PI-HA-learner. By applying Lemma 2 iteratively, we obtain
    h                          2 i                h                                                  2 i
  E µ̂āt (h̄t ) − µāt (h̄t )     ≲ rµāt (n) + E E µ̂āt+1 (H̄t+1 ) − µāt+1 (H̄t+1 ) | H̄t = h̄t           (112)
                                                  h h                                     2 i             i
                                   ≤ rµāt (n) + E E µ̂āt+1 (H̄t+1 ) − µāt+1 (H̄t+1 )       | H̄t = h̄t     (113)
                                 ≲ ...                                                                        (114)


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        t+τ
                                        X
                                    ≲         rµāℓ (n).                                                                             (115)
                                        ℓ=t

The result for CATE follows by noting that
                                             h                                                               2
        ā,b̄                                                             2 i
   E[(τ̂PI-RA  (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≤ E µ̂āt (h̄t ) − µāt (h̄t )      + E µ̂b̄t (h̄t ) − µb̄t (h̄t )     .                   (116)

RA-learner. We start by deriving a formula for the bias term via

 b̂RA (h̄t ) = πt (at | h̄t ) E µ̂āt+1 H̄t+1 | H̄t = h̄t − µāt h̄t + µb̄t h̄t − µ̂b̄t h̄t

                                                                                                    (117)
                                                                     h                          i
               + πt (bt | h̄t ) µ̂āt h̄t − µāt h̄t + µb̄t h̄t − E µ̂b̄t+1 H̄t+1 | H̄t = h̄t

                                                                                                    (118)

               + 1 − πt (at | h̄t ) − πt (bt | h̄t ) µ̂āt h̄t − µāt h̄t + µb̄t h̄t − µ̂b̄t h̄t . (119)


Hence, we can apply Lemma 2 and obtain
                                                         h             i
        ā,b̄                               ā,b̄
   E[(τ̂RA    (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≲ rPO    (n) + E b̂RA (h̄t )2                                                               (120)
                                                                            t+τ                    t+τ
                                                                                                                       !
                                       ā,b̄
                                                                            X                      X
                                    ≲ rPO    (n) + πt2 (at | h̄t )                  rµāℓ (n) +           rµb̄ ℓ (n)                 (121)
                                                                           ℓ=t+1                    ℓ=t
                                                              t+τ                   t+τ
                                                                                                     !
                                                              X                     X
                                        + πt2 (bt | h̄t )             rµāℓ (n) +           rµb̄ ℓ (n)                               (122)
                                                              ℓ=t                   ℓ=t+1
                                                                                              t+τ                      t+τ
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                              2               X                        X
                                        + 1 − πt (at | h̄t ) − πt (bt | h̄t )                       rµāℓ (n) +              rµb̄ ℓ (n)
                                                                                              ℓ=t                  ℓ=t+1
                                                                                                                                     (123)
                                                       t+τ
                                                       X                     t+τ
                                                                             X
                                       ā,b̄
                                    ≲ rPO    (n) +           rµāℓ (n) +             rµb̄ ℓ (n).                                     (124)
                                                       ℓ=t                 ℓ=t+1


IPW learner. The bias term for the IPW-learner can be written as
 b̂āIPW (h̄t )                                                                                                                      (125)
           Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } t+τ          Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
       " t+τ                                              !                #
=E                                 −                        Yt+τ H̄t = h̄t                                                           (126)
           ℓ=t
                 π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )      ℓ=t
                                           πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                     Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } t+τ        Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
       "        " t+τ                                             !           #                #
= E ...E                                   −                        Yt+τ H̄t+τ . . . H̄t = h̄t                                       (127)
                     ℓ=t
                          π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )     ℓ=t
                                                   πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                      Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
       "        " t+τ −1
= E ...E                                                                                                                             (128)
                      ℓ=t
                              π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ ) π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
         Y−1 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
        t+τ
                                                          !                        #             #
                                                              ā

   −                                                        µt+τ H̄t+τ H̄t+τ −1 . . . H̄t = h̄t                                      (129)
         ℓ=t
                 πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ ) πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
                      Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
       "        " t+τ −1
= E ...E                                                                                                                             (130)
                      ℓ=t
                              π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ ) π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
        Y−1
       t+τ
               1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )                   Y−1
                                                                 t+τ
                                                                          1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
   −                                                         +                                                                       (131)
        ℓ=t
                π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ ) πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )              ℓ=t
                                                                          π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ ) πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
         Y−1    1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
        t+τ
                                                             !                               #                 #
                                                                 µāt+τ

    −                                                                     H̄t+τ H̄t+τ −1 . . . H̄t = h̄t                             (132)
         ℓ=t
                πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ ) πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )


                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ ) − π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
      "t+τ −1                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                 µāt+τ

=E                                                                                                        H̄t+τ         H̄t = h̄t
         ℓ=t
                 π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )                   π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
                                                                                                                                    (133)
                        Y−1    1{Aℓ = aℓ }              Y−1       1{Aℓ = aℓ }
        "         "    t+τ                             t+τ
                                                                                    !                                     #                 #
                                                                                        µāt+τ

   + E ...E                                        −                                             H̄t+τ        H̄t+τ −1 . . . H̄t = h̄t
                        ℓ=t
                               π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )            ℓ=t
                                                                  πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                                                                                                                                    (134)
= ...                                                                                                                               (135)
         Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )
  t+τ
        "k−1                                                              #
  X
                                                        µāk H̄k H̄t = h̄t .

=     E                                                                                                                             (136)
  k=t    ℓ=t
             π̂ ℓ (aℓ | H̄ ℓ ) π̂ k (a k | H̄k )

Hence, Lemma 2 yields
                                 " t+τ                                                    #
          h               i (∗)   X h                                                   i
                                                                            2
         E b̂āIPW (h̄t )2 ≤ C E

                                       E πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )     H̄t = h̄t                                             (137)
                                               k=t
                                             t+τ   h      h
                                   (∗∗)      X                                                         2 i                    i
                                   = C             E E          πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )               H̄t = h̄t            (138)
                                             k=t
                                       t+τ
                                       X
                                   ≲         rπāℓ (n),                                                                             (139)
                                       ℓ=t
where (∗) follows from the boundedness assumptions (2) and (∗∗) from applying Fubini’s theorem.
We obtain the rate for CATE via
                                                            h               i   h                i
           ā,b̄                               ā,b̄
     E[(τ̂IPW    (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≲ rPO    (n) + E b̂āIPW (h̄t )2 + E b̂b̄IPW (h̄t )2   (140)
                                                 ā,b̄
                                              ≲ rPO    (n) +          max          rπāℓ (n) +       max          rπb̄ ℓ (n).       (141)
                                                                  ℓ∈{t,...,t+τ }                 ℓ∈{t,...,t+τ }

DR learner. We derive the bias term for the DR-learner via
     b̂āDR (h̄t )                                                                                                                  (142)
                             1{Aℓ = aℓ }              1{Aℓ = aℓ }
          "        "   t+τ
                                                                        !
                       Y
   = E ...E                                        −                     Yt+τ                                                       (143)
                         ℓ=t
                              π̂  (a
                                 ℓ ℓ    |  H̄ℓ )       πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
         t+τ
                                      1{Ak = ak } k−1             1{Aℓ = aℓ }
         X                                                 Y
              µ̂āk H̄k 1 −

      +                                                                                                                             (144)
         k=t
                                      π̂ k (a k  | H̄ k )   ℓ=t
                                                                  π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )

                                       1{Ak = ak } k−1            1{Aℓ = aℓ }
         t+τ                                               Y                                #               #
         X
                  ā

       −      µk H̄k 1 −                                                             H̄t+τ . . . H̄t = h̄t                          (145)
         k=t
                                       πk (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                      X Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )
          "          " t+τ k−1
   (∗)
                                                                                          µāk H̄k

   = E ...E                                                                                                                         (146)
                       k=t ℓ=t
                                   π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )             π̂k (ak | H̄k )
         t+τ
                                      1{Ak = ak } k−1       Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
         X
              µ̂āk H̄k 1 −

      +                                                                                                                             (147)
         k=t
                                      π̂k (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )

                                       1{Ak = ak } k−1            1{Aℓ = aℓ }
         t+τ                                               Y                                #               #
         X
                  ā

       −      µk H̄k 1 −                                                             H̄t+τ . . . H̄t = h̄t                          (148)
         k=t
                                       πk (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                        Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ ) − π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
        "           "t+τ −1
                                                                                                     µāt+τ H̄t+τ

   = E ...E                                                                                                                         (149)
                        ℓ=t
                               π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )                   π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )

                                       πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
                                                                    t+τY−1 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
           ā

      + µ̂t+τ H̄t+τ 1 −                                                                                                             (150)
                                       π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )           ℓ=t
                                                                              π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )


                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                                                 

                                                                            Y−1      1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                                                                           t+τ                                                    
                                           πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
       − µāt+τ
                                                                                                                                  
                      H̄t+τ             1−                                                              H̄t+τ −1  . . . H̄t = h̄t 
                                                                                                                 
                                           πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )               ℓ=t
                                                                                     πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )              
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
            |                                       {z                                             }
                                                           =0
                                                                                                                                (151)
                            X Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )
                "         "t+τ −1 k−1
                                                                                                       µāk H̄k

      + E ...E                                                                                                                  (152)
                             k=t         ℓ=t
                                                 π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )           π̂k (ak | H̄k )
           t+τ −1
                                                 1{Ak = ak } k−1 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
            X                                                Y
                      µ̂āk H̄k

      +                                     1−                                                                                  (153)
            k=t
                                                 π̂k (ak | H̄k )     ℓ=t
                                                                           π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
                −1
                                                 1{Ak = ak } k−1 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
            t+τ                                              Y                                           #                #
             X
                      µāk

       −                     H̄k            1−                                                H̄t+τ −1 . . . H̄t = h̄t          (154)
                k=t
                                                  πk (ak | H̄k )     ℓ=t
                                                                           πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
            Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πt+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ ) − π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
          "t+τ −1
   =E                                                                                                                           (155)
                ℓ=t
                     π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )                π̂t+τ (at+τ | H̄t+τ )
         ā                     ā

       µ̂t+τ H̄t+τ − µt+τ H̄t+τ                    H̄t = h̄t                                                                    (156)
                          X Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )
            "         "t+τ −1 k−1
                                                                                     µāk H̄k

      + E ...E                                                                                                                  (157)
                          k=t ℓ=t
                                     π̂  (a
                                        ℓ ℓ  | H̄ ℓ )          π̂  (a
                                                                  k k | H̄ k )
         t+τ −1
                                      1{Ak = ak } Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ }
                                                          k−1
           X
                 µ̂āk H̄k 1 −

      +                                                                                                                         (158)
           k=t
                                      π̂k (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
              −1
                                      1{Ak = ak } k−1          1{Aℓ = aℓ }
         t+τ                                             Y                               #              #
            X
                     ā

      −          µk H̄k 1 −                                                    H̄t+τ −1 . . . H̄t = h̄t                         (159)
            k=t
                                      πk (ak | H̄k ) ℓ=t πℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )
   = ...                                                                                      (160)
             Y 1{Aℓ = aℓ } πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )
     t+τ
           " k−1
                                                                                             #
     X
                                                            µ̂āk H̄k − µāk H̄k

   =     E                                                                          H̄t = h̄t ,
     k=t     ℓ=t
                 π̂ℓ (aℓ | H̄ℓ )   π̂k (ak | H̄k )
                                                                                              (161)
where (∗) follows from the bias formula of the IPW-learner.
Hence,
         h              i
       E b̂āDR (h̄t )2                                                                                                         (162)
              " t+τ                                                                         #
     (∗)        X h                                      2 ā                 2           i
                                                                      ā

     ≤ CE             E πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )   µ̂k H̄k − µk H̄k     H̄t = h̄t                                       (163)
                      k=t
                    t+τ
                    X h         h
     (∗∗)                                                              2 i h ā                  2 i           i
                                                                          E µ̂k H̄k − µāk H̄k

      = C                 E E         πk (ak | H̄k ) − π̂k (ak | H̄k )                               H̄t = h̄t
                    k=t
                                                                                                                                (164)
         t+τ                  t+τ
                                                   !
         X                    X
     ≲           rπāℓ (n)              rµāk (n) ,                                                                             (165)
          ℓ=t                 k=ℓ

where (∗) follows from the boundedness assumption (2) and (∗∗) follows from Fubini’s theorem and
the sample splitting assumption (4). For CATE, we obtain the corresponding rate via
                                                          h              i      h             i
        ā,b̄                               ā,b̄
   E[(τ̂DR    (h̄t ) − τā,b̄ (h̄t ))2 ] ≲ rPO    (n) + E b̂āDR (h̄t )2 + E b̂b̄DR (h̄t )2                          (166)
                                                        t+τ              t+τ                        t+τ
                                                                                                                  !
                                            ā,b̄
                                                        X                X                          X
                                         ≲ rPO    (n) +        rπāℓ (n)     rµāk (n) + rπb̄ ℓ (n)     rµb̄ k (n) . (167)
                                                                   ℓ=t              k=ℓ                       k=ℓ


                                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     M ATHEMATICAL DETAILS REGARDING A SSUMPTION 3
In this section, we provide background on the formal definitions of the convergence rates in Assump-
tion 3. We follow Stone (1980). Let θ be a parameter and T (θ) some target functional that we want
to estimate.
Definition 1. A sequence of estimators T̂n (θ) of a functional T (θ) converges with (achievable) rate
rT (n) if
                       lim lim inf sup Pθ (T̂n (θ) − T (θ)| > crθ (n)) = 0.                    (168)
                         c→0   n∈N   θ∈Θ

Definition 2. A rate rT (n) is called an upper bound to the rate of convergence if for all estimators
T̂n (θ) it holds for all c > 0 that
                          lim inf sup Pθ (|T̂n (θ) − T (θ)|| > crθ (n)) > 0                    (169)
                            n∈N   θ∈Θ

and
                         lim lim inf sup Pθ (T̂n (θ) − T (θ)| > crθ (n)) = 1.                  (170)
                         c→0   n∈N   θ∈Θ

rT (n) is called optimal if it is both achievable and an upper bound.

Optimal rates are known in a variety of settings and depend on the specific assumption of the
underlying function class. In the following, we provide two examples of optimal rates that could be
used in our Theorem 1 to obtain explicit rates if we impose the corresponding assumptions on our
nuisance functions and second-stage regression functions (similar as in, e.g., Curth & van der Schaar
(2021); Kennedy (2023)).
Smoothness assumptions: Stone (1980) showed that for a nonparametric regression problem with an
                                                                     2η
η-smooth regression function, the optimal rate of convergence is n− 2η+p , where p is the dimension
of the covariate space.
Sparsity assumptions: We say that a function f (x) is k-sparse, if it is linear in x ∈ Rp and it only
depends on k < min{n, p} predictors. (Yang & Tokdar, 2015) showed, that in this case the optimal
rate of the regression problem is given by k log(p)
                                               n    . The linearity assumption can be relaxed to an
additive structural assumption. Sparsity assumptions are often imposed in high-dimensional settings
where n < p.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E        I MPLEMENTATION AND HYPERPARAMETER DETAILS
General implementation of nuisance and second-stage regressions: We start by noting that each
nuisance and second-stage estimator can be written as a function f : H → R that uses the history
H̄t to predict a κ-step ahead target Yet+κ . For example, for the PI-HA-learner, we set Yet+τ = Yt+τ .
We parametrize each learner via fθ (h̄t ) = gη (Φν (h̄t )), where θ = (η, ν) are learnable parameters,
Φν : H → Rp is a parametrized representation function, and gη : Rp → R is a parametrized output
function. Finally, we learn the propensity scores πℓ (aℓ | ·) in a joint architecture, while using separate
models for the response functions µāℓ (·) (as they require nested regressions).
Transformer architecture. We build on an encoder transformer as in (Ashish Vaswani et al., 2017).
Each transformer consists of a single transformer block and employs a causal mask to avoid look-
ahead bias. First, the input is passed through a linear input layer. In order to ensure that the sequence
order is preserved, we apply a non-trainable positional encoding. Then, the history is passed through
the transformer blocks. Each block consists of (i) a self-attention mechanism with three attention
heads and hidden state dimension dmodel = 30, (ii) and a feed-forward network with hidden layer size
dff = 20. Both the (i) self-attention mechanism and (ii) the feed-forward network employ residual
connections, which are followed by dropout layers with dropout probabilities p = 0.1, respectively.
For regularization, we apply post-normalization as in (Ashish Vaswani et al., 2017), that is, layer
normalization after each residual connection. Finally, we send the learned representation through a
feed-forward neural network with one hidden layer of size d′ff = 20, ReLU nonlinearities, and with
linear or softmax activation for regression and classification tasks, respectively.
Training:           We       perform    training    by     minimizing      the   loss    L(θ)        =
Pn PT (i) −κ wt(i)   (i)                          2
                                            (i)              (i)
                               ye   − fθ h̄t        where wt are either observations of the sta-
   i=1    t=1      (T (i) −κ) t+τ
                                                        (i)
bilized inverse-variance weights from Eq. (20) or wt = 1/n for all i and t. If the target Yet+τ is
discrete (i.e., for learning propensity scores), we use a cross-entropy instead of mean squared error.
For nuisance estimators which additionally condition on treatments (e.g., history adjustments or
response functions), we split the data and fit the estimator on the part corresponding to the treatment
intervention (as done by the T-learner (Curth et al., 2020) in the static setting). Note that, in our
loss, we not only average over samples but also over time steps. This is standard in the time-varying
setting and increases the effective sample size by leveraging the time dimension (Lim et al., 2018;
Bica et al., 2020a).
Hyperparameters. To ensure a fair comparison, we choose the same hyperparameters (e.g., dimen-
sions, learning rate) for all nuisance estimators and meta-learners. We employ additional weight
decay for the two-stage learners to avoid overfitting during the pseudo-outcome regression (as the
CATE is of simpler structure than the nuisance parameters). This is consistent with the literature on
meta-learners for CATE estimation (Curth et al., 2020). For reproducibility purposes, we report all
hyperparameters as .yaml files.3
Runtime. For each transformer-based learner, training took approximately 90 seconds using n =
5000 samples and a standard computer with AMD Ryzen 7 Pro CPU and 32GB of RAM.


    3
        Code is available at https://github.com/DennisFrauen/CATEMetaLearnersTime.


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    R EMARKS ON BALANCED REPRESENTATIONS
Prior works CAPO/ CATE estimation propose to learn balanced representations that are non-predictive
of the treatment (Bica et al., 2020b; Melnychuk et al., 2022; Seedat et al., 2022). The idea is to mimic
randomized clinical trials and reduce finite-sample error due to estimation variance (Shalit et al.,
2017). However, for time-varying treatment effects, this approach has several drawbacks:

      1. Learning guarantees only exist in static (i.e., non-time-varying) settings (Shalit et al., 2017).
         Thus, balanced representations do not resolve bias due to time-varying confounders. In
         particular, all mentioned works (Bica et al., 2020b; Melnychuk et al., 2022; Seedat et al.,
         2022) can be interpreted as PI-HA-learners with an additional balancing loss component. As
         we have shown, special adjustment methods are necessary to remove bias from time-varying
         confounders, as done by the PI-RA, RA-, IPW-, DR-, and IPW-DR-learner.
      2. Even in static settings, methods based on balanced representations impose invertibility
         assumptions on the learned representations (Shalit et al., 2017). This is often unrealistic
         in time-varying settings, where representations not only incorporate information about the
         current confounders but also about the full patient history.
      3. Because invertibility is difficult to ensure, balanced representations may increase bias (a
         phenomenon called representation-induced confounding (Melnychuk et al., 2024). We refer
         to Curth et al. (2021) and Melnychuk et al. (2024) for a detailed discussion on this issue.
         Again, this is particularly detrimental in time-varying settings.

For the above reasons, we decided not to incorporate balanced representations into our model instan-
tiations when running our experiments. This is consistent with previous works in the literature (Curth
et al., 2021; Vanderschueren et al., 2023). Nevertheless, we emphasize that balanced representations
can be easily integrated into our meta-learners.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    D ETAILS REGARDING EXPERIMENTS ON SIMULATED DATA
Data-generating process. Our general data-generating process for simulating datasets is as follows:
we start by simulating an initial confounder X1 ∼ N (0, 1) from a standard normal distribution. For
the following time steps t ∈ {2, . . . , 5}, we simulate time-varying confounders via
                                 Xt = fx (Yt−1 , At−1 , H̄t−1 ) + εx ,                           (171)
for some function fx and where εx ∼ N (0, 0.5). Then, we simulate binary, time-varying treatments
via
                       At = x ∼ Bernoulli (pt ) with pt = σ(fa (H̄t ))                      (172)
for some function fa and where σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function. Finally, we simulate time-varying,
continuous outcomes via
                                      Y = fy (At , H̄t ) + εy ,                               (173)
where εy ∼ N (0, 0.3).
• Dataset D1 . For D1 , we set the confounding function to fx (Yt−1 , At−1 , H̄t−1 ) = 0.5Xt−1 , the
treatment assignment function to fa (H̄t ) = 4 cos(0.5Xt − 0.5(At−1 − 0.5)), and the outcome
assignment function to fy (At , H̄t ) = cos(Xt ) + 0.5(At − 0.5). We sample a training dataset of size
ntrain = 5000 and a test dataset of size ntest = 1000.
• Dataset D2 . For D2 , we set the confounding function to fx (Yt−1 , At−1 , H̄t−1 ) = 0.5Xt−1 , the
treatment assignment function to fa (H̄t ) = 0.5Xt − 0.5(At−1 − 0.5), and the outcome assignment
function to fy (At , H̄t ) = cos(5Xt ) + 0.5(At − 0.5). We sample a training dataset of size ntrain =
10000 and a test dataset of size ntest = 1000.
• Dataset D3 . For D3 , we set the confounding function to fx (Yt−1 , At−1 , H̄t−1 ) = 0.5Xt−1 , the
treatment assignment function to fa (H̄t ) = γ(0.5Xt − 0.5(At−1 − 0.5)), where γ is a parameter
controlling the overlap, and the outcome assignment function to fy (At , H̄t ) = cos(Xt ) + 0.5(At −
0.5). We sample a training dataset of size ntrain = 5000 and a test dataset of size ntest = 1000.
Interventions. For D1 and D2 we set τ ∈ {0, 1, 2} and choose the corresponding treatment
interventions aτ and bτ as follows: a0 = 1, a1 = (0, 1), a2 = (0, 0, 1), b0 = 0, b1 = (1, 0), and
b2 = (1, 0, 0). Hence, the corresponding CATE measures the effect of intervening at the last time step
as compared to intervening at the first time step. For D2 , we set τ = 1, a1 = (0, 1), and b1 = (1, 0).


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS USING LSTM- BASED MODEL ARCHITECTURES
Our meta-learners are model agnostic and can thus be instantiated with any machine learning model.
Here, we perform additional experiments for an instantiation using LSTM networks (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997). The results are shown in Tables 6 and 7. The results remain largely consistent
with the ones from our transformer-based instantiations.
                                    Table 6: Results for D1 .

                                         τ =0          τ =1           τ =2
                  PI-HA-learner      1.99 ± 0.15 8.37 ± 0.34 8.83 ± 0.44
                  PI-RA-learner      2.00 ± 0.16 5.94 ± 0.21 3.58 ± 0.35
                  RA-learner         0.05 ± 0.04 0.13 ± 0.10 0.68 ± 0.42
                  IPW-learner        0.10 ± 0.06 0.20 ± 0.11 0.32 ± 0.16
                  DR-learner         0.09 ± 0.04 0.17 ± 0.13 0.35 ± 0.21
                  IVW-DR-learner 0.05 ± 0.02 0.17 ± 0.11 0.66 ± 0.31
                  Results averaged over 5 random seeds. Best learner in bold.

                                    Table 7: Results for D2 .

                                       τ =0            τ =1           τ =2
                 PI-HA-learner      3.23 ± 0.61 14.89 ± 1.92 19.43 ± 2.25
                 PI-RA-learner      2.83 ± 0.20 6.53 ± 0.43        7.42 ± 0.64
                 RA-learner         0.20 ± 0.18 1.07 ± 0.64        4.94 ± 1.03
                 IPW-learner        0.21 ± 0.16 0.80 ± 0.61        6.96 ± 2.64
                 DR-learner         0.20 ± 0.13 0.72 ± 0.44        7.33 ± 2.00
                 IVW-DR-learner 0.13 ± 0.11 0.95 ± 0.46            4.33 ± 1.27
                 Results averaged over 5 random seeds. Best learner in bold.


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS USING REAL - WORLD DATA
We provide an additional exemplary application of our meta-learners for a specific patient from
the MIMIC data who was never treated (Fig. 4). The counterfactual outcomes predicted by the
meta-learners for t ≥ 6 indicate that providing the patient with ventilation would have decreased their
expected blood pressure for future time steps. While evaluating the best counterfactual trajectories
is not possible on real-world data, the results may indicate that PIHA and PIRA overestimate the
treatment effect while IPW and DR underestimate the effect. In contrast, our IVW-DR-learner
provides a balanced trajectory.

                                                                                        0HWKRG
                                                                                           )DFWXDOV
                                                                                           3,+$
                                                                                           3,5$
                                                                                        ,3:
                                                                                           '5
                                                                                           ,9:'5


               9DOXHV


                                                                t

Figure 4: Results for real-world medical data. Blood pressure predictions of meta-learners for a
single patient that was never treated.


                                                           30
