Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ITIGATING I NFORMATION L OSS IN T REE -BASED R E -
INFORCEMENT L EARNING VIA D IRECT O PTIMIZATION

     Sascha Marton1∗ Tim Grams2∗ Florian Vogt1                                                                 Stefan Lüdtke3
     Christian Bartelt2 Heiner Stuckenschmidt1
     1
      University of Mannheim 2 Technical University of Clausthal 3 University of Rostock
     sascha.marton@uni-mannheim.de              tim.nico.grams@tu-clausthal.de



                                                                                   A BSTRACT

                    Reinforcement learning (RL) has seen significant success across various domains,
                    but its adoption is often limited by the black-box nature of neural network poli-
                    cies, making them difficult to interpret. In contrast, symbolic policies allow repre-
                    senting decision-making strategies in a compact and interpretable way. However,
                    learning symbolic policies directly within on-policy methods remains challenging.
                    In this paper, we introduce SYMPOL, a novel method for SYMbolic tree-based
                    on-POLicy RL. SYMPOL employs a tree-based model integrated with a policy
                    gradient method, enabling the agent to learn and adapt its actions while maintain-
                    ing a high level of interpretability. We evaluate SYMPOL on a set of benchmark
                    RL tasks, demonstrating its superiority over alternative tree-based RL approaches
                    in terms of performance and interpretability. Unlike existing methods, it enables
                    gradient-based, end-to-end learning of interpretable, axis-aligned decision trees
                    within standard on-policy RL algorithms. Therefore, SYMPOL can become the
                    foundation for a new class of interpretable RL based on decision trees. Our imple-
                    mentation is available under: https://github.com/s-marton/sympol


         −200                                                            −200                                                        −200

         −400                                                            −400                                                        −400

         −600                                                            −600                                                        −600
Reward


                                                                Reward


                                                                                                                            Reward


         −800                                                            −800                                                        −800

         −1000                                                           −1000                                                       −1000

         −1200                                                           −1200                                                       −1200

         −1400         SYMPOL Train          SYMPOL Test                 −1400            MLP Train       SA-DT Test                 −1400              SDT Train       D-SDT Test

                    200k     400k     600k        800k     1M                      200k       400k     600k     800k   1M                        200k       400k     600k     800k   1M
                            Global Timestep                                                  Global Timestep                                               Global Timestep



                  (a) SYMPOL (ours)                                              (b) State-Action DT                                         (c) Discretized Soft DT

Figure 1: Information Loss in Tree-Based Reinforcement Learning on Pendulum. Existing
methods for symbolic, tree-based RL (Figure 1b and 1c) suffer from severe information loss when
converting the differentiable policy used for training (e.g., the MLP for SA-DT) into the symbolic
policy used for interpretation (i.e., the DT). Using SYMPOL (Figure 1a), we can directly optimize
the symbolic policy with PPO and therefore have no information loss during the application.


1                I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning lacks transparency. Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remark-
able success in solving complex sequential decision-making problems, ranging from robotics and
autonomous systems to game playing and recommendation systems. However, the policies learned
by traditional RL algorithms, represented by Neural Networks (NNs), often lack interpretability and
transparency, making them difficult to understand, trust, and deploy in safety-critical or high-stakes
scenarios (Landajuela et al., 2021).
           ∗
               Equal Contribution


                                                                                               1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Symbolic policies increase trust. Symbolic policies, on the other hand, offer a promising alterna-
tive by representing decision-making strategies in terms of RL policies as compact and interpretable
structures (Guo et al., 2024). These symbolic representations do not only facilitate human under-
standing and analysis but also ensure predictable and explainable behavior, which is crucial for
building trust and enabling effective human-AI collaboration. Moreover, the deployment of sym-
bolic policies in safety-critical systems, such as autonomous vehicles or industrial robots, could
significantly improve their reliability and trustworthiness. By providing human operators with a
clear understanding of the decision-making process, symbolic policies can facilitate effective moni-
toring, intervention, and debugging, ultimately enhancing the safety and robustness of these systems.
In this context, decision trees (DTs) are particularly effective as symbolic policies for RL, as their
hierarchical structure provides natural interpretability.
Existing challenges. Despite these promising prospects, the field of symbolic RL faces several
challenges. One main reason is given by the fact that many symbolic models, like DTs, are non-
differentiable and cannot be integrated in existing RL frameworks. Therefore, traditional methods
for learning symbolic policies often rely on custom and complex training procedures (Costa et al.,
2024; Vos & Verwer, 2023; Kanamori et al., 2022), limiting their applicability and scalability. Al-
ternative methods involve pre-trained NN policies combined with some post-processing to obtain
an interpretable model (Silva et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019; 2023; Bastani et al., 2018). However,
post-processing introduces a mismatch between the optimized policy and the model obtained for
interpretation, which can lead to loss of crucial information, as we show in Figure 1.
Contribution. To mitigate the impact of information loss, a direct optimization of the policy is
crucial. Existing methods that employ a direct optimization of a tree-based policy, such as those
described by Silva et al. (2020) learn differentiable, soft decision trees which do not provide a high
level of interpretability. To obtain interpretable, axis-aligned DTs, these methods require post-hoc
distillation or discretization and therefore suffer from information loss (see Figure 1). In this paper,
we introduce SYMPOL, SYMbolic tree-based on-POLicy RL, a novel method emplaying a direct
optimization axis-aligned DT policies end-to-end. Our contributions are as follows:

       • We integrate GradTree (Marton et al., 2024a) into existing RL frameworks via a separate
         actor-critic architecture to directly optimize DT policies and extend it to continuous action
         spaces (Section 4.1).
       • We propose a dynamic rollout buffer to enhance exploration stability and a dynamic batch
         size through gradient accumulation to improve gradient stability (Section 4.2) to mitigate
         the instability of DT training in dynamic environments.
       • We propose using weight decay on a subset of parameters to support a dynamic adjustment
         of the model parameters when optimizing DTs with gradient descent (Section 4.1).

As a result, SYMPOL does not depend on pre-trained NN policies, complex search procedures, or
post-processing steps, but can be seamlessly integrated into existing RL algorithms (Section 3).
Results. Through extensive experiments on benchmark RL environments, we demonstrate that
SYMPOL does not suffer from information loss and outperforms existing tree-based RL approaches
in terms of interpretability and performance (Section 5.2), providing human-understandable expla-
nations. In most environments, SYMPOL’s performance is comparable to full-complexity models,
while in categorical environments, it even surpasses them. Furthermore, we provide a case study
(Section 6) to show how interpretable policies help in detecting misbehavior and misgeneralization
which might remain unnoticed with commonly used black-box policies.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Recently, the integration of symbolic methods into RL has gained significant attention. Symbolic
RL does cover different approaches including program synthesis (Trivedi et al., 2021; Penkov &
Ramamoorthy, 2019; Verma et al., 2018), concept bottleneck models (Ye et al., 2024), piecewise
linear networks (Wabartha & Pineau, 2024) and mathematical expressions (Landajuela et al., 2021;
Guo et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024; Kamienny et al., 2022). Another line of work aims to synthesize
symbolic policies using logical rules, leveraging for instance differentiable inductive logic program-
ming for gradient-based optimization (Delfosse et al., 2024b; Jiang & Luo, 2019; Cao et al., 2022).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In contrast to first-order rules, DTs offer greater flexibility by not only combining atomic conditions
but also comparing features against thresholds — a critical capability for handling continuous ob-
servation spaces. Furthermore, trees have also been in used in other agentic components than the
policy, such as reward functions (Milani et al., 2022; Kalra & Brown, 2023; 2022). In this paper,
we focus exclusively on tree-based methods for symbolic RL. Similarly, ensemble methods (Fuhrer
et al., 2024; Min & Elliott, 2022) have been proposed. However, policies consisting of hundreds of
trees and nodes lack interpretability and therefore are out of scope for this paper. Several approaches
have been proposed to leverage the strengths of interpretable, tree-based representations within RL
frameworks, each approach comes with its own critical limitations. We summarize existing methods
into three streams of work:
(1) Post-processing. One line learns full-complexity policies first and then performs some kind
of post-processing for interpretability. One prominent example is the VIPER algorithm (Bastani
et al., 2018) where a NN policy is learned before distilling a DT from the policy. However, dis-
tillation methods often suffer from significant performance mismatches between the training and
evaluation policies (Figure 1b). To mitigate this mismatch, existing methods often learn large DTs
(VIPER learns DTs with 1,000 nodes) and therefore aim for systematic verification rather than in-
terpretability. In contrast, SYMPOL is able to learn small, interpretable DTs (average of only 50
nodes) without information loss. Following VIPER, various authors proposed similar distillation
methods (Li et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2019; 2023; Jhunjhunwala et al., 2020). Furthermore, Kohler
et al. (2024) propose a novel method that distills interpretable and editable programmatic tree poli-
cies. In contrast to SYMPOL, the extracted trees are not considered axis-aligned, as they allow for
linear combinations and multiple features within the internal nodes.
(2) Custom optimization.          Methods involving custom, tree-specific optimization techniques
and/or objectives (Ernst et al., 2005; Roth et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2015; Kanamori et al., 2022)
are generally more time-consuming and less flexible. As a result, their policy models cannot be
easily integrated into existing learning RL frameworks. Examples are evolutionary methods (Costa
et al., 2024; Custode & Iacca, 2023) and linear integer programming (Vos & Verwer, 2023). Topin
et al. (2021) propose Iterative Bounding Markov Decision Process (IBMDP) that allow learning
DT policies through a masking procedure and modified value updates by using arbitrary function
approximators. However, using IBMDP, the learning problem becomes more complex compared
to the base MDP, which can result in poor scalability and limits the applicability to very simple
tasks (Milani et al., 2022; Kohler et al., 2024). In contrast, SYMPOL optimizes a DT policy directly
on the base MDP, avoiding these limitations.
(3) Soft Decision Trees (SDTs). Methods optimizing SDTs (Silva et al., 2020; Silva & Gom-
bolay, 2021; Coppens et al., 2019; Tambwekar et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022; Farquhar et al., 2017)
are difficult to interpret since they usually involve multiple features simultaneously at each decision
node, creating complex, multidimensional splits rather than straightforward, single-feature thresh-
olds. Nevertheless, the trees are usually not easily interpretable and techniques such as discretizing
the learned trees into more interpretable representations are applied (Silva et al., 2020), occasionally
resulting in high performance mismatches (Figure 1c). In contrast, SYMPOL directly optimizes
hard, axis-aligned DTs and therefore does not exhibit a performance loss (Figure 1a).
Distinction of SYMPOL from Differentiable and Soft Decision Trees. In existing work like
Silva et al. (2020), differentiable decision trees typically correspond to SDTs, achieving differen-
tiability by relaxing discrete decisions in terms of feature selection at each internal node and path
selection. This approach is fundamentally different from SYMPOL, which does not use differen-
tiable decision trees. Instead, SYMPOL leverages GradTree to optimize standard, non-differentiable
decision trees through gradient descent, as we will show in Section 4.


3   P RELIMINARIES

Markov Decision Process (MDP). We study a deterministic MDP (S, A, P, r, γ) where S and A
are finite state and action spaces, P : S×A×S → [0, 1] defines the transition dynamics, r : S×A → R
is the reward function and γ the discount factor. At each timestep t, an agent samples an action at
from policy π! : S → A based on observation
                                          P∞       st ∈ S and executes it, receiving reward rt . The
value function V π (s) = Eat ∼π,st+1 ∼P [ t=0 γ t r(st , at ) | st = s] approximates the expected return
when starting in state s and then acting according to policy π. Similarly, the action-value function


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                               P∞
Qπ (s, a) = Eat ∼π,st+1 ∼P [ t=0 γ t r(st , at ) | st = s, at = a] estimates the expected return when
selecting action a in state s and then following policy π. Finally, the advantage function Aπ (s, a) =
Qπ (s, a)−V π (s) defines the difference between the expected return when choosing action a in state
s and the expected return when following the policy π from state s. Overall,P    we aim for finding an
                                                                                   ∞
optimal policy π ∗ that maximizes the expected discounted return J(π) = E [ t=0 γ t r(st , at )].
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) is an on-policy, actor-critic
RL method designed to enhance the training stability. The algorithm introduces a clipped surrogate
objective to restrict the policy update step size. The main idea is to constrain policy changes to a
small trust region, preventing large updates that could destabilize training. Formally, PPO optimizes:
                                       "                                                                             !#
          CLIP                                     πθ (at |st )                       πθ (at |st )
      L          (θ) =Eat ∼πθold ,st+1 ∼P min                     Ât ,   clip                       , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ Ât   (1)
                                                  πθold (at |st )                    πθold (at |st )

where ππθθ (a(at |s t)
                 t |st )
                         is the probability ratio between the new policy πθ and old policy πθold . Ât is an
         old
estimate of the advantage function at time step t and ϵ is a hyperparameter for the clipping range.

4     SYMPOL: S YMBOLIC O N -P OLICY RL
In the following, we formalize the online training of hard, axis-aligned DTs with the PPO objective.
Therefore, SYMPOL utilizes GradTree (Marton et al., 2024a) as a core component to learn a DT
policy directly from policy gradients. In contrast to existing work on RL with DTs, this allows an op-
timization of the DT on-policy without information loss. The main conceptual difference to existing
work that learn symbolic policies end-to-end (Delfosse et al., 2024b; Fuhrer et al., 2024; Delfosse
et al., 2024c; Topin et al., 2021; Luo et al.) is that SYMPOL does not require any modification of the
RL framework itself, making the proposed method framework-agnostic. As a result, interpretable
policies with SYMPOL are learned in the same way as NN policies are commonly learned. In the
main paper, we focus on PPO as the, we believe, most prominent on-policy RL method. To support
our claim of seamless integration, we provide additional results using Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C)
(Mnih et al., 2016) in Appendix A.1 To efficiently learn DT policies with SYMPOL, we employed
several crucial (see ablation study in Table 5) modifications, which we will elaborate below.

4.1   L EARNING DT S WITH P OLICY G RADIENTS

Arithmetic DT policy formulation. Traditionally, DTs involve nested concatenations of rules. In
GradTree, DTs are formulated as arithmetic functions based on addition and multiplication to facil-
itate gradient-based learning. Therefore, our resulting DT policy is fully-grown (i.e., complete, full)
and can be pruned post-hoc. Our basic pruning involves removing redundant paths, which signifi-
cantly reduces the complexity. We define a path as redundant if the decision is already determined
either by previous splits or based on the range of the selected feature. More details are given in
Appendix A.4. Overall, we formulate a DT policy π of depth d with respect to its parameters as:
                                                              d
                                                             2X −1
                                           π(s|a, τ , ι) =           al L(s|l, τ , ι)                                     (2)
                                                              l=0
                                                                                                                   d
where L is a function that indicates whether a state s ∈ R|S| belongs to a leaf l, a ∈ A2 denotes
                                                d                                         d
the selected action for each leaf node, τ ∈ R2 −1 represents split thresholds and ι ∈ N2 −1 the
feature index for each internal node.
Dense architecture. To support a gradient-based optimization and ensure an efficient computation
via matrix operations, we make use of a dense DT representation. Traditionally, the feature index
vector ι is one-dimensional. However, as in GradTree, we expand it into a matrix form. Specif-
                                                                                    d
ically, this representation one-hot encodes the feature index, converting ι ∈ R2 −1 into a matrix
          d
I ∈ R(2 −1)×|S| . Similarly, for split thresholds, instead of a single value for all features, individ-
                                                              d
ual values for each feature are stored, leading to T ∈ R(2 −1)×|S| . The dense representation is
visualized in Figure 2. Please note, that in contrast to SDTs, the dense representation of SYMPOL
corresponds to an equivalent standard DT representation at each point in time, ensuring that the un-
derlying model is a hard, axis-aligned DT. By enumerating the internal nodes in breadth-first order,


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  𝒔# ≥ 2.0                                                                 𝜾# = 1.0 0.0 0.0
                                                                                                           𝝉# = 2.0 0.0 0.0
                            Yes              No                                                    𝕊 (𝒔|𝜾",𝝉")                     1 − 𝕊 (𝒔|𝜾",𝝉")

                 𝒔! ≥ 1.2                          𝒔" ≥ 0.9                              𝜾! = 0.0 0.0 1.0                    𝜾" = 0.0 1.0 0.0
                                                                                         𝝉! = 0.0 0.0 1.2                    𝝉" = 0.0 0.9 0.0
            Yes        No                         Yes      No                        𝕊 (𝒔|𝜾#,𝝉#)          1 − 𝕊 (𝒔|𝜾#,𝝉#) 𝕊 (𝒔|𝜾$,𝝉$)            1 − 𝕊 (𝒔|𝜾$,𝝉$)

       Ac#on 0         Ac#on 0          Ac#on 0            Ac#on 1                  𝒂! = 1.0 0.0     𝒂" = 1.0. 0.0       𝒂# = 1.0. 0.0      𝒂$ = 0.0 1.0


            (a) Vanilla DT Representation                                                      (b) Dense DT Representation

Figure 2: Standard vs. Dense DT Representation. A comparison between the standard decision
tree representation and its dense equivalent, illustrated using an example decision tree of depth 2,
with a state space of dimensionality 3 and two possible actions.


we can redefine the indicator function L for a leaf l, resulting in
                                                                          d
                                                                         2X −1
                                                        π(s|a, T, I) =           al L(s|l, T , I)                                                                  (3)
                                                                         l=0

                                         d
                                         Y
      where L(s|l, T , I) =                        (1 − p(l, j)) S(s|Ii(l,j) , Ti(l,j) ) + p(l, j) 1 − S(s|Ii(l,j) , Ti(l,j) )                                     (4)
                                         j=1

Here, i is the index of the internal node preceding a leaf node l at a certain depth j and p indicates
whether the left (p = 0) or the right branch (p = 1) was taken.
Axis-aligned splitting.     Typically, DTs use the Heaviside function for splitting, which is non-
differentiable. We use the split function introduced in GradTree to account for reasonable gradients:

                                                          S(s|ι, τ ) = ⌊S (ι · s − ι · τ )⌉                                                                        (5)

where S(z) = 1+e1−z represents the logistic function, ⌊·⌉ stands for rounding and a · b denotes the
dot product. We further need to ensure that ι is a one-hot encoded vector to account for axis-aligned
splits. This is achieved by applying a hardmax transformation before calculating S. Both rounding
and hardmax operations are non-differentiable and therefore, SYMPOL is not considered as a soft or
differentiable DT method. Instead, to overcome non-differentiability, SYMPOL employs a straight-
through operator (Bengio et al., 2013) during backpropagation. This allows the model to use non-
differentiable operations in the forward pass while ensuring gradient propagation in the backward
pass. As a result, we can directly learn an interpretable DT from policy gradient. This makes
SYMPOL framework-agnostic and facilitates a seamless integration into existing RL frameworks.
Weight decay.       In contrast to GradTree, which employs an Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) opti-
mizer with stochastic weight averaging (Izmailov et al., 2018), we opted for an Adam optimizer
with weight decay (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017). In the context of SYMPOL, weight decay does
not serve as a regularizer for model complexity, as the interpretation of model parameters differs.
We distinguish between three types of parameters: the distributions in the leaves (a), the split index
encoding (I), and the split values (T ). We do not apply weight decay to the split values because
they are independent of magnitude. However, for the split indices and leaves, weight decay enhances
exploration during training by penalizing large parameter values. As a result, the distribution of the
split index selection and class prediction are narrow and have lower variance. This aids in dynami-
cally adjusting which feature is considered at a split and in altering the predicted leave distribution.
Actor-critic network architecture. Commonly, the actor and critic use a similar network archi-
tecture or even share the same weights (Schulman et al., 2017). While SYMPOL aims for a simple
and interpretable policy, we do not have the same requirements for the critic. Therefore, we decided
to only employ a tree-based actor and use a full-complexity NN as a value function. As a result,
we can still capture complexity through the value function, without loosing interpretability, as we
maintain a simple and interpretable policy.
Continuous action spaces. Furthermore, we extend the DT policy of SYMPOL to environments
with continuous action spaces. Therefore, instead of predicting a categorical distribution over the


                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


classes, we predict the mean of a normal distribution at each leaf and utilize an additional variable
σlog ∈ R|A| to learn the log of the standard deviation.

4.2      A DDRESSING T RAINING S TABILITY

One main challenge when using DTs as a policy is the stability. While a stable training is also
desired and often hard to achieve for a NN policy, this is even more pronounced for SYMPOL.
This is mainly caused by the inherent tree-based architecture. Changing a split at the top of the
tree can have a severe impact on the whole model, as it can completely change the paths taken for
certain observations. This is especially relevant in the context of RL, where the data distribution can
vary highly between iterations. To mitigate the impact of highly non-stationary training samples,
especially at early stages of training, we made two crucial modifications for improved stability.
Exploration stability.        Motivated by the idea that rollouts of more accurate policies contain
increasingly diverse, higher quality samples, we implemented a dynamic number of environment
steps between training iterations. Let us consider a pendulum as an example. While at early stages
of training a relatively small sample size facilitates faster learning as the pendulum constantly flips,
more optimal policies lead to longer rollouts and therefore more expressive and diverse experiences
in the rollout buffer. Similarly, the increasing step counts stabilize the optimization of policy and
critic, as the number of experiences for gradient computation grow with agent expertise and capture
the diversity within trajectories better. Therefore, our novel collection approach starts with ninit
environment steps and expands until nf inal actions are taken before each training iteration. For
computational efficiency reasons, instead of increasing the size of the rollout buffer at every time
step, we introduce a step-wise exponential function. The exponential increase supports exploration
in the initial iterations, while maintaining stability at later iterations. Hence, we define the number
of steps in the environment nt at time step t as
                                           j               k
                                               (t+1)×i
                                                               −1                           ninit
                          nt = ninit × 2        1+ttotal
                                                                    with i = 1 + log2                    (6)
                                                                                            nfinal
For our experiments, we define ninit as a hyperparameter (similar to the static step size for other
methods) and set nfinal = 128 × ninit and therefore i = 8 which we observed is a good default value.
Gradient stability. We also utilize large batch sizes for SYMPOL resulting in less noisy gradients,
leading to a smoother convergence and better stability. In this context, we implement gradient
accumulation to virtually increase the batch size further while maintaining memory-efficiency. As
reduced noise in the gradients also leads to less exploration in the parameter space, we implement a
dynamic batch size, increasing in the same rate as the environment steps between training iterations
(Equation 6). Therefore, we can benefit from exploration and fast convergence early on and increase
gradient stability during the training.

5       E VALUATION
We designed our experiments to evaluate whether SYMPOL can learn accurate DT policies without
information loss and observe whether the trees learned by SYMPOL are small and interpretable.
As mentioned above, we focus on PPO as the most prominent actor-critic, on-policy RL algorithm
in our evaluation. To support our claim that SYMPOL can be seamlessly integrated into existing
on-policy RL frameworks, we additionally provide results using A2C in Appendix A.1.

5.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Setup. We implemented SYMPOL in a highly efficient single-file JAX implementation that al-
lows a flawless integration with highly optimized training frameworks (Lange, 2022; Weng et al.,
2022; Bonnet et al., 2024).1 We evaluated our method on several environments commonly used
for benchmarking RL methods. Specifically, we used the control environments CartPole (CP), Ac-
robot (AB), LunarLander (LL), MountainCarContinuous (MC-C) and Pendulum (PD-C), as well as
the MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023) environments Empty-Random (E-R), DoorKey (DK),
LavaGap (LG) and DistShift (DS).
    1
        Our implementation is available under https://github.com/s-marton/sympol.


                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                                                                                                                              −200
          500
                                                                                                             200

                                                                                                                                                                                                              −400
                                                                                                             100
          400

                                                                                                               0                                                                                              −600



 Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Reward
                                                                                                   Reward
          300                                                                                               −100
                                                                                                                                                                                                              −800

                                                                                                            −200

          200                                                                                                                                                                                                 −1000
                                                                                                            −300


                                                                                                            −400                                                                                              −1200
          100

                SYMPOL Train    SA-DT (d=5) Train    SA-DT (d=8) Train          D-SDT Train                 −500   SYMPOL Train   SA-DT (d=5) Train    SA-DT (d=8) Train          D-SDT Train                         SYMPOL Train   SA-DT (d=5) Train    SA-DT (d=8) Train          D-SDT Train
                                                                                                                                                                                                              −1400
                SYMPOL Test     SA-DT (d=5) Test     SA-DT (d=8) Test           D-SDT Test                         SYMPOL Test    SA-DT (d=5) Test     SA-DT (d=8) Test           D-SDT Test                          SYMPOL Test    SA-DT (d=5) Test     SA-DT (d=8) Test           D-SDT Test
            0                                                                                               −600
                        200k          400k           600k                800k                 1M                           200k         400k           600k                800k                 1M                            200k         400k           600k                800k                 1M
                                        Global Timestep                                                                                   Global Timestep                                                                                    Global Timestep


                               (a) CartPole                                                                                 (b) LunarLander                                                                              (c) Pendulum (cont.)

Figure 3: Selected Training Curves. Shows the training reward of the full-complexity policy (e.g.
MLP in the case of SA-DT) as solid line and the test reward of the interpretable policy as dashed
line for three control environments. Additional, more detailed results are in Appendix A.7.


Methods. The goal of this evaluation is to compare SYMPOL to alternative methods that allow
an interpretation of RL policies as a symbolic, axis-aligned DTs. Building on previous work (Silva
et al., 2020), we employ an MLP and an SDT to provide a reference to state-of-the-art results and
evaluate two methods grounded in the interpretable RL literature:

                 • State-Action DTs (SA-DT): SA-DTs are the most common method to generate inter-
                   pretable policies post-hoc. Hereby, we first train an MLP policy, which is then distilled
                   into a DT as a post-processing step after the training. SA-DT can be considered as a ver-
                   sion of DAGGER (Ross et al., 2011) and therefore a simplified version of VIPER (Bastani
                   et al., 2018). In a comparative experiment (see Appendix A.3), we showed that for the
                   case of learning small, interpretable DTs the performance of SA-DT is similar to those of
                   VIPER, which is in-line with results reported e.g. by Kohler et al. (2024).
                 • Discretized Soft DTs (D-SDT): SDTs allow gradient computation by assigning probabili-
                   ties to each node. While SDTs exhibit a hierarchical structure, they are usually considered
                   as less interpretable, since multiple features are considered in a single split and the whole
                   tree is traversed simultaneously (Marton et al., 2024a). Therefore, Silva et al. (2020) use
                   SDTs as policies which are discretized post-hoc to allow an easy interpretation.

Evaluation procedure. We report the average undiscounted cumulative reward over 5 random
trainings with 5 random evaluation episodes each (=25 evaluations for each method). We trained
each method for 1mio timesteps. For SYMPOL, SDT and MLP, we optimized the hyperparameters
based on the validation reward with optuna (Akiba et al., 2019) for 60 trials using a predefined
grid. For D-SDT we discretized the SDT and for SA-DT, we distilled the MLP with the highest
performance. More details on the hyperparameters can be found in Appendix C.

5.2             R ESULTS

SYMPOL does not exhibit information loss. Ex-                                                                                                                          Table 1: Information Loss. We calcu-
isting methods for learning DT policies usually in-                                                                                                                    lated Cohen’s D to measure effect size be-
volve post-processing to obtain the interpretable model.                                                                                                               tween the validation reward of the trained
Therefore, they introduce a mismatch between the op-                                                                                                                   and the test reward of the applied model.
timized and interpreted policy, which can result in in-                                                                                                                Values > 0.8 are considered as a large ef-
formation loss. The main advantage of SYMPOL is                                                                                                                        fect. Detailed results are in Appendix A.2
the direct optimization of a DT policy, which guaran-
tees that there is no information loss between the opti-                                                                                                                                                                                          Cohen’s D ↓
mized and interpreted policy. To show this, we calcu-
lated Cohen’s D to measure the effect size comparing                                                                                                                                       SYMPOL (ours)                                                         -0.019
                                                                                                                                                                                           SA-DT (d=5)                                                            3.449
the validation reward of the trained model with the test
                                                                                                                                                                                           SA-DT (d=8)                                                            2.527
reward of the applied, optionally post-processed model                                                                                                                                     D-SDT                                                                  3.126
(Table 1). We can observe very large effects for SA-DT
and D-SDT and only a very small effect for SYMPOL,                                                                                                                                         MLP                                                                   0.306
similar to full-complexity models MLP and SDT. This                                                                                                                                        SDT                                                                   0.040
discrepancy can also be observed in the training curves
in Figure 3.


                                                                                                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SYMPOL learns accurate DT poli-                                       Table 2: Control Performance. We report the average
cies. We evaluated our approach                                       undiscounted cumulative test reward over 25 random tri-
against existing methods on control                                   als. The best interpretable method, and methods not sta-
environments in Table 2.         SYM-                                 tistically different, are marked bold.
POL is consistently among the best
interpretable models and achieves                                                                           CP     AB           LL          MC-C           PD-C
significantly higher rewards compared
to alternative methods for learning DT                                   SYMPOL (ours)                      500     - 80        - 57              94       - 323
                                                                         D-SDT                              128     -205        -221             -10       -1343
policies on several environments, espe-
                                                                         SA-DT (d=5)                        446      -97        -197              97       -1251
cially on LL and PD-C. Further, SYM-                                     SA-DT (d=8)                        476     - 75        -150              96       - 854
POL consistently solves CP and AB
and is competitive to full-complexity                                    MLP                                500     - 72         241              95       - 191
models on most environments.                                             SDT                                500     - 77        -124             - 4       - 310


DT policies offer a good inductive Table 3: MiniGrid Performance. We report the aver-
bias for categorical environments. age undiscounted cumulative test reward over 25 random
While SYMPOL achieves great results trials. The best interpretable method, and methods not
in control benchmarks, it may not be an statistically different, are marked bold.
ideal method for environments model-
ing physical relationships. As recently                         E-R DK LG-5 LG-7 DS
also noted by Fuhrer et al. (2024), tree-
based models are best suited for cate-       SYMPOL (ours)      0.964 0.959 0.951 0.953 0.939
                                             D-SDT              0.662 0.654 0.262 0.381 0.932
gorical environments due to their effec-
                                             SA-DT (d=5)        0.583 0.958 0.951 0.458 0.952
tive use of axis-aligned splits. In our ex-  SA-DT (d=8)        0.845 0.961 0.951 0.799 0.954
periments on MiniGrid (Table 3), SYM-
POL achieves comparable or superior          MLP                0.963 0.963 0.951 0.760 0.951
results to full-complexity models (e.g.      SDT                0.966 0.959 0.839 0.953 0.954
on LG-7). The performance gap be-
tween SA-DT and SYMPOL is smaller in certain MiniGrid environments due to less complex en-
vironment transition functions and missing randomness, making the distillation easy. Considering
more complex environments with randomness or lava like E-R or LG-7, SYMPOL outperforms
alternative methods by a substantial margin.

DT policies learned with SYMPOL                                                         Car Velocity
                                                                                         ≤ −0.01
are small and interpretable. While                   Car Velocity
                                                                                                 Yes                           No
                                                                                                                                Car Velocity
we trained SYMPOL with a depth of                     ≤ −0.04
                                                                                Yes        No
                                                                                                                                  ≤ 0.06
                                                                                                                                     Yes           No

7 and therefore 255 possible nodes, the        Left
                                             (-0.26)
                                                                    Car Position
                                                                      ≤ 0.00
                                                                                                            Car Position
                                                                                                              ≤ 0.00
                                                                                                                                                    Car Position
                                                                                                                                                      ≤ 0.00
effective tree size after pruning is sig-                     Left                Right
                                                                                           Yes         No
                                                                                                      Right
                                                                                                                        Yes
                                                                                                                          Right
                                                                                                                                    No
                                                                                                                                              Right
                                                                                                                                                    Yes      No
                                                                                                                                                                  Right
nificantly smaller with only 50.5 nodes                     (-0.16)              (0.67)              (0.82)              (0.32)              (1.14)              (0.01)


(internal and leaf combined) on aver-
age. This can be attributed to a self- Figure 4: SYMPOL Policy for MC-C. The main rule en-
pruning mechanism that is inherently coded by this DT is that the car should accelerate to the
applied by SYMPOL in learning redun- left, if its velocity is negative, and to the right if it is pos-
dant paths during the training and there- itive. This essentially increases the speed of the car over
fore only optimizing relevant parts. Fur- time, making it possible to reach the goal at the top of the
thermore, DTs learned with SYMPOL hill. The magnitude of acceleration is mainly determined
are smaller than SA-DTs (d=5) with an by the current position, reducing the action cost.
average of 60.3 nodes and significantly
smaller than SA-DTs (d=8) averaging 291.6 nodes. The pruned D-SDTs are significantly smaller
with only 16.5, but also have a very poor performance, as shown in the previous experiment. An
exemplary DT learned by SYMPOL is visualized in Figure 4. Extended results, including a com-
parison with SDTs are in Appendix A.4 and A.5.

SYMPOL is efficient. In RL, the actor-environment interaction frequently constitutes a significant
portion of the total runtime. For smaller policies, in particular, the runtime is mainly determined by
the time required to execute actions within the environment to obtain the next observation, while
the time required to execute the policy itself having a comparatively minimal impact on runtime.
Therefore, recent research put much effort into optimizing this interaction through environment


                                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                     Yes              No
                                                                                                                           Turn
                                                                                                                           Left


                                                                                 Yes                 No
                                                                                                            Move
                                                                                                           Forward


                                                                        Yes        No
                                                                Turn                    Turn
                                                                Right                   Left


Figure 6: DistShift. We show the training         Figure 7: SYMPOL Policy. This image shows the DT
environment for the agent along with the          policy of SYMPOL. Split nodes are visualized as the
starting position and goal. The path taken        3x3 view grid of the agent with one square marking the
by SYMPOL (see Figure 7) is marked by             considered object and position. If the visualized object
green arrows and solves the environment.          is present at this position, the true path (left) is taken.


vectorization. The design of SYMPOL, in contrast to existing methods for tree-based RL, allows
a seamless integration with these highly efficient training frameworks. As a result, the runtime of
SYMPOL is almost identical to using an MLP or SDT as policy, averaging less than 30 seconds for
1mio timesteps. Detailed results are in Appendix A.7.

Ablation study. In Section 4, we                              SYMPOL
introduced several crucial compo-           w/o separate architecture
nents to facilitate an efficient and sta-         w/o dynamic rollout
ble training of SYMPOL. To sup-             w/o batch size adjustment
port the intuitive justifications for our                 w/o adamW
modifications, we performed an abla-                                      0.0   0.2            0.4              0.6        0.8    1.0
tion study (Figure 5) to evaluate the                                                     Normalized Mean
relevance of the individual compo-
nents. Our results confirm that each        Figure 5: Ablation Study. We report the mean normalized
component substantially contributes         reward over all control environments (details in Table 11).
to the overall performance.


6    C ASE S TUDY: D ETECTING G OAL M ISGENERALIZATION

To demonstrate the benefits of SYMPOLs enhanced transparency, we present a case study on goal
misgeneralization (Di Langosco et al., 2022). Good policy generalization is vital in RL, yet agents
often exhibit poor out-of-distribution performance, even with minor environmental changes. Goal
misgeneralization is a well-researched out-of-distribution robustness failure that occurs when an
agent learns robust skills during training but follows unintended goals. This happens when the
agent’s behavioral objective diverges from the intended objective, leading to high rewards during
training but poor generalization during testing. For instance, NNs were shown to systematically
misgeneralize on Atari environments (Farebrother et al., 2018; Delfosse et al., 2024a).
To demonstrate that SYMPOL can help in detecting misaligned behavior, let us consider the Dist-
Shift environment from MiniGrid, shown in Figure 6. The environment is designed to test for
misgeneralization (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023), as the goal is repeatedly placed in the top right
corner and the lava remains at the same position. We can formulate the intended behavior accord-
ing to the task description as avoiding the lava and reaching a specific goal location. SYMPOL,
similar to other methods, solved the task consistently. The advantage of SYMPOL is the tree-based
structure, which is easily interpretable. When inspecting the SYMPOL policy (Figure 7), we can
immediately observe that the agent has not captured the actual task correctly. Essentially, it has only
learned to keep an empty space on the left of the agent (which translates into following the wall) and
not to step into lava (but not to get around it). While this is sufficient to solve this exact environment,
it is evident, that the agent has not generalized to the overall goal.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            Yes                   No
                                                                     Turn
                                                                     Left


                                                                                                Yes                     No
                                                                                        Turn
                                                                                        Right


                                                                                                                  Yes                    No


                                                                                  Yes                     No
                                                                                                                                              Yes   No
                                                                                                                                    Turn              Move
                                                                                                                                    Right            Forward


Figure 8: DistShift with Domain Random-                        Yes           No                                 Yes          No

ization. This is a modified version of Dist-            Turn
                                                        Left
                                                                                    Move
                                                                                   Forward
                                                                                                       Move
                                                                                                      Forward
                                                                                                                                  Turn
                                                                                                                                  Left

Shift, with goal and lava at random positions.
SYMPOL (Figure 7), visualized as the green          Figure 9: SYMPOL Policy with Domain Ran-
line, is not able to solve the randomized en-       domization. The SYMPOL policy (Figure 9) re-
vironment. Training SYMPOL with domain              trained with domain randomization. The agent
randomization (Figure 9), visualized as the         now has learned to avoid lava and walls, as well
red line, is able to solve the environment.         as identifying and walk into the goal.


In order to test for misgeneralization, we created test environments in which the agent has to reach
a random goal placed with lava placed at a varying locations. As already identified based on the
interpretable policy, we can observe in Figure 8 that the agent gets stuck when the goal or lava
positions change. Alternative non-interpretable policies exhibit the same behavior, which might
remain unnoticed due to the black-box nature. Instead of simply looking at the learned policy
with SYMPOL, alternative methods would require using external methods or designing complex
test cases to detect such misbehavior. Alternative methods to generate DT policies like SA-DT
also provide an interpretable policy, but as already shown during our experiments, frequently come
with severe information loss. Due to this information loss, we cannot ensure that we are actually
interpreting the policy, which is guaranteed using SYMPOL.
Based on these insights, we retrained SYMPOL with domain randomization. The resulting pol-
icy (see Figure 9) now solves the randomized environments (see Figure 8), still maintaining in-
terpretability. In line with our results, Delfosse et al. (2024c) showed that using interpretable DT
policies can help to mitigate goal misgeneralization which showcases the potential benefit of using
interpretable RL policies to ensure a good generalization.


7   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we introduced SYMPOL, a novel method for tree-based RL. SYMPOL can be seam-
lessly integrated into existing on-policy RL frameworks, where the DT policy is directly optimized
on-policy while maintaining interpretability. This direct optimization guarantees that the explanation
exactly matches the policy learned during training, avoiding the information loss often encountered
with existing methods that rely on post-processing to obtain an interpretable policy. Furthermore,
the performance of interpretable DT policies learned by SYMPOL is significantly higher compared
to existing methods, particularly in environments involving more complex environment transition
functions or randomness. We believe that SYMPOL represents a significant step towards bridging
the gap between the performance of on-policy RL and the interpretability and transparency of sym-
bolic approaches, paving the way for the widespread adoption of trustworthy and explainable AI
systems in safety-critical and high-stakes domains.
While we focused on an actor-critic on-policy RL method, the flexibility of SYMPOL allows an
integration into arbitrary policy optimization RL frameworks including off-policy methods like Soft
Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) or Advantage Weighted Regression (AWR) (Peng et al.,
2019), which can be explored in future work. Also, it would be interesting to evaluate a more
complex, forest-like tree structure as a performance-interpretability trade-off, similar to Marton et al.
(2024b), especially based on the promising results of Fuhrer et al. (2024) for tree-based RL.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported in part by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Climate Action of Germany (BMWK), and in part by the German Federal Ministry of Education
and Research (BMBF).

R EFERENCES
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
  A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2623–2631, 2019.
Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy
  extraction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients
  through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432, 2013.
Clément Bonnet, Daniel Luo, Donal Byrne, Shikha Surana, Sasha Abramowitz, Paul Duckworth,
  Vincent Coyette, Laurence I. Midgley, Elshadai Tegegn, Tristan Kalloniatis, Omayma Mahjoub,
  Matthew Macfarlane, Andries P. Smit, Nathan Grinsztajn, Raphael Boige, Cemlyn N. Waters,
  Mohamed A. Mimouni, Ulrich A. Mbou Sob, Ruan de Kock, Siddarth Singh, Daniel Furelos-
  Blanco, Victor Le, Arnu Pretorius, and Alexandre Laterre. Jumanji: a diverse suite of scalable
  reinforcement learning environments in jax, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
  09884.
Yushi Cao, Zhiming Li, Tianpei Yang, Hao Zhang, Yan Zheng, Yi Li, Jianye Hao, and Yang Liu.
  Galois: boosting deep reinforcement learning via generalizable logic synthesis. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:19930–19943, 2022.
Chun-Hao Chang, Rich Caruana, and Anna Goldenberg. Node-gam: Neural generalized additive
  model for interpretable deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01613, 2021.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo de Lazcano, Lucas Willems,
 Salem Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld:
 Modular & customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. CoRR,
 abs/2306.13831, 2023.
Youri Coppens, Kyriakos Efthymiadis, Tom Lenaerts, Ann Nowé, Tim Miller, Rosina Weber, and
  Daniele Magazzeni. Distilling deep reinforcement learning policies in soft decision trees. In
  Proceedings of the IJCAI 2019 workshop on explainable artificial intelligence, pp. 1–6, 2019.
Vinı́cius G Costa, Jorge Pérez-Aracil, Sancho Salcedo-Sanz, and Carlos E Pedreira. Evolving inter-
  pretable decision trees for reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence, 327:104057, 2024.
Leonardo L Custode and Giovanni Iacca. Evolutionary learning of interpretable decision trees. IEEE
  Access, 11:6169–6184, 2023.
Quentin Delfosse, Jannis Blüml, Bjarne Gregori, and Kristian Kersting. Hackatari: Atari learning
  environments for robust and continual reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03997,
  2024a.
Quentin Delfosse, Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Interpretable and ex-
  plainable logical policies via neurally guided symbolic abstraction. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Quentin Delfosse, Sebastian Sztwiertnia, Mark Rothermel, Wolfgang Stammer, and Kristian Ker-
  sting. Interpretable concept bottlenecks to align reinforcement learning agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.05821, 2024c.
Lauro Langosco Di Langosco, Jack Koch, Lee D Sharkey, Jacob Pfau, and David Krueger. Goal mis-
  generalization in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 12004–12019. PMLR, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Damien Ernst, Pierre Geurts, and Louis Wehenkel. Tree-based batch mode reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6:503–556, 2005.
Jesse Farebrother, Marlos C Machado, and Michael Bowling. Generalization and regularization in
  dqn. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00123, 2018.
Gregory Farquhar, Tim Rocktäschel, Maximilian Igl, and Shimon Whiteson. Treeqn and
  atreec: Differentiable tree-structured models for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1710.11417, 2017.
Benjamin Fuhrer, Chen Tessler, and Gal Dalal. Gradient boosting reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.08250, 2024.
Jiaming Guo, Rui Zhang, Shaohui Peng, Qi Yi, Xing Hu, Ruizhi Chen, Zidong Du, Ling Li, Qi Guo,
   Yunji Chen, et al. Efficient symbolic policy learning with differentiable symbolic expression.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ujjwal Das Gupta, Erik Talvitie, and Michael Bowling. Policy tree: Adaptive representation for
  policy gradient. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 29,
  2015.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Timur Garipov, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wil-
  son. Averaging weights leads to wider optima and better generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.05407, 2018.
Aman Jhunjhunwala, Jaeyoung Lee, Sean Sedwards, Vahdat Abdelzad, and Krzysztof Czarnecki.
 Improved policy extraction via online q-value distillation. In 2020 International Joint Conference
 on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2020.
Zhengyao Jiang and Shan Luo. Neural logic reinforcement learning. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 3110–3119. PMLR, 2019.
Akansha Kalra and Daniel S Brown. Interpretable reward learning via differentiable decision trees.
  In NeurIPS ML Safety Workshop, 2022.
Akansha Kalra and Daniel S Brown. Can differentiable decision trees learn interpretable reward
  functions? arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13004, 2023.
Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny et al. Symbolic-model-based reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS 2022
  AI for Science: Progress and Promises, 2022.
Kentaro Kanamori, Takuya Takagi, Ken Kobayashi, and Yuichi Ike. Counterfactual explanation
  trees: Transparent and consistent actionable recourse with decision trees. In International Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1846–1870. PMLR, 2022.
Eoin M. Kenny, Mycal Tucker, and Julie Shah. Towards interpretable deep reinforcement learn-
  ing with human-friendly prototypes. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=hWwY_Jq0xsN.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Hector Kohler, Quentin Delfosse, Riad Akrour, Kristian Kersting, and Philippe Preux. Inter-
  pretable and editable programmatic tree policies for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.14956, 2024.
Mikel Landajuela, Brenden K Petersen, Sookyung Kim, Claudio P Santiago, Ruben Glatt, T Nathan
 Mundhenk, Jacob F Pettit, and Daniel M Faissol. Discovering symbolic policies with deep rein-
 forcement learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 5979–5989. PMLR, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robert Tjarko Lange. gymnax: A JAX-based reinforcement learning environment library, 2022.
  URL http://github.com/RobertTLange/gymnax.
Zhao-Hua Li, Yang Yu, Yingfeng Chen, Ke Chen, Zhipeng Hu, and Changjie Fan. Neural-to-tree
  policy distillation with policy improvement criterion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.06898, 2021.
Guiliang Liu, Oliver Schulte, Wang Zhu, and Qingcan Li. Toward interpretable deep reinforce-
  ment learning with linear model u-trees. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
  Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2018, Dublin, Ireland, September 10–14, 2018,
  Proceedings, Part II 18, pp. 414–429. Springer, 2019.
Xiao Liu, Shuyang Liu, Bo An, Yang Gao, Shangdong Yang, and Wenbin Li. Effective interpretable
  policy distillation via critical experience point identification. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 38(5):
  28–36, 2023.
Zichuan Liu, Yuanyang Zhu, Zhi Wang, Yang Gao, and Chunlin Chen. Mixrts: Toward in-
  terpretable multi-agent reinforcement learning via mixing recurrent soft decision trees. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2209.07225, 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.      Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Lirui Luo, Guoxi Zhang, Hongming Xu, Yaodong Yang, Cong Fang, and Qing Li. End-to-end
  neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning with textual explanations. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning.
Lirui Luo et al. End-to-end neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning with textual explanations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.12451, 2024.
Sascha Marton, Stefan Lüdtke, Christian Bartelt, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. Gradtree: Learning
  axis-aligned decision trees with gradient descent. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 14323–14331, 2024a.
Sascha Marton, Stefan Lüdtke, Christian Bartelt, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. Grande: Gradient-
  based decision tree ensembles for tabular data. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2024b.
Stephanie Milani, Zhicheng Zhang, Nicholay Topin, Zheyuan Ryan Shi, Charles Kamhoua, Evan-
  gelos E Papalexakis, and Fei Fang. Maviper: Learning decision tree policies for interpretable
  multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and
  Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 251–266. Springer, 2022.
Joosung Min and Lloyd T Elliott.        Q-learning with online random forests.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.03771, 2022.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.01783.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
Svetlin Penkov and Subramanian Ramamoorthy. Learning programmatically structured representa-
  tions with perceptor gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00956, 2019.
Ben Peters, Vlad Niculae, and André FT Martins. Sparse sequence-to-sequence models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1905.05702, 2019.
Sergei Popov, Stanislav Morozov, and Artem Babenko. Neural oblivious decision ensembles for
  deep learning on tabular data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06312, 2019.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and J Andrew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and
   structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the 14th International Con-
   ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and
   Conference Proceedings, 2011.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aaron M Roth, Nicholay Topin, Pooyan Jamshidi, and Manuela Veloso. Conservative q-
  improvement: Reinforcement learning for an interpretable decision-tree policy. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.01180, 2019.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Andrew Silva and Matthew Gombolay. Encoding human domain knowledge to warm start rein-
  forcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35,
  pp. 5042–5050, 2021.

Andrew Silva, Matthew Gombolay, Taylor Killian, Ivan Jimenez, and Sung-Hyun Son. Optimiza-
  tion methods for interpretable differentiable decision trees applied to reinforcement learning. In
  International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 1855–1865. PMLR, 2020.

Pradyumna Tambwekar, Andrew Silva, Nakul Gopalan, and Matthew Gombolay. Natural lan-
  guage specification of reinforcement learning policies through differentiable decision trees. IEEE
  Robotics and Automation Letters, 8(6):3621–3628, 2023.

Nicholay Topin, Stephanie Milani, Fei Fang, and Manuela Veloso. Iterative bounding mdps: Learn-
  ing interpretable policies via non-interpretable methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 9923–9931, 2021.

Mark Towers, Ariel Kwiatkowski, Jordan Terry, John U Balis, Gianluca De Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Markus Krimmel, Arjun KG, et al. Gymnasium: A standard
 interface for reinforcement learning environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17032, 2024.

Dweep Trivedi, Jesse Zhang, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joseph J Lim. Learning to synthesize programs
 as interpretable and generalizable policies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 34:25146–25163, 2021.

Abhinav Verma, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri.
  Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 5045–5054. PMLR, 2018.

Daniël Vos and Sicco Verwer. Optimal decision tree policies for markov decision processes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2301.13185, 2023.

Daniël Vos and Sicco Verwer. Optimizing interpretable decision tree policies for reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11632, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.
  11632.

Maxime Wabartha and Joelle Pineau. Piecewise linear parametrization of policies: Towards in-
 terpretable deep reinforcement learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=hOMVq57Ce0.

Jiayi Weng, Min Lin, Shengyi Huang, Bo Liu, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk,
   Zichen Liu, Yufan Song, Ting Luo, Yukun Jiang, Zhongwen Xu, and Shuicheng Yan. En-
   vPool: A highly parallel reinforcement learning environment execution engine. In S. Koyejo,
   S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
   formation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 22409–22421. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
   8caaf08e49ddbad6694fae067442ee21-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.
   pdf.

Zhuorui Ye, Stephanie Milani, Fei Fang, and Geoff Gordon. Concept-based interpretable rein-
  forcement learning with limited to no human labels. In Workshop on Interpretable Policies in
  Reinforcement Learning@ RLC-2024, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
In this section, we present additional results to support the claims made in the main paper, along
with extended results for the summarizing tables. We focus on the control environments because
they offer a diverse suite of benchmarks that cover different tasks and include both continuous and
discrete action spaces. We chose not to include the MiniGrid environments here because their inclu-
sion could distort the results, particularly the averages calculated in the main paper, as all MiniGrid
environments involve similar tasks and feature a discrete action and observation space. The primary
reason for including MiniGrid in the main paper is to provide additional experimental results that
confirm the robustness and applicability of our method across different domains, as well as to high-
light that tree-based methods offer a beneficial inductive bias for these categorical environments.

A.1   E VALUATION WITH A LTERNATIVE RL A LGORITHMS : A DVANTAGE ACTOR C RITIC
      (A2C)

To support our claim that SYMPOL can be integrated into arbitrary on-policy frameworks, we pro-
vide results on A2C in the following. The reported results use optimized hyperparameters for each
method. In general, A2C is considered as less stable compared to PPO, which is an additional
challenge for SYMPOL, as training stability is especially crucial for DT policies. As A2C does not
update the policy in minibatches over multiple epochs, we did not include a dynamic batch size here,
but update SYMPOL with a single update over the rollout to stay consistent with the A2C algorithm.

Table 4: A2C Control Performance. We report the average undiscounted cumulative test reward
over 25 random trials. The best interpretable method, and methods not statistically different, are
marked bold.

                                           CP    AB     LL      MC-C     PD-C
                        SYMPOL (ours)      500   - 84   - 85        58   - 502
                        D-SDT               11   -427   -396        -0   -1137
                        SA-DT (d=5)        295   -102   -348         0   -1467
                        SA-DT (d=8)        223   - 99   -367         2   -1526
                        MLP                500   - 78    208         0   - 202
                        SDT                500   - 85   -159         0   - 201



Table 5: A2C Control Performance Comparison. We report the average undiscounted cumulative
test reward over 25 random trials, comparing A2C with PPO using optimized hyperparameters. A
number is marked bold if the performance achieved with the underlying RL algorithm (PPO or A2C)
is significantly better or not statistically different from the best result.

            MLP             SDT         SYMPOL (ours)    SA-DT (d=5)     SA-DT (d=8)      D-SDT
          A2C PPO        A2C PPO        A2C     PPO      A2C     PPO      A2C PPO       A2C   PPO
  CP       500    500     500    500     500      500     295     446      223    476      11     128
  AB       -78    -72     -85    -77     -84      -80    -102     -97      -99    -75    -427    -205
  LL       208    241    -159   -124     -85      -57    -348    -197     -367   -150    -396    -221
  MC-C       0     95       0     -4      58       94       0      97       -2     96       0     -10
  PD-C    -202   -191    -201   -310    -502     -323   -1467   -1251    -1526   -854   -1137   -1343



We compared the performance of all methods using A2C on control environments in Table 4, and
additionally provided a direct comparison between PPO and A2C in Table 5. When using A2C,
SYMPOL consistently outperforms other interpretable models. The performance gap becomes even
more pronounced when using A2C instead of PPO, as SYMPOL achieves substantially higher per-
formance than all other interpretable models in each environment. On MC-C, SYMPOL is the only
method that achieves a positive reward, whereas even full-complexity models were unable to solve
the task. This can be attributed to the lower training stability of A2C compared to PPO. This could
also explain the poor results of distillation methods, as the policy learned by full-complexity models,
even when achieving a high test reward, is potentially less consolidated, making it harder to distill.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, to confirm this assumption, further experiments would be required. Based on these results,
we can confirm that SYMPOL can seamless be integrated into other RL algorithms, demonstrating
the high flexibility of our proposed method. Additionally, our method can benefit from advances in
RL, as it can be seamlessly integrated into novel frameworks.

A.2   I NFORMATION L OSS

We provide detailed results on the information loss which can result as a consequence of discretiza-
tion (for D-SDT) or distillation (for SA-DT). In Table 6, we report the validation reward of the
trained model along with the test reward of the discretized model. We can clearly observe that there
are major differences for SA-DT and D-SDT on several datasets, indicating information loss. In
Table 7, we report Cohen’s D to measure the effect size comparing the validation reward of the
trained model with the test reward of the applied, optionally post-processed model. Again, we can
clearly see large effects for SA-DT and D-SDT on several datasets, especially for PD-C and LL, but
also CP. Furthermore, the training curves in Figure 14 visually show the information loss during the
training.

Table 6: Information Loss (Comparison). We report the validation reward of the trained model
and the test reward of the applied model.

              MLP             SDT            SYMPOL (ours)     SA-DT (d=5)       SA-DT (d=8)         D-SDT
          valid   test   valid    test       valid    test     valid   test      valid   test    valid    test
  CP       500     500       500     500      500       500     500       446     500      476    500       128
  AB       -71     -72       -89     -77      -79       -80     -71       -97     -71      -75    -89      -205
  LL       256     241       -91    -124       -9       -57     256      -197     256     -150    -91      -221
  MC-C      95      95        -4      -4       87        94      95        97      95       96     -4       -10
  PD-C    -169    -191      -295    -310     -305      -323    -169     -1251    -169     -854   -295     -1343



Table 7: Information Loss (Cohen’s D). We calculated Cohen’s D to measure effect size between
the validation reward of the trained model and the test reward of the applied model. Typically,
values > 0.5 are considered a medium and values > 0.8 a large effect. positive effects that are at
least medium are marked as bold.

                    MLP            SDT     SYMPOL (ours)      SA-DT (d=5)       SA-DT (d=8)      D-SDT
         CP         0.000      0.000                 0.000             0.632             1.214    4.075
         AB         0.035     -0.630                 0.104             0.728             0.338    0.982
         LL         0.341      0.750                 0.370             4.776             8.155    2.254
         MC-C      -0.042     -0.002                -1.035            -2.011            -1.172    0.745
         PD-C       1.195      0.081                 0.468            13.120             4.101    7.573
         Mean ↓    0.306       0.040                -0.019             3.449            2.527     3.126


A.3   C OMPARISON OF SYMPOL, SA-DT (DAGGER) AND VIPER (Q-DAGGER)

In this section, we provide a direct comparison of SYMPOL with SA-DT and VIPER for control
environments (see Table 8) and MiniGrid environments (see Table 9). SA-DT (Silva et al., 2020)
can be considered as a version of DAGGER (Ross et al., 2011) and is conceptually similar to VIPER
(Q-DAGGER) (Bastani et al., 2018) which improves data collection including additional weighting.
Our results remain consistent with our original claims, demonstrating that SYMPOL outperforms
alternative approaches. This is also in-line with the results reported by Kohler et al. (2024), where
the authors show, that the sampling in VIPER does not yield a better performance compared to
DAGGER/SA-DT for interpretable DTs. The results reported in the original VIPER paper (Bastani
et al., 2018) stating to achieve a perfect reward for CP are on a different version of the environment
(CartPole-v0) with only 200 opposed to 500 time steps and less randomness (CartPole-v1), making
the underlying task easier. Also, we want to note, that the reported results are in-line with related
work, reporting comparable or worse results than ours. For instance, Vos & Verwer (2024) report
a mean reward of only 367 for VIPER on CartPole-v1. Also, Kenny et al. (2023) showcase a poor


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Control Performance. We report the average undiscounted cumulative test reward over
25 random trials. The best interpretable method, and methods not statistically different, are marked
bold. Please note that VIPER cannot be applied to continuous environments.

                                          CP     AB      LL     MC-C      PD-C
                       SYMPOL (ours)     500    - 80    - 57       94     - 323
                       D-SDT             128    -205    -221      -10     -1343
                       SA-DT (d=5)       446     -97    -197       97     -1251
                       SA-DT (d=8)       476    - 75    -150       96     - 854
                       VIPER (d=5)       457    - 77    -200        -         -
                       VIPER (d=8)       480    - 75    -169        -         -
                       MLP               500    - 72     241       95     - 191
                       SDT               500    - 77    -124      - 4     - 310



Table 9: MiniGrid Performance. We report the average undiscounted cumulative test reward over
25 random trials. The best interpretable method, and methods not statistically different, are marked
bold.

                                        E-R      DK      LG-5    LG-7        DS
                     SYMPOL (ours)      0.964   0.959   0.951     0.953    0.939
                     D-SDT              0.662   0.654   0.262     0.381    0.932
                     SA-DT (d=5)        0.583   0.958   0.951     0.458    0.952
                     SA-DT (d=8)        0.845   0.961   0.951     0.799    0.954
                     VIPER (d=5)        0.651   0.958   0.948     0.456    0.954
                     VIPER (d=8)        0.845   0.963   0.948     0.801    0.954
                     MLP                0.963   0.963   0.951     0.760    0.951
                     SDT                0.966   0.959   0.839     0.953    0.954


performance of VIPER in general and specifically for LL the performance is worse than what we
reported. Our findings align with these, suggesting that differences in performance may reflect
randomness and missing generalizability in the evaluation.



A.4   T REE S IZE

We report the average tree sizes over 25 trials for each environment. The DTs for SYMPOL and
D-SDT are automatically pruned by removing redundant paths. There are mainly two identifiers,
making a path redundant:

      • The split threshold of a split is outside the range specified by the environment. For instance,
        if x1 ∈ [0.0, 1.0] the decision x1 ≤ −0.1 will always be false as −0.1 ≤ 0.0.


      • A decision at a higher level of the tree already predefines the current decision. For instance,
        if the split at the root node is x1 ≤ 0.5 and the subsequent node following the true path is
        x1 ≤ 0.6 we know that this node will always be evaluated to true as 0.5 ≤ 0.6.

We excluded the MiniGrid environments here, as they require a more sophisticated, automated prun-
ing as there exist more requirements making a path redundant. For instance, if for the decision
whether there is a wall in front of the agent is true, the decision for all other objects at the same
position has to be always false.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 10: Tree Size. We report the average size of the learned DT for each environment.

                            SYMPOL (ours)      D-SDT     SA-DT (d=5)     SA-DT (d=8)
                 CP                    39.4      14.2            61.8           315.0
                 AB                    78.6      17.0            56.5           173.0
                 LL                    55.0      19.8            59.8           270.2
                 MC-C                  23.4       3.0            61.0           311.8
                 PD-C                  56.2      28.6            62.2           388.2
                 Mean ↓                50.5      16.5            60.3           291.6


A.5    I NTERPRETABILITY C OMPARISON BETWEEN HARD , AXIS - ALIGNED AND SOFT DT S

In the main paper, we showed a visualization of a hard, axis-aligned DT learned by SYMPOL on
the MC-C environment. While this was a comparatively small tree, we provide another example of
a comparatively large tree with 59 nodes in Figure 10. While the tree is comparatively large, we can
observe that the main logic is contained in the nodes at higher levels, focusing on the pole angle and
the pole angular velocity. The less important features are in the lower levels where splits are often
mage on the cart position, which is not required to solve the task perfectly. This also highlights the
potential for advanced post-hoc pruning methods to increase interpretability and potentially even
generalization. When comparing the hard, axis-aligned decision trees (DTs) (Figure 10 and Fig-
ure 4) learned by SYMPOL with corresponding soft decision trees (SDTs) learned by existing direct
optimization methods (Figure 11 and Figure 12), the superiority of axis-aligned splits over oblique,
multidimensional boundaries becomes evident.
The DTs learned by SYMPOL are substantially more interpretable, both at the level of individual
splits and the overall tree structure. For example, when examining the root node of the CartPole task,
the standard DT (Figure 10) makes a straightforward comparison, ”s3 (Pole Velocity) ≤ −0.800”,
whereas the corresponding SDT (Figure 11) expresses the decision as ”σ(−1.14s0 − 0.30s1 +
0.94s2 +0.11s3 +0.99)”, which is significantly more complex and harder to interpret. This disparity
becomes even more pronounced when considering complete paths or the entire tree. In SYMPOL’s
DTs, decisions at nodes are binary (yes/no), whereas SDTs employ probabilistic routing.
Probabilistic routing introduces two key disadvantages in interpretability compared to axis-aligned
DTs: (1) the need to consider multiple paths simultaneously, and (2) the inability to directly interpret
the leaf outputs, as they are weighted by path probabilities. We also want to note that in order to
allow a visualization of the SDT, we reduced the tree size to only 4, while the tree size used during
the evaluation was 7.

A.6    A BLATION S TUDY

Our ablation study was designed to support our intuitive justifications for the modifications made to
the RL framework and our method. Therefore, we disabled individual components of our method
and evaluated the performance without the specific component. This includes the following modifi-
cations introduced in Section 4:

      1. w/o separate architecture: Instead of using separate architectures for actor and critic, we
         use the same architecture and hyperparameters for the actor and critic.
      2. w/o dynamic rollout: We proposed a dynamic rollout buffer that increases with a stepwise
         exponential rate during training to increase stability while maintaining exploration early
         on. Here we used a standard, static rollout buffer.
      3. w/o batch size adjustment: Similar to the dynamic rollout buffer, we proposed using a
         dynamic batch size to increase gradient stability in later stages of the training. Here, we
         used standard, static batch size.
      4. w/o adamW: We introduced an Adam optimizer with weight decay to SYMPOL to support
         the adjustment of the features to split on and the class predicted. Here, we use a standard
         Adam optimizer without weight decay.


                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pole Velocity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ≤ -0.800


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pole Velocity                                                                               Pole Angle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ≤ -3.000                                                                                   ≤ 0.025



                                                                                                                                                          Pole Angle                                                                                    Cart Velocity                                                                               Pole Velocity                                                     Cart Velocity
                                                                                                                                                           ≤ 0.008                                                                                        ≤ -0.400                                                                                    ≤ 4.800                                                           ≤ 0.000


     by SYMPOL on the CartPole environment.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                           Pole Angle                                                                         Pole Angle                 Pole Angle                                                    Pole Angle                   Cart Position                                 Pole Angle                                  Cart Position
                                                                                                                                      Push Left             ≤ 0.008                                                                            ≤ 0.042                    ≤ 0.008                                                                                                                                  ≤ 0.058                                      ≤ 0.384
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ≤ -0.008                      ≤ -0.48


19
                                                                                                                      Cart Position                   Cart Position                                               Cart Position         Cart Position                   Cart Position                   Push                             Cart Position               Push                              Pole Velocity                  Pole Velocity           Cart Velocity       Push
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Push Left                                                   Push Left
                                                                                                                        ≤ -0.288                        ≤ -0.48                                                     ≤ -0.864              ≤ -0.096                        ≤ -0.192                      Right                              ≤ 0.000                   Right                               ≤ 1.000                        ≤ 3.800                 ≤ 0.000           Right



                                                                                                                          Push             Cart Velocity                Cart Position                             Cart Position                            Push              Push                 Cart Position                                          Push                        Push             Cart Position                                   Push                    Push
                                                                                                          Push Left                                                                             Push Left                             Push Left                                                                                     Push Left                                                                                  Push Left                       Push Left
                                                                                                                          Right              ≤ 0.800                      ≤ -0.384                                  ≤ -0.288                               Right             Right                  ≤ 0.192                                              Right                       Right              ≤ 0.576                                       Right                   Right



                                                                                                                                                  Push                   Push             Cart Position              Push                                                                                       Push                                                                                                  Push
                                                                                                                               Push Left                                                                                          Push Left                                                Push Left                                                                                            Push Left             Right
                                                                                                                                                  Right                  Right              ≤ 0.192                  Right                                                                                      Right



                                                                                                                                                                                                          Push
                                                                                                                                                                                    Push Left
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Right


     Figure 10: Exemplary large CartPole DT. This figure visualizes a larger tree with 59 nodes learned
     sponding path probability.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              𝕊 = −1.14𝑠! − 0.30𝑠"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             +0.94𝑠# + 0.11𝑠$ + 0.99

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 - 𝜎(𝕊)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   𝜎(𝕊)


                                                                                                                                                                                  𝕊 = 1.27𝑠! − 0.57𝑠"                                                                                                                                               𝕊 = −1.19𝑠! − 0.17𝑠"
                                                                                                                                                                                 +0.60𝑠# + 0.05𝑠$ + 0.06                                                                                                                                           +0.79𝑠# + 0.04𝑠$ − 1.49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                     𝜎(𝕊)                                     1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                                                                                                                𝜎(𝕊)


20
                                                                                                                                       𝕊 = −1.32𝑠! − 0.24𝑠"                                                               𝕊 = −1.09𝑠! − 0.62𝑠"                                                        𝕊 = −0.94𝑠! − 0.90𝑠"                                                                𝕊 = 1.59𝑠! − 0.41𝑠"
                                                                                                                                      +0.20𝑠# + 0.06𝑠$ + 1.41                                                            +0.69𝑠# + 0.27𝑠$ − 0.99                                                     −0.94𝑠# + 1.10𝑠$ + 0.99                                                            −0.52𝑠# − 0.42𝑠$ + 3.90


                                                                                                                                     𝜎(𝕊)               1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                                                         𝜎(𝕊)             1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                                                  𝜎(𝕊)                  1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                                                     𝜎(𝕊)                 1 - 𝜎(𝕊)


                                                                                                                    𝕊 = −0.90𝑠! + 0.28𝑠"                  𝕊 = 1.84𝑠! − 0.16𝑠"                       𝕊 = −1.17𝑠! − 0.37𝑠"                    𝕊 = −1.22𝑠! − 0.24𝑠"                   𝕊 = −1.28𝑠! − 0.46𝑠"                    𝕊 = −1.18𝑠! + 0.32𝑠"                       𝕊 = −1.28𝑠! − 0.27𝑠"                 𝕊 = −0.65𝑠! + 0.47𝑠"
                                                                                                                   +0.63𝑠# + 0.37𝑠$ + 1.41              −0.66𝑠# − 0.59𝑠$ + 3.69                    +0.66𝑠# + 0.14𝑠$ + 0.99                 +0.63𝑠# − 0.09𝑠$ − 1.28                +0.89𝑠# − 0.19𝑠$ + 1.49                 +0.20𝑠# − 0.34𝑠$ − 0.38                    +1.05𝑠# − 0.23𝑠$ − 1.57              −0.73𝑠# + 0.12𝑠$ − 1.60


                                                                                                                       𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                   𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                       𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                     𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                    𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                    𝜎(𝕊)            1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                   𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                  𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)


                                                                                                              [-5.10, 4.84]        [0.70, -0.50]     [5.73, -5.44]          [1.62, -1.60]     [-3.68, 3.64]        [1.34, -1.39]       [-3.42, 3.32]       [5.02, -4.79]     [-3.66, 3.85]        [1.22, -1.32]       [-2.63, 2.32]           [2.46, -2.42]     [-5.52, 5.41]        [5.52, -5.62]    [0.69, -0.95]       [2.79, -2.95]


     associated probability. The final prediction is obtained by weighting the leaf outputs with the corre-
     tionally, there is no hard decision on which path is selected, but multiple paths are taken with an
     on CartPole. The tree involves oblique decisions involving multiple features at each split. Addi-
     Figure 11: Exemplary SDT for CartPole. This figure visualizes a soft / differentiable DT learned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         𝕊 = 0.04𝑠! − 0.05𝑠"


     the corresponding path probability.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                −0.08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 - 𝜎(𝕊)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             𝜎(𝕊)


                                                                                                                                                                             𝕊 = 0.04𝑠! − 0.24𝑠"                                                                                                                                              𝕊 = −0.20𝑠! + 0.23𝑠"
                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.09                                                                                                                                                            −0.99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                𝜎(𝕊)                                    1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                                                                                                                𝜎(𝕊)


21
                                                                                                                                    𝕊 = −0.23𝑠! − 0.10𝑠"                                                             𝕊 = 0.26𝑠! − 0.11𝑠"                                                             𝕊 = 0.04𝑠! − 0.05𝑠"                                                          𝕊 = 0.05𝑠! + 0.09𝑠"
                                                                                                                                          + 1.48                                                                           + 0.99                                                                           −0.24                                                                       + 0.19


                                                                                                                                  𝜎(𝕊)             1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                                                        𝜎(𝕊)             1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                                                   𝜎(𝕊)                  1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                                                  𝜎(𝕊)                1 - 𝜎(𝕊)


                                                                                                                  𝕊 = 0.07𝑠! + 0.09𝑠"                 𝕊 = −0.16𝑠! + 0.02𝑠"                     𝕊 = 0.13𝑠! − 0.18𝑠"                    𝕊 = −0.23𝑠! + 0.24𝑠"                     𝕊 = 0.04𝑠! + 0.02𝑠"                    𝕊 = −0.21𝑠! + 0.17𝑠"                     𝕊 = −0.22𝑠! + 0.30𝑠"                 𝕊 = 0.01𝑠! − 0.17𝑠"
                                                                                                                         −0.99                              + 0.40                                   − 0.99                                 + 0.99                                   − 0.25                                 + 0.34                                    −0.99                               + 0.99


                                                                                                                      𝜎(𝕊)     1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                 𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                    𝜎(𝕊)         1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                    𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                      𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                   𝜎(𝕊)            1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                 𝜎(𝕊)       1 - 𝜎(𝕊)                 𝜎(𝕊)        1 - 𝜎(𝕊)


                                                                                                              -0.07                0.03             -0.11              -0.15               -0.18                   0.05              0.41              0.05              -0.11                  0.04                 0.20                  0.09              0.17               -0.05            -0.22               0.02


     with an associated probability. The final prediction is obtained by weighting the leaf outputs with
     split. Additionally, there is no hard decision on which path is selected, but multiple paths are taken
     learned on MountainCar. The tree involves oblique decisions involving multiple features at each
     Figure 12: Exemplary SDT for MountainCar. This figure visualizes a soft / differentiable DT
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Detailed results for each of the control datasets are reported in Table 11. The results clearly confirm
our intuitive justifications, as each adjustment has a crucial impact on the performance of SYMPOL.

Table 11: Ablation Study. We report the average test performance over a total of 25 random trials.
This normalized performance consists in normalizing each reward between 0 and 1 via an affine
renormalization between the top- and worse-performing models. Instead of the worse-performing
model, we use the 20% test reward quantile to account for outliers.

   Agent Type                  CP       AB       LL          MC-C      PD-C      Normalized Mean (↑)
   SYMPOL                      500.0    - 79.9   - 57.4         94.3   - 323.3                 0.988
   w/o separate architecture   135.6    -196.4   -276.8       -552.4   -1219.4                 0.080
   w/o dynamic rollout         456.1    - 92.0   -178.2       -144.1   - 434.4                 0.598
   w/o batch size adjustment   498.8    - 81.7   -320.7      -1818.8   - 434.4                 0.372
   w/o adamW                   416.1    - 78.3   - 97.3          0.0   - 393.5                 0.865


A.7   RUNTIME AND T RAINING C URVES


The experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000. The environments for CP, AB,
MC-C and PD-C were vectorized (Lange, 2022) and therefore the training is highly efficient, taking
only 30 seconds for 1mio timesteps on average (excluding the sequential evaluation which cannot
be vectorized). The remaining environments are not vectorized, and we used the standard Gymna-
sium (Towers et al., 2024) implementation. In Table 12 can clearly see the impact of environment
vectorization, as the runtime for LL, which is not vectorized, is more than 10 times higher with over
400 seconds.

Table 12: Runtime. We report the average runtime over 25 trials. One trial spans 1mio timesteps
for each environment. We excluded LL from the mean runtime calculation, as this is the only non-
vectorized environment. To provide a fair comparison of different methods, we aligned the step and
batch size.

                                         SYMPOL (ours)         SDT     MLP
                               CP                     28.8     23.9     25.2
                               AB                     35.5     37.7     33.8
                               MC-C                   23.4     19.4     18.4
                               PD-C                   28.7     28.2     18.5
                               Mean ↓                 29.1     27.3     24.0
                               LL                  402.3      394.0    405.6


In addition to the training times, we report detailed training curves for each method. Figure 13
compares the training reward and the test reward of SYMPOL with the full-complexity models
MLP and SDT. SYMPOL shows a similar convergence compared to full-complexity models on
most environments. For AB, SYMPOL converges even faster than an MLP which can be attributed
to the dynamic rollout buffer and batch size. For MC-C we can see that the training of SYMPOL is
very unstable at the beginning. We believe that this can be attributed to the sparse reward function
of this certain environment and the fact that as a result, minor changes in the policy can result in a
severe drop in the reward. Combined with the small rollout buffer and batch size early in the training
of SYMPOL, this can result in an unstable training. However, we can see that the training stabilizes
later on, which again confirms the design of our dynamic buffer size increasing over time.
Furthermore, we provide a pairwise comparison of SYMPOL with SA-DT and D-SDT in Figure 14.
Here, we can again observe the severe information loss for D-SDT and SA-DT by comparing the
training curve with the test reward.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                       0                                                                                                    300

         500
                                                                                                                                                                                                            200

                                                                                                    −50
                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
         400

                                                                                                                                                                                                              0

Reward                                                                                              −100


                                                                                           Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Reward
         300                                                                                                                                                                                               −100


                                                                                                                                                                                                           −200
                                                                                                    −150
         200
                                                                                                                                                                                                           −300


                                                                                                                                                                                                           −400
         100                                                                                        −200


                      SYMPOL Train      MLP Train         SDT Train                                                          SYMPOL Train        MLP Train        SDT Train                                −500                    SYMPOL Train      MLP Train    SDT Train
                      SYMPOL Test       MLP Test          SDT Test                                                           SYMPOL Test         MLP Test         SDT Test                                                         SYMPOL Test       MLP Test     SDT Test
           0                                                                                        −250                                                                                                   −600
               200k            400k                600k          800k             1M                                  200k            400k                 600k          800k             1M                                200k            400k           600k          800k   1M
                                 Global Timestep                                                                                        Global Timestep                                                                                       Global Timestep


                              (a) CP                                                                                               (b) AB                                                                                                 (c) LL
                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                        −200


                                                    0                                                                                                   −400



                                                 −100                                                                                                   −600


                                                                                                                                               Reward
                                        Reward


                                                                                                                                                        −800
                                                 −200


                                                                                                                                                        −1000
                                                 −300


                                                                                                                                                        −1200
                                                 −400

                                                                         SYMPOL Train      MLP Train          SDT Train                                                          SYMPOL Train      MLP Train         SDT Train
                                                                                                                                                        −1400
                                                                         SYMPOL Test       MLP Test           SDT Test                                                           SYMPOL Test       MLP Test          SDT Test
                                                 −500
                                                                  200k            400k                 600k          800k             1M                                  200k            400k                600k          800k            1M
                                                                                    Global Timestep                                                                                         Global Timestep


                                                                           (d) MC-C                                                                                                (e) PD-C

Figure 13: Training Curves (Full-Complexity). Shows the training reward as solid line and the
test reward as dashed line for SYMPOL (blue), MLP (orange) and SDT (green).


                                                                                                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Reward
500                                                                                                   500                                                                           500


                                                                                                      400                                                                           400
400


                                                                                             Reward


                                                                                                                                                                           Reward
                                                                                                      300                                                                           300
300



                                                                                                      200                                                                           200
200



                                                                                                      100                                                                           100
100
                                 SYMPOL Train    SA-DT (d=5) Train                                                      SYMPOL Train      SA-DT (d=8) Train                                               SYMPOL Train      D-SDT Train
                                 SYMPOL Test     SA-DT (d=5) Test                                                       SYMPOL Test       SA-DT (d=8) Test                                                SYMPOL Test       D-SDT Test
                                                                                                        0                                                                             0
  0
                                                                      Global Timestep
                                                                                                                200k        400k            600k               800k   1M                          200k      400k           600k            800k   1M
                         200k        400k         600k                800k              1M                                    Global Timestep                                                                 Global Timestep


(a) CP SYMPOL vs. SA-DT (d=5) (b) CP SYMPOL vs. SA-DT (d=8)                                                                                                                                   (c) CP SYMPOL vs. D-SDT
      0                                                                                                     0                                                                             0
             Reward


−50                                                                                                   −50                                                                           −50


                                                                                                      −100                                                                          −100
−100


                                                                                                      −150                                                                          −150
−150


                                                                                             Reward


                                                                                                                                                                           Reward
                                                                                                      −200                                                                          −200
−200

                                                                                                      −250                                                                          −250
−250

                                                                                                      −300                                                                          −300
−300

                                                                                                      −350                                                                          −350
−350                             SYMPOL Train    SA-DT (d=5) Train                                                      SYMPOL Train       SA-DT (d=8) Train                                              SYMPOL Train      D-SDT Train
                                 SYMPOL Test     SA-DT (d=5) Test                                                       SYMPOL Test        SA-DT (d=8) Test                                               SYMPOL Test       D-SDT Test
                                                                                                      −400                                                                          −400
−400
                                                                      Global Timestep
                                                                                                                 200k        400k           600k               800k   1M                           200k     400k           600k            800k   1M
                          200k        400k         600k               800k              1M                                     Global Timestep                                                                Global Timestep


(d) AB SYMPOL vs. SA-DT (d=5) (e) AB SYMPOL vs. SA-DT (d=8)                                                                                                                                   (f) AB SYMPOL vs. D-SDT
 300                                                                                                   300                                                                           300
             Reward


 200                                                                                                   200                                                                           200


                                                                                                       100                                                                           100
 100

                                                                                                            0                                                                             0
      0
                                                                                             Reward


                                                                                                                                                                           Reward
                                                                                                      −100                                                                          −100
−100

                                                                                                      −200                                                                          −200
−200

                                                                                                      −300                                                                          −300
−300

                                                                                                      −400                                                                          −400
−400

                                 SYMPOL Train    SA-DT (d=5) Train                                    −500              SYMPOL Train       SA-DT (d=8) Train                        −500                  SYMPOL Train      D-SDT Train
−500
                                 SYMPOL Test     SA-DT (d=5) Test                                                       SYMPOL Test        SA-DT (d=8) Test                                               SYMPOL Test       D-SDT Test
                                                                                                      −600                                                                          −600
−600
                                                                      Global Timestep
                                                                                                                 200k        400k           600k               800k   1M                           200k     400k           600k            800k   1M
                          200k        400k         600k               800k              1M                                     Global Timestep                                                                Global Timestep


(g) LL SYMPOL vs. SA-DT (d=5) (h) LL SYMPOL vs. SA-DT (d=8)                                                                                                                                   (i) LL SYMPOL vs. D-SDT
 100                                                                                                   100
             Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                     100

                                                                                                            0
      0
                                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                      −100
−100
                                                                                                                                                                                    −100
                                                                                             Reward


                                                                                                      −200
                                                                                                                                                                           Reward


−200
                                                                                                                                                                                    −200

                                                                                                      −300
−300
                                                                                                                                                                                    −300

                                                                                                      −400
−400
                                 SYMPOL Train    SA-DT (d=5) Train                                                      SYMPOL Train       SA-DT (d=8) Train                        −400
                                 SYMPOL Test     SA-DT (d=5) Test                                                       SYMPOL Test        SA-DT (d=8) Test
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SYMPOL Train      D-SDT Train
                                                                                                      −500
−500
                                                                      Global Timestep                                                                                                                     SYMPOL Test       D-SDT Test
                                                                                                                 200k        400k           600k               800k   1M
                          200k        400k         600k               800k              1M                                                                                          −500
                                                                                                                               Global Timestep
                                                                                                                                                                                                   200k     400k           600k            800k   1M
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Global Timestep


(j) MC-C SYMPOL vs.                                                    SA-DT (k) MC-C SYMPOL vs. SA-DT
(d=5)                                                                                                                                                                                (l) MC-C SYMPOL vs. D-SDT
                                                                             (d=8)
−200                                                                                                  −200
               Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                    −200

                                                                                                      −400
−400
                                                                                                                                                                                    −400

                                                                                                      −600
−600
                                                                                                                                                                                    −600
                                                                                             Reward


                                                                                                      −800
−800
                                                                                                                                                                           Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                    −800

                                                                                                      −1000
−1000
                                                                                                                                                                                    −1000

                                                                                                      −1200
−1200
                                                                                                                                                                                    −1200
                                  SYMPOL Train    SA-DT (d=5) Train                                                      SYMPOL Train      SA-DT (d=8) Train
                                                                                                      −1400
−1400                             SYMPOL Test     SA-DT (d=5) Test                                                       SYMPOL Test       SA-DT (d=8) Test
                                                                                                                                                                                                           SYMPOL Train      D-SDT Train
                                                                                                                                                                                    −1400
                                                                      Global Timestep                                                                                                                      SYMPOL Test       D-SDT Test
                                                                                                                 200k         400k           600k              800k   1M
                          200k         400k         600k              800k              1M                                      Global Timestep
                                                                                                                                                                                                   200k      400k           600k           800k   1M
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Global Timestep


(m) PC-C SYMPOL vs. SA-DT (n) PC-C SYMPOL vs.                                                                                                                   SA-DT
(d=5)                                                                                                                                                                                (o) PC-C SYMPOL vs. D-SDT
                          (d=8)

Figure 14: Training Curves. Shows the training reward as solid line and the test reward as dashed
line for SYMPOL (blue), SA-DT-5 (orange) SA-DT-8 (green) and D-SDT (red). Thereby, the test
reward is calculated with the discretized/distilled policy for SA-DT and D-SDT. For several datasets,
we can again observe the severe information loss introduced with the post-processing (e.g. for PD-C
and LL).


B                       M INI G RID

We used the MiniGrid implementation from (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023). For each environment,
we limited to observations and the actions to the available ones according to the documentation.
Furthermore, we decided to use a view size of 3 to allow a good visualization of the results. In the
following, we provide more examples for our MiniGrid Use-Case, along with more detailed visual-


                                                                                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


izations. In the following, we visualized the SYMPOL agent sequentially acting in the environment
as one image for one step from left to right and top to bottom. Figure 15 shows how SYMPOL (see
image in the main paper or tree function(obs) defined below) solves the environment. Fig-
ure 16 and Figure 18 show the same agent failing on the environment with domain randomization,
proving that the agent did not generalize, as we could already observe by inspecting the symbolic,
tree-based policy. Retraining the agent with domain randomization (see image in the main paper or
tree function retrained(obs) defined below), SYMPOL is able to solve the environment
(see Figure 17 and Figure 19), maintaining interpretability.


B.1   V ISUALIZATIONS E NVIRONMENT


Figure 15: DistShift SYMPOL. This figure visualizes the path taken by the SYMPOL agent trained
on the basic DistShift environment (see image in the main paper or tree function(obs) de-
fined below) from left to right and top to bottom. The agent follows the wall and reaches the goal at
the top right corner.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: DistShift (Domain Randomization) SYMPOL Example 1. This figure visualizes the
path taken by the SYMPOL agent trained on the basic DistShift environment (see image in the main
paper or tree function(obs) defined below) from left to right and top to bottom. The agent
follows the wall gets stuck by the lava.


Figure 17: DistShift (Domain Randomization) SYMPOL (retrained) Example 1. This figure
visualizes the path taken by the SYMPOL agent trained on the randomized DistShift environment
(see image in the main paper or tree function retrained(obs) defined below) from left
to right and top to bottom. The agent avoids the lava, identifies the goal and walks into the goal.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: DistShift (Domain Randomization) SYMPOL Example 2. This figure visualizes the
path taken by the SYMPOL agent trained on the basic DistShift environment (see image in the main
paper or tree function(obs) defined below) from left to right and top to bottom. The agent
follows the wall until there is no empty space on the left. Instead of an empty space there is the goal,
but instead of walking into the goal, the agent surpasses it and again gets stuck at the lava.


Figure 19: DistShift (Domain Randomization) SYMPOL (retrained) Example 2. This figure
visualizes the path taken by the SYMPOL agent trained on the randomized DistShift environment
(see image in the main paper or tree function retrained(obs) defined below) from left
to right and top to bottom. The agent avoids the lava, identifies the goal, and walks into the goal.


                                                  27
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    B.2   SYMPOL A LGORITHMIC P RESENTATION

1  def tree_function(obs):
2      if obs[field one to front and one to left] is ’empty’:
 3         if obs[field one to front] is ’lava’:
 4             if obs[field one to left] is ’empty’:
 5                 action = ’turn right’
 6             else:
 7                 action = ’turn left’
 8         else:
 9             action = ’move forward’
10     else:
11         action = ’turn left’
12     return action



1  def tree_function_retrained(obs):
2      if obs[field one to left] is ’goal’:
 3         action = ’turn left’
 4     else:
 5         if obs[field one to right] is ’goal’:
 6             action = ’turn right’
 7         else:
 8             if obs[field two to front] is ’wall’:
 9                 if obs[field one to front and one to right] is ’goal’:
10                     if obs[field one to right] is ’lava’:
11                         action = ’turn left’
12                     else:
13                         action = ’move forward’
14                 else:
15                     if obs[field one to front] is ’goal’:
16                         action = ’move forward’
17                     else:
18                         action = ’turn left’
19             else:
20                 if obs[field one to front] is ’lava’:
21                     action = ’turn right’
22                 else:
23                     action = ’move forward’
24     return action



    C     M ETHODS AND H YPERPARAMETERS
    The main methods we compared SYMPOL against are behavioral cloning state-action DTs (SA-DT)
    and discretized soft decision trees (D-SDT). In addition to the information given in the paper, we
    want to provide some more detailed results of the implementation and refer to our source code for
    the exact definition.

           • State-Action DTs (SA-DT) Behavioral cloning SA-DTs are the most common method to
             generate interpretable policies post-hoc. Hereby, we first train an MLP policy, which is then
             distilled into a DT as a post-processing step after the training. Specifically, we train the DT
             on a dataset of expert trajectories generated with the MLP policy. The number of expert
             trajectories was set to 25 which we experienced as a good trade-off between dataset size
             for the distillation and model complexity during preliminary experiments. The 25 expert
             trajectories result in a total of approximately 12500 state-action pairs, varying based on the
             environment specification.
           • Discretized Soft Decision Trees (D-SDT) SDTs allow gradient computation by assigning
             probabilities to each node. While SDTs exhibit a hierarchical structure, they are usually
             considered as less interpretable, since multiple features are considered in a single split and
             the whole tree is traversed simultaneously (Marton et al., 2024a). Therefore, Silva et al.


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (2020) use SDTs as policies which are discretized post-hoc to allow an easy interpretation
        considering only a single feature at each split. Discretization is achieved by employing an
        argmax to obtain the feature index and normalizing the split threshold based on the feature
        vector. We improved their method by replacing the scaled sigmoid and softmax, with an
        entmoid and entmax transformation(Peters et al., 2019), resulting in sparse feature selectors
        with more responsive gradients, as it is common practice Popov et al. (2019); Chang et al.
        (2021).


In the following, we list the parameter grids used during the hyperparameter optimization (HPO)
as well as the optimal parameters selected for each environment. For SYMPOL, SDT and MLP,
we optimized the hyperparameters based on the validation reward with optuna Akiba et al., 2019
for 60 trials. Thereby, we ensured that the environments evaluated during the HPO were distinct to
the environments used for reporting the test performance in the rest of the paper. Additionally, we
decrease the learning rate if no improvement in validation reward is observed for five consecutive
iterations, allowing for finer model adjustments in later training stages.


C.1   HPO G RIDS


                                 Table 13: HPO Grid SYMPOL

                  hyperparameter                        values
                  learning rate actor weights                       [0.0001, 0.1]
                  learning rate actor split values                [0.0001, 0.05]
                  learning rate actor split idx array               [0.0001, 0.1]
                  learning rate actor leaf array                  [0.0001, 0.05]
                  learning rate actor log std                       [0.0001, 0.1]
                  learning rate critic                            [0.0001, 0.01]
                  n update epochs                                         [0, 10]
                  reduce lr                                        {True, False}
                  n steps                                             {128, 512}
                  n envs                                                  [4, 16]
                  norm adv                                         {True, False}
                  ent coef                                   {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}
                  gae lambda                              {0.8, 0.9, 0.95, 0.99}
                  gamma                                 {0.9, 0.95, 0.99, 0.999}
                  vf coef                                     {0.25, 0.50, 0.75}
                  max grad norm                                           [None]
                  SWA                                                     {True}
                  adamW                                                   {True}
                  depth                                                      {7}
                  minibatch size                                            {64}


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Table 14: HPO Grid MLP

                         hyperparameter         values
                         neurons per layer                     [16, 256]
                         num layers                                [1, 3]
                         learning rate actor              [0.0001, 0.01]
                         learning rate critic             [0.0001, 0.01]
                         minibatch size             {64, 128, 256, 512}
                         n update epochs                          [1, 10]
                         n steps                             {128, 512}
                         n envs                                   [4, 16]
                         norm adv                          {True, False}
                         ent coef                    {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}
                         gae lambda               {0.8, 0.9, 0.95, 0.99}
                         gamma                  {0.9, 0.95, 0.99, 0.999}
                         vf coef                      {0.25, 0.50, 0.75}
                         max grad norm            {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, None}


                                   Table 15: HPO Grid SDT

                        hyperparameter          values
                        critic                           {’MLP’, ’SDT’}
                        depth                                        [4, 8]
                        temperature             {0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0}
                        learning rate actor                 [0.0001, 0.01]
                        learning rate critic                [0.0001, 0.01]
                        minibatch size                {64, 128, 256, 512}
                        n update epochs                             [1, 10]
                        n steps                                {128, 512}
                        n envs                                      [4, 16]
                        norm adv                             {True, False}
                        ent coef                       {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}
                        gae lambda                  {0.8, 0.9, 0.95, 0.99}
                        gamma                     {0.9, 0.95, 0.99, 0.999}
                        vf coef                         {0.25, 0.50, 0.75}
                        max grad norm               {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, None}


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   B EST H YPERPARAMETERS


                     Table 16: Best Hyperparameters SYMPOL (Control)

                                                CP      AB      LL      MC-C    PD-C
         ent coef                               0.200   0.000   0.000   0.500   0.100
         gae lambda                             0.950   0.950   0.900   0.990   0.800
         gamma                                  0.990   0.990   0.999   0.999   0.999
         learning rate actor weights            0.048   0.003   0.072   0.000   0.022
         learning rate actor split values       0.000   0.000   0.001   0.000   0.000
         learning rate actor split idx array    0.026   0.052   0.010   0.000   0.010
         learning rate actor leaf array         0.020   0.005   0.009   0.028   0.006
         learning rate actor log std            0.001   0.002   0.021   0.094   0.000
         learning rate critic                   0.001   0.000   0.002   0.002   0.000
         max grad norm                          None    None    None    None    None
         n envs                                 7       8       6       5       15
         n steps                                512     128     512     128     128
         n update epochs                        7       7       7       2       7
         norm adv                               False   False   True    False   True
         reduce lr                              True    True    True    True    False
         vf coef                                0.500   0.250   0.500   0.500   0.750
         SWA                                    True    True    True    True    True
         adamW                                  True    True    True    True    True
         dropout                                0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
         depth                                  7       7       7       7       7
         minibatch size                         64      64      64      64      64
         n estimators                           1       1       1       1       1


                    Table 17: Best Hyperparameters SYMPOL (MiniGrid)

                                                E-R     DK      LG-5    LG-7    DS
          ent coef                              0.100   0.200   0.100   0.100   0.500
          gae lambda                            0.990   0.950   0.900   0.900   0.950
          gamma                                 0.900   0.990   0.950   0.990   0.999
          learning rate actor weights           0.063   0.042   0.055   0.001   0.036
          learning rate actor split values      0.001   0.001   0.006   0.001   0.000
          learning rate actor split idx array   0.001   0.001   0.012   0.001   0.009
          learning rate actor leaf array        0.003   0.004   0.009   0.008   0.001
          learning rate actor log std           0.043   0.021   0.005   0.002   0.038
          learning rate critic                  0.001   0.001   0.001   0.001   0.001
          max grad norm                         None    None    None    None    None
          n envs                                14      14      16      7       10
          n steps                               128     512     512     128     512
          n update epochs                       8       9       5       4       5
          norm adv                              True    True    True    True    False
          reduce lr                             False   True    True    True    True
          vf coef                               0.500   0.500   0.250   0.500   0.250
          SWA                                   True    True    True    True    True
          adamW                                 True    True    True    True    True
          dropout                               0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
          depth                                 7       7       7       7       7
          minibatch size                        64      64      64      64      64
          n estimators                          1       1       1       1       1


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 18: Best Hyperparameters MLP (Control)

                                        CP      AB      LL      MC-C    PD-C
                 adamW                  False   False   False   False   False
                 ent coef               0.200   0.000   0.100   0.100   0.100
                 gae lambda             0.900   0.900   0.900   0.950   0.950
                 gamma                  0.999   0.990   0.999   0.999   0.990
                 learning rate actor    0.001   0.000   0.001   0.005   0.000
                 learning rate critic   0.003   0.005   0.003   0.001   0.002
                 max grad norm          1.000   1.000   0.500   0.100   None
                 minibatch size         256     256     128     512     128
                 n envs                 13      12      13      15      8
                 n steps                128     512     512     512     512
                 n update epochs        7       9       8       2       2
                 neurons per layer      139     185     46      240     75
                 norm adv               False   True    False   True    True
                 num layers             2       2       3       2       2
                 reduce lr              False   False   False   False   False
                 vf coef                0.250   0.500   0.500   0.250   0.250


                      Table 19: Best Hyperparameters MLP (MiniGrid)

                                        E-R     DK      LG-5    LG-7    DS
                 adamW                  False   False   False   False   False
                 ent coef               0.100   0.100   0.100   0.100   0.100
                 gae lambda             0.950   0.900   0.950   0.950   0.990
                 gamma                  0.990   0.900   0.990   0.900   0.990
                 learning rate actor    0.000   0.000   0.002   0.000   0.000
                 learning rate critic   0.001   0.000   0.003   0.001   0.001
                 max grad norm          0.100   0.100   1       0.500   0.100
                 minibatch size         64      256     128     512     256
                 n envs                 13      8       8       12      10
                 n steps                512     256     512     128     128
                 n update epochs        5       7       9       8       7
                 neurons per layer      112     169     76      28      158
                 norm adv               False   True    False   True    True
                 num layers             3       1       1       1       2
                 reduce lr              False   False   False   False   False
                 vf coef                0.500   0.500   0.250   0.750   0.500


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 20: Best Hyperparameters SDT (Control)

                                        CP      AB      LL      MC-C    PD-C
                 adamW                  False   False   False   False   False
                 critic                 mlp     mlp     mlp     mlp     mlp
                 depth                  7       6       8       7       7
                 ent coef               0.000   0.100   0.200   0.000   0.200
                 gae lambda             0.950   0.950   0.990   0.900   0.900
                 gamma                  0.990   0.990   0.999   0.990   0.900
                 learning rate actor    0.001   0.002   0.001   0.001   0.000
                 learning rate critic   0.000   0.000   0.001   0.007   0.000
                 max grad norm          0.100   0.100   1.000   0.500   0.100
                 minibatch size         128     128     128     64      128
                 n envs                 15      6       7       14      7
                 n steps                512     128     512     512     256
                 n update epochs        4       10      2       1       7
                 norm adv               True    False   True    False   False
                 reduce lr              False   False   False   False   False
                 temperature            1       0.500   1       1       0.100
                 vf coef                0.500   0.500   0.750   0.250   0.500


                      Table 21: Best Hyperparameters SDT (MiniGrid)

                                        E-R     DK      LG-5    LG-7    DS
                 adamW                  False   False   False   False   False
                 critic                 sdt     mlp     sdt     sdt     sdt
                 depth                  7       6       7       8       7
                 ent coef               0.100   0.100   0.200   0.100   0.100
                 gae lambda             0.900   0.950   0.990   0.950   0.900
                 gamma                  0.990   0.900   0.999   0.950   0.950
                 learning rate actor    0.004   0.001   0.000   0.002   0.001
                 learning rate critic   0.000   0.002   0.000   0.005   0.002
                 max grad norm          0.100   0.100   0.500   0.100   None
                 minibatch size         512     256     512     256     512
                 n envs                 10      10      10      13      5
                 n steps                512     256     256     128     512
                 n update epochs        5       10      8       4       7
                 norm adv               True    True    True    True    True
                 reduce lr              False   False   False   False   False
                 temperature            1       1       1       1       1
                 vf coef                0.750   0.750   0.750   0.250   0.750


                                                33
