Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S EPARATION P OWER OF E QUIVARIANT
N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Marco Pacini1,2 Xiaowen Dong3 Bruno Lepri2                   Gabriele Santin4
 1
   University of Trento, 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler,
 3
   University of Oxford, 4 University of Venice



                                             A BSTRACT

         The separation power of a machine learning model refers to its ability to distinguish
         between different inputs and is often used as a proxy for its expressivity. Indeed,
         knowing the separation power of a family of models is a necessary condition to ob-
         tain fine-grained universality results. In this paper, we analyze the separation power
         of equivariant neural networks, such as convolutional and permutation-invariant
         networks. We first present a complete characterization of inputs indistinguish-
         able by models derived by a given architecture. From this results, we derive how
         separability is influenced by hyperparameters and architectural choicesÔÇösuch as
         activation functions, depth, hidden layer width, and representation types. Notably,
         all non-polynomial activations, including ReLU and sigmoid, are equivalent in ex-
         pressivity and reach maximum separation power. Depth improves separation power
         up to a threshold, after which further increases have no effect. Adding invariant
         features to hidden representations does not impact separation power. Finally, block
         decomposition of hidden representations affects separability, with minimal com-
         ponents forming a hierarchy in separation power that provides a straightforward
         method for comparing the separation power of models.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Alongside the proliferation and success of equivariant models (Wood & Shawe-Taylor, 1996; Cohen,
2021; Maron et al., 2018), there has been a growing interest in understanding the fundamental reasons
behind their performances, and in assessing their expressive power (Maron et al., 2019a; Yarotsky,
2018). For traditional deep learning approaches, this expressive power is usually quantified in terms
of universality (E, 2019), or their ability to approximate any element of a given class of functions
to arbitrary precision. However, universality is not directly applicable to neural networks that
incorporates invariances of the data (Bronstein et al., 2021), since they necessarily act by identifying
pairs of inputs that are equivalent under the given set of transformations. This feature creates
a complex interaction between the networkÔÇÖs ability to discriminate different input data, and the
invariant or equivariant structure that they are trying to preserve. Assessing expressivity thus requires
first a fine-grained analysis of the separation power of these families of neural networks, namely their
capacity of distinguishing distinct inputs, which is a necessary condition for the universality of the
models (Joshi et al., 2023).
In the graph learning community, which is a paramount domain where invariant and equivariant
models are studied (Maron et al., 2018; Puny et al., 2023; Bevilacqua et al., 2022), networks
are required to be invariant or equivariant under the group of permutations of the graphÔÇÖs nodes.
In this domain, the primary methods for comparing separation power are the Weisfeiler-Leman
(WL) isomorphism test (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968) and homomorphism counting (Lov├ísz, 2012).
Significant attention has been devoted to studying this property for graph learning models such as
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009; Gori et al., 2005; Kipf & Welling, 2017),
Invariant Graph Networks (IGNs) (Maron et al., 2018; 2020), and subgraph GNNs (Alsentzer et al.,
2020; Bevilacqua et al., 2022). However, the WL test and homomorphism counting, along with their
variants, have severe limitations imposed by their combinatorial nature. In particular, recent research
(Joshi et al., 2023) has highlighted the necessity of developing expressivity measures applicable to
models that process data beyond relational structures, such as geometric graphs.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this paper we contribute to this effort by studying the separation power of a more general class
of equivariant neural networks, which are not covered by previous results but are of significant
practical interest. Namely, we focus on the family of neural networks with regular convolutions
(Cohen & Welling, 2016a), i.e., networks with non-polynomial continuous point-wise activations,
finite-dimensional representations, and equivariance with respect to the action of finite groups acting
on representations as permutations. This class is rich enough to comprise many models of common
interest, such as IGNs (Maron et al., 2018), Circular Convolutional Neural Networks (Circular CNNs)
(Ravanbakhsh, 2020), and Icosahedral CNNs (Cohen et al., 2019), even if the proposed approach is not
able to address some relevant equivariant models such as Clebsh-Gordan or polynomial approaches
(Kondor et al., 2018; Puny et al., 2023).
Specifically, we precisely describe the set of input pairs identified by relevant families of neural
networks. In contrast, other approaches, limited to IGNs and graph processing, provide only upper
bounds on expressiveness (Geerts, 2020) or lower bounds that require networks with large hidden
feature widths (Maron et al., 2019a). Additionally, we show how hyperparameter and architectural
choices impact the separation power of equivariant neural network models, both in general settings
and in specific cases of practical interest.
To study the separation power of relevant classes of equivariant networks, we show that the set of
identified points corresponds to the set of common zeros of a modified set of networks (Section 5.1).
We characterize the set of input pairs identified by these families of neural networks by introducing
an explicit formula which, remarkably, is recursive over the networks depth (Section 5.2). This
result provides important insights into how different hyperparameters and architectural choices
impact the design of practical equivariant neural network models. In particular, we prove that any
non-polynomial activation is equivalent in separation power, achieving the maximum separability for
networks with a fixed architecture (Section 5.3). We show that increasing depth enhances separation
up to a certain depth, where separation power stabilizes (Section 5.4). Furthermore, we prove that the
multiplicity of the blocks in hidden representations or, equivalently, the width of invariant hidden
features does not affect the separation power of the networks (Section 5.5). We demonstrate that the
separation power of different block types forms a hierarchy, corresponding to the partial ordering of
sub-groups of the symmetry group with respect to which the model is equivariant (Section 5.6). We
illustrate how these general results apply to practical models (Section 6). Specifically, we strengthen
existing results by showing that a much broader class of IGNs matches the separation power of WL
(Section 6.1). Then, we demonstrate that the separation power of circular CNNs depends on the filter
size (Section 6.2).
All proofs are provided in the Appendix.

Contributions. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: (i) We address the separation
power of equivariant neural networks by fully characterizing the set of points identified by networks
with a fixed architecture (Proposition 2 and Theorem 1). (ii) We prove that any continuous, real,
element-wise, non-polynomial activation is equivalent in separation power, achieving the maximum
separability for networks with a fixed architecture (Theorem 2). (iii) We show that increasing depth
enhances separation power up to a specific threshold, beyond which it stabilizes (Theorem 3). (iv) We
illustrate how block decomposition of layers influences separability (Theorem 4) and how separation
power is independent of invariant hidden features (Remark 1). Notably, this result implies that any
k-IGN matches the separation power of k-WL, improving upon previous results that required IGNs
to have large hidden feature widths Maron et al. (2019a). (v) Finally, we show that the minimal
components from this decomposition form a hierarchy in separation power (Theorem 5).


2   R ELATED W ORK

Recently, equivariant deep learning models have gained popularity (Cohen & Welling, 2014; 2016a;b),
being successful in diverse fields such as computer graphics (Qi et al., 2017), galaxy morphology
prediction (Dieleman et al., 2015), computational biology (Joshi et al., 2024), and computational
chemistry (Chanussot et al., 2021). In the case of permutation equivariance, often required in graph
learning, the WL test has been adopted as the fundamental tool to measure the expressivity of GNNs
(Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019) and has been used to derive upper bounds (Geerts et al., 2021)
and lower bounds (Maron et al., 2019a) on the expressiveness of IGNs and GNNs (Geerts & Reutter,


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2022). Recently, homomorphism counting has been proposed as a more fine-grained measure of
expressivity for GNNs (Zhang et al., 2024), capable of assessing the separation power of subgraph
GNNs and their variants (Alsentzer et al., 2020; Frasca et al., 2022; Bevilacqua et al., 2022). Other
works that are related to the study of neural network separability include specific universality results
for equivariant networks (Maron et al., 2019b; Yarotsky, 2018; Zhou, 2020; Ravanbakhsh, 2020;
Keriven & Peyr├ę, 2019; Dym & Maron, 2020). Instead, Joshi et al. (2023) addresses the problem
of separability by generalizing the WL test from combinatorial structures to geometric graphs. In
this paper, we shift from graph and relational domains to the continuous domain, where WL-based
approaches are inapplicable, and extend the study of separation power to a broader class of equivariant
neural networks not explored in previous research but essential for practical applications. Specifically,
we examine neural networks utilizing regular G-convolutions (Cohen & Welling, 2016a). This
class encompasses several widely used models, such as IGNs (Maron et al., 2018), Circular CNNs
(Ravanbakhsh, 2020), and Icosahedral CNNs (Cohen et al., 2019).

3     T HE R ELEVANCE OF S EPARABILITY
3.1   S EPARATION - CONSTRAINED U NIVERSALITY

The universality property of neural networks enables them to approximate any continuous function
with arbitrary precision, meaning there exists a sequence of networks that converges pointwise to
each continuous function. Equivariant neural networks are designed to handle target functions with
specific structures, represented by transformations that recognize equivalent inputs. However, this
characteristic necessitates a deeper examination of their separation power. The separation power
¤ü(N ) of a subset N ÔŐć C(X, Y ) of continuous functions between topological spaces X and Y is
defined as follows.
Definition 1. A function f : X Ôćĺ Y is said to separate two points ╬▒, ╬▓ Ôłł X if f (╬▒) ╠Ş= f (╬▓). A
family of functions N from X to Y separates ╬▒, ╬▓ Ôłł X if there exists a function f Ôłł N that separates
╬▒ and ╬▓. If a function or a family of functions fails to separate two points, we say that it identifies
them. The set of pairs of points that are identified by N define on an equivalence relation
                    ¤ü(N ) = {(╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł X ├Ś X | f (╬▒) = f (╬▓) for each f Ôłł N }.                        (1)

When working with spaces of neural networks, which we refer to as neural spaces for brevity, their
separation power transfers to the class of functions they can approximate, as shown by the following
fact.
Fact. Let (fn )nÔłłN be a sequence of functions in N that converges pointwise to f . If ╬▒, ╬▓ Ôłł X such
that fn (╬▒) = fn (╬▓) for all n Ôłł N, then f (╬▒) = f (╬▓).

In particular, N cannot approximate with arbitrary precision functions beyond ones respecting ¤ü(N ),
namely, C ¤ü(N ) (X, Y ) = {f Ôłł C(X, Y ) | f (╬▒) = f (╬▓) ÔłÇ(╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł ¤ü(N )}. Understanding however
if the entire set C ¤ü(N ) (X, Y ) can be approximated leads to the study of separation-constrained
universality.
Notably, Maron et al. (2019b) and Ravanbakhsh (2020) illustrate this phenomenon in the context of
equivariant neural networks, which are proven to approximate any continuous equivariant function.
However, their constructions involve intermediate representations of impractically large dimensions.
In contrast, Geerts (2020) and Maron et al. (2019a) show that permutation equivariant networks
commonly used in practice can approximate continuous permutation equivariant functions whose
separation power is equivalent to the WL test.
In this work, we address the problem of characterizing ¤ü(N ) for relevant families of equivariant
neural networks, as it is necessary, though not sufficient, to understand separation-constrained
universality. Specifically, we focus on how hyperparameter and architecture choices influence
separability, as we will discuss in Section 3.2.

3.2   T HE E FFECT OF H YPERPARAMETERS ON S EPARABILITY AND U NIVERSALITY

From a practical viewpoint it is fundamental to understand the hyperparameters and architecture
choices that affect the separation or approximation power of families of neural networks. For example,


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


IGNÔÇÖs separation and approximation power are influenced by two hyperparameters (k, w), where k
represents the networkÔÇÖs relational order and w denotes the width of the final multi-layer perceptron.
Informally, Maron et al. (2019b) showed that IGN = Ôł¬k,w k-IGNw is universal for continuous
equivariant functions, while Geerts (2020) proved that k-IGN = Ôł¬w k-IGNw is universal only within
the class of equivariant functions in C k-WL (X, Y ), the set of continuous equivariant functions with
the same separation power as k-WL. This example highlights that, in a general equivariant setting,
two types of hyperparameters and architecture choices may exist: (i) those like k, which regulate the
separation power and, hence, have a huge impact on approximation power, but also have a significant
impact on the required computational resources, and (ii) hyperparameters like w, which do not affect
separability but may impact separation-constrained approximation, often with a limited impact on
computational resources. In our work, we aim to identify which hyperparameters and architecture
choices control separation power, determining which belong to the first category and which may fall
into the second.


4     P RELIMINARIES

4.1   G ROUPS AND E QUIVARIANCE

We aim to define functions that are symmetric with respect to specific transformations. Groups,
which are particularly useful for computation and technical manipulation, consist of transformations
that fulfill certain criteria: the elements can be combined, each element has an inverse, and there is
a neutral element with respect to composition. While group theory efficiently studies symmetries
and transformations from a purely algebraic perspective, it needs to be adapted to the linear algebra
framework required for defining neural networks. Representation theory acts as a dictionary for
translating between these two languages, showing how abstract groups can be mapped to sets of
matrices that themselves form groups. For an overview, see Appendix A or Fulton & Harris (2004) for
a more complete reference. We will primarily focus on permutation representations. Before defining
them, we need to introduce additional notation. Let X be a finite set and G a finite group acting on
it. Let RX denote the set of real-valued functions defined on X. For each x Ôłł X, let ex Ôłł RX be
the function that takes the value 1 at x and 0 everywhere else, and note that the set {ex }xÔłłX forms a
basis for RX . A permutation representation of G is a linear action of G on V = RX such that for
each g Ôłł G and x Ôłł X, we have g(ex ) = egx . Letting V and W be permutation representations
of G, we say that a function ¤Ľ : V Ôćĺ W is G-equivariant if ¤Ľ(gv) = g¤Ľ(v) for each v Ôłł V and
g Ôłł G. We denote by Hom(V, W ) the set of linear maps between V and W , and by HomG (V, W )
the subset of G-equivariant linear maps. Similarly, we refer to the set of affine maps between V and
W as Aff(V, W ), and the set of G-equivariant affine maps as Aff G (V, W ). Note that Hom(V, W ),
Aff(V, W ), and their equivariant counterparts are real vector spaces with respect to addition and
scalar multiplication. Moreover, Pacini et al. (2024) prove that a map f Ôłł Aff(V, W ) can be uniquely
decomposed as ¤äv ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ for some v Ôłł V and ¤Ľ Ôłł Hom(V, W ) and it is equivariant if and only if its
linear part ¤Ľ is equivariant and v Ôłł W G = {v Ôłł W | gv = v ÔłÇg Ôłł G}, the set of G-invariant vectors
in W . Thus, we have relevant linear morphisms ╬╗ : Aff G (V, W ) Ôćĺ HomG (V, W ), which projects
an affine map onto its linear part, and ¤ä : Aff G (V, W ) Ôćĺ W G , which projects an affine map onto its
translational part.

4.2   E QUIVARIANT N EURAL N ETWORKS

With all the necessary definitions in place, we can now introduce the notion of equivariant neural
network. Our study will focus on neural networks that are equivariant with respect to finite groups,
have arbitrary point-wise continuous activation functions, and whose representations are permutation
representations.
Definition 2 (Point-wise Activation). Let RX be a permutation representation of a group G, and
let ¤â : R Ôćĺ P                 point-wise activation induced by ¤â as the function ¤â╠â : RX Ôćĺ RX
              R. We define theP
such that ¤â╠â( xÔłłX ╬▒x ex ) = xÔłłX ¤â(╬▒x )ex . We will often abuse notation and refer to ¤â as the
activation function as well.
Definition 3 (Neural Networks and Neural Spaces). Let G be a group and V0 , . . . , Vd be permutation
representations of G, and let Mi be subsets of Aff G (ViÔłĺ1 , Vi ) for i = 1, . . . , d. Given d Ôëą 2, the


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


neural space with layers in M1 , . . . , Md and activation ¤â is the recursively defined set
         N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ) = ¤Ľd ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 | ¤Ľd Ôłł Md , ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 Ôłł N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 ) ,


where N ¤â (M1 ) = M1 . A neural network with layers M1 , . . . , Md and activation ¤â is an element
╬Ě d Ôłł N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ). When Mi = Aff G (ViÔłĺ1 , Vi ) for each i = 1, . . . , d, we simply write
N ¤â (V0 , . . . , Vd ) instead of N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ).

In Definition 3, we do not impose any additional structure on Mi beyond it being a subset of
Aff G (ViÔłĺ1 , Vi ), although we will primarily consider Mi to be a vector subspace.
We now provide examples of relevant models that align with Definition 3.
Example 1 (Equivariant Neural Networks). Let G be a group, Vi = RXi be permutation repre-
sentations of G, and Mi = Aff G (ViÔłĺ1 , Vi ) the full space of equivariant affine maps from ViÔłĺ1 to
Vi for each i = 1, . . . , d. The neural space N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ), or equivalently N ¤â (V0 , . . . , Vd ), is
the usual space of equivariant neural networks with depth d and representation spaces Vi for each
i = 0, . . . , d.

As discussed in Section 4.1, equivariant affine maps Aff G (V, W ) can be decomposed into a linear
part in HomG (V, W ) and a translational part in the invariant subspace W G , the set of G-invariant
vectors of W . In our setting, the symmetry group G is finite, and W is a permutation representation,
with its invariant part W G characterized by the following result.
Proposition 1. Let RX be a permutation representation of G with orbit
                                                                   P decomposition    X1 ÔŐö ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐö Xn
(see Definition 7 in Appendix A.3), let Y ÔŐć X. Define 1Y =                        X
                                                                      yÔłłY ey Ôłł R . The invariant
subspace of RX = RX1 ÔŐĽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐĽ RXn , consisting of vectors fixed by the action of G, is generated by
the basis 1X1 , . . . , 1Xn .

With this further characterization, we present detailed examples of equivariant affine maps and neural
spaces relevant to machine learning applications, showing how common models can be expressed
within this formalism. Furthermore, we will revisit these neural spaces in Section 6, highlighting
specific properties related to their separation power.
Example 2 (Invariant Graph Networks). Invariant Graph Networks of order 2 (2-IGNs) (Maron
et al., 2018) are neural network models that ensure equivariance with respect to node ordering,
making them particularly effective for graph processing tasks. They process graphs encoded as
adjacency matrices A in Rn├Śn├Śf , where the first two dimensions encode the relational structure,
and the third dimension corresponds to the features. In our setting, these matrices are defined as
elements in RX ÔŐŚ Rf where X = [n] ├Ś [n] and Rf is the invariant feature space. Each element
¤â Ôłł G = Sn acts on X as ¤â(i, j) = (¤â(i), ¤â(j)) for each (i, j) Ôłł X and trivially on Rf . To achieve
permutation equivariance, the layers of 2-IGNs are maps in Aff Sn (RX ÔŐŚ RfiÔłĺ1 , RX ÔŐŚ Rfi ), and thus
their associated neural spaces are N ¤â (RX ÔŐŚ Rf0 , . . . , RX ÔŐŚ Rfd ). Proposition 10 in Appendix A.4
implies that understanding the structure of Aff Sn (RX ÔŐŚ RfiÔłĺ1 , RX ÔŐŚ Rfi ) reduces to understanding
the structure of Aff Sn (RX , RX ), which is completely characterized in Maron et al. (2018) and
Pearce-Crump (2023), which states that dim HomSn (RX , RX ) = 15 for n > 3 and, in accordance
with Proposition 1, bias terms can be described by noting that X = [n] ├Ś [n] splits into two orbits,
X1 = {(i, i) | i Ôłł [n]} and X2 = {(i, j) | i ╠Ş= j}. Identifying R[n]├Ś[n] = Rn ÔŐŚ Rn Ôł╝         = Rn├Śn ,
elements in RX1 correspond to diagonal matrices in Rn├Śn , while elements in RX2 are off-diagonal
matrices. In particular, invariant vectors in RX1 are linear combinations of
                                    1 0 0                         0 1 1
                                  "          #                  "         #
                          1X1 = 0 1 0             and 1X2 = 1 0 1 .
                                    0 0 1                         1 1 0
Then,
                             (        15
                                                                                                      )
                                            xi ¤Ľ (A) + y1 1X1 + y2 1X2 | x1 , . . . , x15 , y1 , y2 Ôłł R ,
                                      X
                X     X                         i
        Aff Sn (R , R ) =      A 7Ôćĺ
                                      i=1

where ¤Ľ1 , . . . , ¤Ľ15 forms a basis of HomSn (RX , RX ). Furthermore, Maron et al. (2019b) show that
2-IGNs can be generalized to k-IGNs, which employ hidden representation of high order, namely
                    k
elements in R[n] ÔŐŚ Rfi .


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example 3 (Circular Convolutional Neural Networks). Circular convolutional filters can be described
in the context of permutation representations, as we will demonstrate using the 1-dimensional case
for simplicity. Let X = [n] with the cyclic group G = Zn acting on it in the standard way, and
identify R[n] = Rn . Linear maps in HomZn (Rn , Rn ) are circulant matrices C(x) associated with a
vector x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) Ôłł Rn (Davis, 1979). Hence, the linear part and the translational part of a
map in Aff Zn (Rn , Rn ) are written as follows:
                             x1     xn     xnÔłĺ1 ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě x2
                           ´ú«                                  ´ú╣
                                                                                          ´ú« ´ú╣
                           ´ú» x2     x1      xn     ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě x3 ´ú║                              1
               C(x) = ´ú»
                           ´ú»x
                           ´ú»    3   x  2    x  1   ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě x  4
                                                              ´ú║
                                                              ´ú║ and y 1X = y 1[n] = y ´ú░ . ´ú╗ .
                                                                                          ´ú» .. ´ú║
                           ´ú░ ...     ..
                                      .
                                             ..
                                              .
                                                    ..
                                                       .
                                                          .. ´ú║
                                                           .´ú╗                              1
                             xn xnÔłĺ1 xnÔłĺ2 ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě x1
                      Pn
Note that C(x) = i=1 xi C(ei ), where e1 , . . . , en is the canonical basis of Rn . Therefore, since
convolutional filters with limited support are more commonly used in practice, it is appropriate to
restrict our choice of layers to maps within
                                  (      k
                                                                                        )
                                           xi C(ei )v + y 1[n] | x1 , . . . , xk , y Ôłł R ,
                                         X
                          k
                       M = v 7Ôćĺ
                                     i=1

which are the 1-dimensional counterpart of the k ├Ś k 2D convolutional filters widely used in computer
vision. In this case, the corresponding neural space will be N ¤â (M k1 , . . . , M kd ) for appropriate
choices of filter sizes 1 ÔëĄ k1 , . . . , kd ÔëĄ n.

To generalize previous examples, we now assume that the layer spaces M , which are subspaces of
Aff G (V, RX ), can be written as
                  (       k
                                                                                        )
                                          yP 1P | x1 , . . . , xk , yP Ôłł R for all P Ôłł P ,
                        X               X
                                  i
           M = v 7Ôćĺ          xi ¤Ľ (v) +
                         i=1               P ÔłłP

where ¤Ľ1 , . . . , ¤Ľk generate a subspace of HomG (V, RX ), and P is a partition of X, that may either
combine several orbits from the orbit partition X = X1 ÔŐö┬Ě ┬Ě ┬ĚÔŐöXn into larger subsets, or coincide with
the orbit partition itself. For further technical details, we refer the interested reader to Definition 12
in Appendix B.1.
Now that we have described the structure of layer spaces in detail and explained why neural spaces
constructed from these layer spaces more accurately reflect specific architectures used in practice, we
can proceed to study the separation power of these neural spaces.


5     M AIN R ESULTS

We begin by describing and formulating the twin network trick in Section 5.1, which serves as the
primary tool for converting a separation problem into a zero locus problem, to be addressed informally
in Section 5.2. In the subsequent sections, we will explore the implications of this result and how it
can be applied to effectively compare the separation power of different neural spaces.

5.1   T HE T WIN N ETWORK T RICK

In this section, we introduce the twin network trick, which transforms a network separation problem
into a zero locus problem for neural networks. This allows us to apply the recursive techniques for
solving zero locus problems developed in Section 5.2. Specifically, a zero locus problem involves
identifying all points that are mapped to zero by all networks within a given neural space.
More precisely, the identification equivalence relation in (1) can be reformulated as the following
zero locus problem: (╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł ¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) if and only if
                               ╬Ě(╬▒) Ôłĺ ╬Ě(╬▓) = 0 ÔłÇ╬Ě Ôłł N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ).                            (2)


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We observe that (2) reduces to a zero locus prob-
lem involving twin networks. The twin network                    ╬▒
╬Ě : V ÔŐĽV Ôćĺ W , where ╬Ě(╬▒, ╬▓) = ╬Ě(╬▒)Ôłĺ╬Ě(╬▓),
is itself a neural network with the same depth
as ╬Ě but with a different architecture. Namely,
╬Ě Ôłł N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ ) where we define                                 ╬Ě          Ôłĺ
MdÔÇ▓ = {(╬▒, ╬▓) 7Ôćĺ ¤Ľ(╬▒) Ôłĺ ¤Ľ(╬▓) | ¤Ľ Ôłł Md } and

M i = ¤Ľ : (╬▒, ╬▓) 7Ôćĺ (¤Ľ(╬▒), ¤Ľ(╬▓)) ¤Ľ Ôłł Mi .
Thanks to the definition of the twin network,
we can restate the identification problem in                     ╬▓
Equation 2 as an equivalent zero locus problem,
where we aim to find all ╬▓ in V ÔŐĽ V that satisfy
   ╬Ě(╬▓) = 0 ÔłÇ╬Ě Ôłł N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ ).
In summary, these observations can be synthe- Figure 1: The twin network trick illustrated. Eval-
sized into the following proposition, which di- uating two copies of ╬Ě on ╬▒ and ╬▓, and subtracting
rectly links the identification relation to a zero the resulting outputs, is equivalent to evaluating
locus.                                             the twin network ╬Ě on (╬▒, ╬▓).
Proposition 2. For a family F of functions between a set V and a vector space W , let
                                 I(F) = {╬▓ Ôłł V | ╬Ě(╬▓) = 0 ÔłÇ╬Ě Ôłł F}.
be the zero locus of F. Then, for any neural space N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ), we have
                        ¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) = I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ )).
Our task, then, is to determine the zero locus corresponding to the neural space of twin networks.

5.2   T HE C HARACTERIZATION T HEOREM

In the previous sections, thanks to Proposition 2, we have translated the problem of comput-
ing the identification relation ¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) into the problem of computing the zero locus
I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ )). More generally, this zero locus can be determined using the recursive
formula proposed in Theorem 1. For brevity, we provide an informal version here, and refer the
interested reader to Theorem 7 in Appendix B.1 for the complete version.
We begin by recalling and defining the necessary notation to state Theorem 1. Let Mi be vector
subspaces of Aff G (RXiÔłĺ1 , RXi ) for i = 1, . . . , d. Recall that ╬╗(Md ) denotes the linear part of Md ,
and let ¤Ľd,1 , . . . , ¤Ľd,sd be linear maps spanning ╬╗(Md ), and recall that ¤ä (Md ) = ÔčĘ1P ÔčęP ÔłłP for some
partition P of Xd . Let Q be another partition of Xd ; if Q is finer than P we indicate this relationship
as Q ÔëĄ P. Furthermore, for each h = 1, . . . , sd and k Ôłł Xd define the family of partitions of Xd
                                         (                                  )
                                                    X d,h
                                 ╬Ęh,k = Q ÔëĄ P |         ¤Ľki = 0, ÔłÇP Ôłł Q .
                                                    iÔłłP
          XdÔłĺ1
Let ¤Çi : R      Ôćĺ R denote the projection onto the i-th component of RXdÔłĺ1 for each i in XdÔłĺ1 . For
each i, j Ôłł XdÔłĺ1 , define the set (MdÔłĺ1 )ij = {¤ĽÔÇ▓ : x 7Ôćĺ ¤Çi ¤Ľ(x)Ôłĺ¤Çj ¤Ľ(x) | ¤Ľ Ôłł M } which represents
scalar-valued layers obtained as the differences between the i-th and j-th part of the (d Ôłĺ 1)-th layer.
Theorem 1 (Informal). Using the notation defined above, if ¤â is a non-polynomial continuous
activation function, the following formula, recursive with respect to the depth d, holds
                                       \ [        \
           I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) =                 I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ2 , (MdÔłĺ1 )ij )).     (3)
                                        h,k QÔłł╬Ęh,k P ÔłłQ
                                                   i,jÔłłP

The theorem shows that the zero locus of a neural space of depth d can be recursively computed as a
combination of unions and intersections of the zero loci of neural spaces of depth d Ôłĺ 1. At depth 1,
the neural space reduces to a subspace of affine maps, and finding its zero locus corresponds to solving
a system of linear equations. Although the actual execution of Formula 3 requires superpolynomial
time, this recursive approach is particularly useful for deriving key properties of the identification
relation, such as the role of activations, depth, and hidden features on the separation power, as detailed
in the following sections.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.3    T HE ROLE OF ACTIVATIONS

The following result shows that the choice of the activation functionÔÇôand its properties, such as
injectivity or monotonicityÔÇôis irrelevant to separability, as long as the activation is non-polynomial.
Theorem 2. Let ¤â and ¤ä be two continuous activation functions, with ¤â being non-polynomial. Then
                               ¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) ÔŐć ¤ü(N ¤ä (M1 , . . . , Md )).
If ¤ä is also non-polynomial, equality holds. Thus, non-polynomial activations not only yield equivalent
separability but also achieve maximal separation power.

Proof outline. The inclusion follows by reconstructing the steps of in the proof of Theorem 1 and
applying the first part of Theorem 9. To prove the equality in the case ¤ä is also non-polynomial,
we reduce to solve the equivalent zero-locus problem thanks to Proposition 2. We proceed by
induction on d to show that non-polynomial activation functions do not affect the zero-locus. For
the base case d = 1, we have I(N ¤â (M1 )) = I(M1 ), which is independent of ¤â. Now, assume
as the inductive hypothesis that I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 )) is independent of ¤â for any sequence
M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 . Additionally, by definition, h, k and ╬Ęh,k are also independent of ¤â, which proves
that none of the terms in the right-hand side of (3) depend on ¤â, thereby completing the proof.

While non-polynomiality is sufficient for maximal separation, some polynomial activations may
also achieve maximal separation power. Identifying these polynomialsÔÇôor simply some of their
properties, such as their degreeÔÇôremains a complex mathematical problem. For more details, see Kiss
& Laczkovich (2014).

5.4    T HE ROLE OF D EPTH

Depth is a key hyperparameter influencing the separation power of neural spaces. Theorem 3 shows
that, while adding layers of the same type can initially enhance separation power, this effect stabilizes
after a finite number of layers.
Theorem 3. Let Mi be a subspace of Aff G (ViÔłĺ1 , Vi ) for each i = 1, . . . , d. Suppose that VhÔłĺ1 = Vh
for some integer 1 ÔëĄ h ÔëĄ d and that idVh Ôłł Mh . If ¤â is a continuous non-polynomial activation
function, then for m ÔëĄ n,
                     ¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MhÔłĺ1 , Mh , . . . , Mh , Mh+1 , . . . , Md )) ÔŐć
                                                |     {z      }
                                                       n times
                            ÔŐć ¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MhÔłĺ1 , Mh , . . . , Mh , Mh+1 , . . . , Md )),
                                                         |     {z      }
                                                                 m times

but there exists a repetition threshold R such that for all n, m Ôëą R the inclusion becomes an equality.

Proof outline. To prove the first part of the statement, it suffices to show the inclusion for n = 1
and m = 2. Moreover, Theorem 2 implies that it is sufficient to prove this inclusion for a sin-
gle non-polynomial ¤â. Therefore, let ¤â be the ReLU activation function, noting that in this case
¤â ÔŚŽ ¤â = ¤â; equivalently ¤â╠â = ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â = ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ idRXi ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â. Thus, each neural network ¤Ľd ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ1
in N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Mh , . . . , Md ) can be written as ¤Ľd ÔŚŽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ idRXi ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ1 , which is an ele-
ment of N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Mh , Mh , . . . , Md ), thereby proving the desired inclusion by applying Lemma 5.
The stabilization property can be proved by reducing to the equivalent zero-locus problem and ob-
serving that descending sequences of finite intersections and unions of a finite number of sets, as
given by Theorem 1, stabilize thanks to Lemma 2.

The repetition threshold may vary depending on the model and representation. For example, k-IGNs,
being equivalent to k-WL, have a repetition threshold proportional to that of k-WL itself (Maron
et al., 2019a; Geerts, 2020). In contrast, the following proposition shows an example of stabilization
after just one repetition.
Proposition 3. When the hidden representation spaces are regular representations, stabilization
occurs after one layer repetition. Namely, ¤ü(N ¤â (V, RG , . . . , RG , RG/H )) = ¤ü(N ¤â (V, RG , RG/H )).


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.5   T HE ROLE OF I NTERMEDIATE R EPRESENTATIONS

In this section, we show that if a representation, V can be decomposed as V ÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽV ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ , then the separation
power of neural spaces with hidden representation V reduces to the combined separation power
of two distinct neural spaces with hidden representations V ÔÇ▓ and V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ . In this section, we present
Theorem 4, an additional application of Theorem 1, which demonstrates that the identification
equivalence relation for neural spaces defined on V is the intersection of those for neural spaces
defined on V ÔÇ▓ and V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ . This implies that by decomposing each hidden representation V into a sum
of minimal factors, the study of the separation power of general neural spaces can be reduced to
analyzing those defined on minimal representations, as will be explored in Section 5.6.
Theorem 4. Let ¤â : R Ôćĺ R be a continuous non-polynomial activation function, and let V0 , . . . , Vd
be permutation representations with Vi = ViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ for some 0 ÔëĄ i ÔëĄ d. Then,
         ¤ü(N ¤â (V0 , . . . , Vd )) = ¤ü(N ¤â (V0 , . . . , ViÔÇ▓ , . . . , Vd )) Ôłę ¤ü(N ¤â (V0 , . . . , ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ , . . . , Vd )).
Remark 1. Note that if ViÔÇ▓ = ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ , we have
                    ¤ü(N ¤â (V0 , . . . , ViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ , . . . , Vd )) = ¤ü(N ¤â (V0 , . . . , ViÔÇ▓ , . . . , Vd )).              (4)
As a result,
                    ¤ü(N ¤â (V0 , . . . , Vi ÔŐŚ Rf , . . . , Vd )) = ¤ü(N ¤â (V0 , . . . , Vi , . . . , Vd )),
since Vi ÔŐŚ Rf Ôł╝    ÔŐĽf
               = Vi . Thus, the separability is independent of multiplicity and invariant features in
intermediate representations.

5.6   T HE ROLE OF R EPRESENTATION T YPE

Thanks to Theorem 4, we can focus on studying the separation power of neural spaces defined on
minimal representations. These minimal representations are of the form RX , where the group G
acts transitively on X. That is, for any pair of points x, y Ôłł X, there exists an element g Ôłł G such
that gx = y. Basic group theory (Fulton & Harris, 2004) shows that a set with a transitive action is
in bijective correspondence with right cosets G/H for some subgroup H < G, see Definition 6 in
Appendix A.2. Informally, the following theorem allows us to compare representations induced by
transitive actions arising from certain subgroups.
Theorem 5. Let K < H < G be finite groups. We have
                    ¤ü(N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/K , . . . , W )) ÔŐć ¤ü(N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/H , . . . , W )).

Proof outline. The proof consists in showing that RG/H is a sub-representation of RG/K , and prov-
ing that this induces an embedding of N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/H , . . . , W ) into N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/K , . . . , W ).
Consequently, the result follows directly from Lemma 5.

Theorem 5 implies that neural spaces with minimal representations in one layer, namely
{N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/H , . . . , W )}H<G , form a separation power hierarchy corresponding to the hier-
archy of subgroups of G. In particular, if H = G, the corresponding representation RG/G has
minimal separation power. Furthermore, notice that RG/G Ôł╝      = R is the trivial representation, and this
means that invariant layers have the lowest separation power. On the other hand, if H = {e} is the
group containing only the identity element, the corresponding representation RG/{e} has maximal
separation power, since {e} is contained in every subgroup of G. As RG/{e} Ôł╝         = RG is the regular
representation, this implies that the regular representation achieves the maximum separation power. In
general, if K < H, then dim RG/H < dim RG/K . Hence, improving separability requires working
in a larger space, which, aside from ad-hoc optimizations, leads to additional computational cost. In
particular, by applying Theorem 1, we can prove the following proposition.
Proposition 4. The neural space N ¤â (V, RG , RG/H ) of equivariant shallow networks with regular
hidden representations identifies inputs if and only if they belong to the same H-orbit, i.e., (╬▓, ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ ) Ôłł
¤ü(N ¤â (V, RG , RG/H )) if and only if there exists some h Ôłł H such that h╬▓ = ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ .

This is consistent with the results in Ravanbakhsh et al., which demonstrate that shallow networks
with hidden representation blocks isomorphic to RG are universal. This universality implies maximal
separation power, as stated in Theorem 16 of Joshi et al. (2023).


                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6     I MPLICATIONS ON P RACTICAL M ODELS
6.1   I NVARIANT G RAPH N ETWORKS

Theorem 1 in (Maron et al., 2019a) and Theorem 2 in (Geerts, 2020) together imply the following
fundamental result for the theory of IGNs.
Proposition 5. There exist d > 0 and a large F > 0 such that for hidden feature dimensions
f1 , . . . , fd > F , the neural space N ¤â ((Rn )ÔŐŚ2 ÔŐŚRf0 , (Rn )ÔŐŚk ÔŐŚRf1 , . . . , (Rn )ÔŐŚk ÔŐŚRfd , R) matches
the separation power of k-WL.

However, Remark 1 shows that the dimension of hidden invariant features does not affect separation
power, strengthening Proposition 5 in the following corollary.
Corollary 1. There exist d > 0 such that for any hidden feature dimensions f1 , . . . , fd > 0, the
neural space N ¤â ((Rn )ÔŐŚ2 ÔŐŚ Rf0 , (Rn )ÔŐŚk ÔŐŚ Rf1 , . . . , (Rn )ÔŐŚk ÔŐŚ Rfd , R) matches the separation
power of k-WL.

6.2   C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL N ETWORKS

The separation power of circular CNNs is influenced by the width of the filterÔÇÖs support.
Proposition 6. Let M k be the layer space for circular convolutions with filter size k, as defined
in Example 3. Consider the neural space k-CNN = N ¤â (M k , Aff Zn (Rn , R)). This is the space
associated with shallow convolutional networks, where the first layer consists of one filter of size k
followed by an output invariant layer. For n > 2, we have:
          ¤ü(n-CNN) ÔŐŐ ¤ü(1-CNN),           and    ¤ü(n-CNN) ÔŐć ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐć ¤ü(2-CNN) ÔŐć ¤ü(1-CNN).

7     L IMITATIONS
The primary limitations of the proposed framework lie within its initial assumptions. Specifically, it
only applies to permutation representations and cannot extend to other important equivariant models,
such as Clebsch-Gordan or polynomial approaches (Kondor et al., 2018; Puny et al., 2023). While
the techniques used to prove Theorem 1 could be applied, the functional equation (12) necessary for
the proof is substantially different, and no actionable solution is known up to our knowledge. Solving
these equations would improve our understanding of the separation power in these models. The
second key assumption is that we consider only intermediate layers with bias, which is standard in
many practical models. In cases where bias terms are absent, such as in some GNN models, our model
can only provide a bound on the separation power. Indeed, these models can be reformulated as IGNs
(Maron et al., 2018), which belong to a broader neural space with bias terms, allowing us to analyze
their separation power. Our final assumption involves the use of non-polynomial activation functions,
commonly employed with examples like ReLU, tanh, and sigmoid. While non-polynomiality is
sufficient for separation, some polynomial activations may also achieve maximal separation power.
However, identifying these specific polynomials presents a complex mathematical challenge. For
further details, we refer readers to (Kiss & Laczkovich, 2014).

8     C ONCLUSIONS
The proposed results enhance our understanding of which target functions can be approximated
with arbitrary precision by functions in neural network spaces relevant to practical applications. In
particular, these target functions must satisfy the identification relation of neural networks spaces,
which can now be computed using Theorem 1. This result helps us classify hyperparameters and
architectural choices into two categories: those that directly influence separation power, significantly
impacting both approximation ability and computational cost, and those that do not affect separation
power but may influence approximation in a separation-constrained setting, potentially with minimal
computational cost. Specifically, we prove that all non-polynomial activations provide maximum
separation power, depth enhances separation up to a stabilization point, and hidden feature width has
no effect on separation power. Lastly, we show how these insights can be applied to practical models,
such as IGNs and standard CNNs.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


9   ACKNOLEDGEMENTS
Bruno Lepri acknowledges the support of the PNRR project FAIR - Future AI Research (PE00000013),
under the NRRP MUR program funded by the NextGenerationEU and the support of the European
UnionÔÇÖs Horizon Europe research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 101120237
(ELIAS).

R EFERENCES
Emily Alsentzer, Samuel G. Finlayson, Michelle M. Li, and Marinka Zitnik. Subgraph Neural
 Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Beatrice Bevilacqua, Fabrizio Frasca, Derek Lim, Balasubramaniam Srinivasan, Chen Cai, Gopinath
  Balamurugan, Michael M. Bronstein, and Haggai Maron. Equivariant Subgraph Aggregation
  Networks. In International Conference of Learning Representations, 2022.
Michael M. Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Velic╠îkovic╠ü. Geometric Deep Learning:
 Grids, Groups, Graphs, Geodesics, and Gauges. arXiv:2104.13478 [cs, stat], 2021. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2104.13478.
Lowik Chanussot, Abhishek Das, Siddharth Goyal, Thibaut Lavril, Muhammed Shuaibi, Morgane
  Riviere, Kevin Tran, Javier Heras-Domingo, Caleb Ho, Weihua Hu, Aini Palizhati, Anuroop
  Sriram, Brandon Wood, Junwoong Yoon, Devi Parikh, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Zachary Ulissi.
  Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) Dataset and Community Challenges. ACS Catalysis, 2021.
Taco Cohen. Equivariant convolutional networks. PhD Thesis, 2021.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Learning the Irreducible Representations of Commutative Lie Groups.
  In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2014.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group Equivariant Convolutional Networks. In Proceedings of The
  33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2016a.
Taco S. Cohen and Max Welling. Steerable CNNs. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2016b.
Taco S. Cohen, Maurice Weiler, Berkay Kicanaoglu, and Max Welling. Gauge Equivariant Con-
  volutional Networks and the Icosahedral CNN, 2019. In Proceedings of The 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2019.
Philip J. Davis. Circulant Matrices. Wiley, 1979.
Sander Dieleman, Kyle W. Willett, and Joni Dambre. Rotation-invariant convolutional neural
  networks for galaxy morphology prediction. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
  2015.
Nadav Dym and Haggai Maron. On the Universality of Rotation Equivariant Point Cloud Networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Weinan E. Machine Learning: Mathematical Theory and Scientific Applications. Notices of the
 American Mathematical Society, 2019.
Fabrizio Frasca, Beatrice Bevilacqua, Michael M. Bronstein, and Haggai Maron. Understanding and
  Extending Subgraph GNNs by Rethinking Their Symmetries. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
William Fulton and Joe Harris. Representation Theory. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer,
 2004.
Floris Geerts. The expressive power of kth-order invariant graph networks. arXiv:2007.12035 [cs,
  math, stat], 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.12035.
Floris Geerts and Juan L Reutter. Expressiveness and Approximation Properties of Graph Neural
  Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Floris Geerts, Thomas Mu├▒oz, Cristian Riveros, and Domagoj Vrgoc╠î. Expressive Power of Linear
  Algebra Query Languages. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium
  on Principles of Database Systems, 2021.

M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli. A new model for learning in graph domains. In Proceedings.
 2005 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2005., 2005.

Chaitanya K. Joshi, Cristian Bodnar, Simon V. Mathis, Taco Cohen, and Pietro Lio. On the Ex-
  pressive Power of Geometric Graph Neural Networks. In International Conference of Learning
  Representations, 2023.

Chaitanya K. Joshi, Arian R. Jamasb, Ramon Vi├▒as, Charles Harris, Simon V. Mathis, Alex Morehead,
  and Pietro Li├▓. gRNAde: Geometric Deep Learning for 3D RNA inverse design. Methods Mol.
  Biol. 2025.

Palaniappan Kannappan. Functional Equations and Inequalities with Applications, Springer, 2009.

Nicolas Keriven and Gabriel Peyr├ę. Universal Invariant and Equivariant Graph Neural Networks. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional
  Networks. In International Conference of Learning Representations, 2017.

Gergely Kiss. Linear functional equations, Phd Thesis, 2014.

Risi Kondor and Shubhendu Trivedi. On the Generalization of Equivariance and Convolution in
  Neural Networks to the Action of Compact Groups. In Proceedings of the 35th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2018.

Risi Kondor, Zhen Lin, and Shubhendu Trivedi. Clebsch-Gordan Nets: a Fully Fourier Space
  Spherical Convolutional Neural Network, November 2018. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2018.

L├íszl├│ Lov├ísz. Large Networks and Graph Limits. American Mathematical Society, 2012.

Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Nadav Shamir, and Yaron Lipman. Invariant and Equivariant Graph
  Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Hadar Serviansky, and Yaron Lipman. Provably Powerful Graph
  Networks. In International Conference of Learning Representations, 2019a.

Haggai Maron, Ethan Fetaya, Nimrod Segol, and Yaron Lipman. On the Universality of Invariant
  Networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR,
  2019b.

Haggai Maron, Or Litany, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. On Learning Sets of Symmetric Elements.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2020.

Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L. Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and Leman Go Neural: Higher-Order Graph Neural Networks.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.

Marco Pacini, Xiaowen Dong, Bruno Lepri, and Gabriele Santin. A Characterization Theorem
 for Equivariant Networks with Point-wise Activations. In International Conference of Learning
 Representations, 2024.

Edward Pearce-Crump. Connecting Permutation Equivariant Neural Networks and Partition Diagrams.
  arXiv:2212.08648 [cs, math, stat], 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08648.

Omri Puny, Derek Lim, Bobak T. Kiani, Haggai Maron, and Yaron Lipman. Equivariant Polynomials
 for Graph Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, PMLR, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Charles R. Qi, Su, Hao, Mo, Kaichun, and Guibas, Leonidas J. PointNet: Deep Learning on Point
  Sets for 3D Classification and Segmentation. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Siamak Ravanbakhsh. Universal Equivariant Multilayer Perceptrons. In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2020.
Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Jeff Schneider, and Barnab├ís P├│czos. Equivariance Through Parameter-
  Sharing. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR,
  2017.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The
  graph neural network model. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 2009.
B Yu Weisfeiler and A A Leman. The Reduction of a Graph to Canonical Form and the Algebra
  Which Appears Therein. 1968.
Jeffrey Wood and John Shawe-Taylor. Representation theory and invariant neural networks. Discrete
  Applied Mathematics, 1996.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How Powerful are Graph Neural
  Networks? In International Conference of Learning Representations, 2019.
Dmitry Yarotsky. Universal approximations of invariant maps by neural networks. In Constructive
 Approximation, 2022.
Bohang Zhang, Jingchu Gai, Yiheng Du, Qiwei Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Beyond Weisfeiler-
  Lehman: A Quantitative Framework for GNN Expressiveness. In International Conference of
  Learning Representations, 2024.
Ding-Xuan Zhou. Universality of deep convolutional neural networks. In Applied and Computational
  Harmonic Analysis, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P RELIMINARIES
A.1    S PACES OF A FFINE T RANSFORMATIONS

Let V and W be vector spaces, we denote by Hom(V, W ) the set of linear maps between V and W ,
and Aff(V, W ) the set of affine maps between V and W . Note that both Hom(V, W ) and Aff(V, W )
are real vector spaces with respect to addition and scalar multiplication. For each v Ôłł W define
¤äv : W Ôćĺ W such as ¤äv (w) = w + v for each w in W . Each affine map f : V Ôćĺ W has a
unique decomposition ¤Ľ = ¤äv ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ, where ¤Ľ is a linear map and ¤äv is a translation by a vector v Ôłł W .
Previous observations imply that the map
                                       Hom(V, W ) ÔŐĽ W Ôćĺ Aff(V, W )
                                  ╬Ş:
                                              (¤Ľ, v) 7Ôćĺ ¤äv ¤Ľ
is an isomorphism of vector spaces. Define TW = {¤äv | v Ôłł W }, as clearly TW Ôł╝
                                                                             = W , we will often
abuse notation identifying TW with W . Then, we can define the maps
                         Aff(V, W ) Ôćĺ Hom(V, W )                          Aff(V, W ) Ôćĺ W
                    ╬╗:                                     and      ¤ä:
                              f 7Ôćĺ f Ôłĺ f (0)                                 f 7Ôćĺ f (0).
We call ╬╗(f ) the linear part of f for each f Ôłł Aff(V, W ) and ¤ä (f ) the translational part of f for
each affine map.
Proposition 7. Maps ╬╗ and ¤ä are linear and surjective.

Proof. The projection on the linear part ╬╗ is linear since for each ╬▒, ╬▓ Ôłł R and f, g Ôłł Aff(V, W )
            ╬╗(╬▒f + ╬▓g) = (╬▒f + ╬▓g) Ôłĺ (╬▒f + ╬▓g)(0) = ╬▒f + ╬▓g Ôłĺ ╬▒f (0) Ôłĺ ╬▓g(0) =
                                    ╬▒(f Ôłĺ f (0)) Ôłĺ ╬▓(g Ôłĺ g(0)) = ╬▒╬╗(f ) + ╬▓╬╗(g).
Furthermore, ╬╗ is surjective since for each ¤Ľ Ôłł Hom(V, W ), we have that ╬╗(¤Ľ) = ¤Ľ Ôłĺ ¤Ľ(0) = ¤Ľ.
The projection on the translational part ¤ä is linear since for each ╬▒, ╬▓ Ôłł R and f, g Ôłł Aff(V, W )
                 ¤ä (╬▒f + ╬▓g) = (╬▒f + ╬▓g)(0) = ╬▒f (0) + ╬▓g(0) = ╬▒¤ä (f ) + ╬▓¤ä (g).
Map ¤ä is also surjective since fix f Ôłł Hom(V, W ) and notice that ¤ä (¤äv f ) = v and ¤äv f Ôłł Aff(V, W )
for each v Ôłł W .

In general, we will be interested in vector sub-spaces M of Aff(V, W ). A simple way to construct
M is to identify sub-spaces of interest L in Hom(V, W ) and subspaces T of TW Ôł╝     = W and define
M = ╬Ş(L ÔŐĽ T ). We will be interested only is sub-spaces which are possible to construct in this
way. Nevertheless, it is worth noticing there exist sub-spaces of Aff(V, W ) that are not isomorphic
through ╬Ş to directed sums of linear and translation parts. An example is given by the space
M = {¤ä╬▒v ÔŚŽ ╬▒¤Ľ | ╬▒ Ôłł R}. Notice that ╬╗(M ) = {╬▒¤Ľ | ╬▒ Ôłł R}, ¤ä (M ) = {╬▒v | ╬▒ Ôłł R},
and dim M = ╬╗(M ) = ¤ä (M ) = 1. If M = ╬Ş(╬╗(M ) ÔŐĽ ¤ä (M )), we should have 1 = dim M =
dim ╬╗(M )+dim ¤ä (M ) = 2, which is not possible. Spaces that can be decomposed as M = ╬Ş(LÔŐĽT )
have the following useful property.
Proposition 8. Let M be a subspace of Aff(V, W ), where there exist a subspace L of Hom(V, W )
and a subspace T of W such that M = ╬Ş(L ÔŐĽ T ). Let ¤Ľ1 , . . . , ¤Ľs be a basis for L and v1 , . . . , vn a
basis for T . Then, each f in M can be written as
                                              s
                                              X                   n
                                                                  X
                                   f : ╬▓ 7Ôćĺ         xi ¤Ľi (╬▓) +         yj vj ,
                                              i=1                 j=1

for unique parameters xi and yj for each i = 1, . . . , s and j = 1, . . . , n.

A.2    G ROUP T HEORY

Definition 4. A group is a pair (G, ┬Ě) where G is a set and ┬Ě : G ├Ś G Ôćĺ G is a function satisfying
the following axioms.

       ÔÇó Associativity: for each g, h, k Ôłł G we have(g ┬Ě h) ┬Ě k = g ┬Ě (h ┬Ě k).


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      ÔÇó Identity: there exists an element e Ôłł G such that g ┬Ě e = e ┬Ě g = g for each g Ôłł G.
      ÔÇó Inverse Element: for each element g Ôłł G, there exists an element g Ôłĺ1 Ôłł G such that
        g ┬Ě g Ôłĺ1 = g Ôłĺ1 ┬Ě g = e.

A group is finite if it contains a finite number of elements. A group is abelian or commutative if
gh = hg for each g, h Ôłł G.
Example 4. Here we present some fundamental examples of groups.

      ÔÇó Let X be a set and define the set of permutation of X as
                                   S X = {f : X Ôćĺ X | f is bijective}.
        With the composition operation form the symmetric group or the permutation group of
        X. Particular attention is devoted to the case X = [n], we write Sn = S X and it called
        symmetric group or the permutation group of n elements.
      ÔÇó Let Zn be the group of integers modulo n with the addition operation, they are called finite
        cyclic groups of order n.
      ÔÇó Given two groups G and H, the direct product G ├Ś H of them is still a group. The set of the
        elements is the Cartesian product of G and H while the sum is defined as
                              (g1 , h1 ) ┬ĚG├ŚH (g2 , h2 ) = (g1 ┬ĚG g2 , h1 ┬ĚH h2 ).

Now, we introduce the notion of group homomorphism, a transformation between groups which
preserves the operation.
Definition 5. A group homomorphism is a map
                                            ¤Ľ:GÔćĺH
between G and H groups such that, for each g, h Ôłł G
                                      ¤Ľ(g ┬Ě h) = ¤Ľ(g) ┬Ě ¤Ľ(h).
Definition 6 (Cosets). Let G be a group and H be a subgroup of G. The set of left cosets of
G by H is the set G/H = {gH | g Ôłł G}, where gH = {gh | h Ôłł H} are the left cosets of
H. Similarly, we define the set of right cosets as H\G = {Hg | g Ôłł G}. Let K be a second
subgroup of G, we define the double coset of H and K with respect to an element g Ôłł G as the set
HgK = {hgk | h Ôłł H, k Ôłł K}. The set of double cosets is denoted as H\G/K.
Example 5. Relevant examples of left cosets include the following:

      1. Consider G = Z and the subgroup H = n Z of integers multiples of n. The quotient G/H
         is a group and is isomorphic to the cyclic group of n elements, Zn .
      2. Consider G = S3 , the symmetric group on three elements, and the subgroup H =
         {(1), (12)}. The quotient G/H is a group and is isomorphic to S2 , symmetric group
         on two elements.
      3. Consider G = Sn , the symmetric group on n elements, and the subgroup H = An , the
         alternating group on n elements. The quotient G/H is a group and is isomorphic to Z2 .

A.3   G ROUP ACTIONS AND E QUIVARIANT M APS

Let G be a group and X be a set. An action of the group G on the set X is a function
                                         ╬Ž : G ├Ś X Ôćĺ X,
usually written as ¤Ľg (x) = ╬Ž(g, x) for each g in G and x in X, such that:

      ÔÇó For the identity element e in G, the identity condition ¤Ľe = idX holds.
      ÔÇó For all g, h Ôłł G, the compatibility condition ¤Ľg ÔŚŽ ¤Ľh = ¤Ľgh holds.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this context, we often write g ┬Ě x or simply gx instead of ¤Ľg (x). A G-set is a set X equipped with
a group action of G. This means that there is a well-defined action ┬Ě : G ├Ś X Ôćĺ X satisfying the
properties of a group action as described above. Throughout the following sections, it will often be
convenient to decompose G-sets into a disjoint union of subsets, each minimal (in a sense specified
in Definition 7) and equipped with a compatible G-action.
Definition 7. Let G be a group acting on a set X. An orbit in X is a subset Y ÔŐć X such that for
each x Ôłł Y , we have Y = {g ┬Ě x | g Ôłł G}. The set X can be decomposed into a disjoint union
of orbits under the action of G. This is called the orbit decomposition of X, and if X is finite, the
decomposition can be written as
                                           X = X1 ÔŐö ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐö Xn ,
where X1 , . . . , Xn are the distinct orbits of X.

Another fundamental concept for our treatment is that of a function between G-sets that preserves
actions, which is more formally specified in Definition 8.
Definition 8. Let X and Y be two G-sets, a map f : X Ôćĺ Y is G-equivariant if
                                         g ┬Ě f (x) = f (g ┬Ě x)
for each x in X.

A.4   G ROUP R EPRESENTATIONS AND E QUIVARIANT A FFINE T RANSFORMATIONS

Let G be a group and V be a vector space over a field R. A G-action ╬Ž : G ├Ś V Ôćĺ V on V is
G-representation if ¤Ľg is linear for each g in G. Or equivalently,
                                               G Ôćĺ GL(V )
                                          ¤Ľ:
                                                 g 7Ôćĺ ¤Ľg
where GL(V ) is the general linear group of V , consisting of all invertible linear transformations on
V . We will usually identify the entire ╬Ž : G ├Ś V Ôćĺ V action with V itself and write gv = ╬Ž(g, v).
Let V and W be two G-representations, we will indicate the set of equivariant linear maps be-
tween V and W as HomG (V, W ) and as Aff G (V, W ) the set of equivariant affine maps. Note that
HomG (V, W ) is a vector space. Indeed, 0 Ôłł HomG (V, W ) and for each f, g Ôłł HomG (V, W ) and
each ╬▒, ╬▓ Ôłł R, ╬▒f + ╬▓g Ôłł HomG (V, W ). The same is true for Aff G (V, W ).
Let V be a G-representation, we define the set of invariant vectors V G = {v Ôłł V | gv = v ÔłÇg Ôłł G}.
In Section A.1 we studied the properties of vector subspaces of affine transformations between vector
spaces. Here we are now interested in studying subspaces of equivariant affine transformations. To
better understand the structure of such spaces it is necessary to remind Theorem 8 in Pacini et al.
(2024).
Theorem 6. An map ¤Ľ = ¤äw ÔŚŽ f belongs to Aff G (V, W ) if and if f Ôłł HomG (V, W ) and v is
invariant.

We can define restrictions of maps ╬ŞG , ╬╗G , and ¤äG as follows
                                   HomG (V, W ) ÔŐĽ W G Ôćĺ Aff G (V, W )
                            ╬ŞG :
                                             (¤Ľ, v) 7Ôćĺ ¤äv ¤Ľ
                    Aff G (V, W ) Ôćĺ HomG (V, W )                   Aff G (V, W ) Ôćĺ W G
              ╬╗G :                                     and ¤äG :
                            f 7Ôćĺ f Ôłĺ f (0)                               f 7Ôćĺ f (0).
Theorem 6 implies that ╬ŞG is an isomorphism and a similar proof to the one of Proposition 7 shows
that both ╬╗G and ¤äG are linear, equivariant, and surjective. When it will be clear we are working in
the equivariant setting, we will drop the subscript and just write ╬Ş, ╬╗, and ¤ä .
In the main text we will often use the following results.
Proposition 9. Let V1 , V2 , and V be G-representations. Then,
                      HomG (V1 ÔŐĽ V2 , V ) = HomG (V1 , V ) ÔŐĽ HomG (V2 , V )
and
                      HomG (V, V1 ÔŐĽ V2 ) = HomG (V, V1 ) ÔŐĽ HomG (V, V2 ).


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 10. Let V and W be G-representations, and let G act trivially on Rn and Rm . Then,
                  HomG (V ÔŐŚ Rn , W ÔŐŚ Rm ) Ôł╝
                                          = HomG (V, W ) ÔŐŚ Hom(Rn , Rm ),
and
                                     (V ÔŐŚ Rn )G Ôł╝ = V G ÔŐŚ Rn .
In other words, recalling that Aff G (V, W ) Ôł╝
                                             = HomG (V, W ) ÔŐĽ W G and since Hom(Rn , Rm ) Ôł╝     =
  n├Śm
R      is the set of n ├Ś m matrices over R, understanding the structure of Aff G (V ÔŐŚ Rn , W ÔŐŚ Rm )
reduces to understanding the structure of Aff G (V, W ).

A.5    O N P ERMUTATION R EPRESENTATIONS

The followings are easy and known results from the theory of permutation representations.
We recall the definition of permutation representations as stated in Section 4.1.
Definition 9. Let X be a finite set and G a finite group acting on it. A permutation representation of
G is a representation of G on RX such that g(ex ) = egx for each g Ôłł G and x Ôłł X.
Proposition 11. Let X and Y be two G-sets. We have the two following G-representations isomor-
phisms
                        RXÔŐöY Ôł╝ = RX ÔŐĽ RY and RX├ŚY Ôł╝     = RX ÔŐŚ R Y ,
where X ÔŐö Y indicate the disjoint union of the sets X and Y .
Example 6. Let S = [n] and let Sn act on S in the standard way and note that RS =     Ôł╝ Rn as
representations. From Proposition 11, we obtain that tensors of order 2 are R ÔŐŚ R = RS├ŚS =
                                                                              n    n

Rn├Śn . Let Ôłć = {(i, i) | i Ôłł S} and Ôłć = {(i, j) Ôłł S | i ╠Ş= j}, note that S ├Ś S = Ôłć ÔŐö Ôłć and that
Sn acts transitively on both Ôłć and Ôłć. Therefore, Rn ÔŐŚ Rn Ôł╝ = RS├ŚS Ôł╝  = R Ôłć ÔŐĽ RÔłć .

We say that a group G acts transitively on a set X if this action has only one orbit, namely Gx = X
for each x Ôłł X. If X = X1 ÔŐö┬Ě ┬Ě ┬ĚÔŐöXn is the orbit decomposition of X, then RX Ôł╝    = RX1 ÔŐĽ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬ĚÔŐĽRXn .
As the bias terms of equivariant layers are vectors invariant under the action of permutation repre-
sentations, it is important to characterize the invariant part of a permutation representation. Before
proceeding, it is necessary to state the following result.
Proposition 12. If G is a finite group acting transitively on a finite set X, then there exists a subgroup
H < G and a G-set bijection between X and G/H.

Proposition 12 implies that we can restrict our study to representations of the form RG/H for some
subgroup H of G. With this result, we can now proceed to prove Proposition    1. Let G be a group and
X be a finite set with action of G. For Y ÔŐć X, recall that 1Y = yÔłłY ey .
                                                                  P


Proof of Proposition 1. The Reynolds operator
                                                  V ÔłĺÔćĺ V G
                                          R:
                                                       X
                                                  v 7Ôćĺ   gv
                                                        gÔłłG

projects each G-representation V on its invariant subspace V G . In the case V = RG/H , ekH is an
element of the canonical base of RG/H ,
                                                                  egH = |H|1G/H .
                           X            X                 X
                R(ekH ) =      gekH =       egkH = |H|
                            gÔłłG           gÔłłG                 gHÔłłG/H

The final observation follows from Proposition 11.

Propositions 11 and 9 together imply that characterizing equivariant maps between permutation
representations reduces to characterizing equivariant maps between representations induced by
transitive actions on finite sets, or equivalently, left cosets by Proposition 12. We address this in
Proposition 14. To prove this result, we first define the concept of right multiplication in Definition 10
and then prove Proposition 13, which characterizes equivariant maps between regular representations.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 10. For each g Ôłł G define the right-multiplication

                                                  RG ÔłĺÔćĺ RG
                                        Rg :
                                                  eh 7Ôćĺ ehgÔłĺ1 .

Proposition 13. Right actions are a basis for the space of equivariant endomorphisms of the regular
representation. In other words, {Rg }gÔłłG is a basis for HomG (RG , RG ).


Proof. Each linear application ¤Ľ Ôłł Hom(RG , RG ) is defined by the values ¤Ľ(eg ) for each g Ôłł G
by linear extension. If ¤Ľ is G-equivariant, it is defined just by its value on ee . Indeed, ¤Ľ(eg ) =
¤Ľ(gee ) = g¤Ľ(ee ) for each g Ôłł G. Note that Rg is linear as the right action of g on RG is linear
and Rg (eh ) = ehgÔłĺ1 = eh g Ôłĺ1 . It is also equivariant, indeed Rg (hv) = hvg Ôłĺ1 = h Rg (v) for each
v Ôłł RG and h Ôłł G. Furthermore, RgÔłĺ1 (ee ) = eg for each g Ôłł G and therefore they generate
HomG (RG , RG ).
                                                                   P
Suppose that there exist values ag Ôłł R for each g Ôłł G such that gÔłłG ag Rg = 0, then
                                      X                      X
                                 0=          ag Rg (ee ) =         ag egÔłĺ1 .
                                      gÔłłG                    gÔłłG

Since elements eg are linearly independent, ag = 0 for each g Ôłł G. Hence, Rg are linearly
independent and form a basis for HomG (RG , RG ).


Now we would like to have a result similar to Proposition 13 but for morphisms between G/K and
G/H. To do this we need to define the following injection

                                                  RG/H Ôćĺ RG
                                    ╬╣G/H :             1 X
                                               egH 7Ôćĺ      egh ,
                                                      |H|
                                                              hÔłłH

and projection
                                                   RG Ôćĺ RG/H
                                       ¤ÇG/H :
                                                    eg 7Ôćĺ egH .

For an arbitrary representation V , we define two surjective maps

                                     HomG (RG , V ) Ôćá HomG (RG/K , V )
                          ╬╣ÔłŚG/K :
                                              ¤Ľ 7Ôćĺ ¤Ľ ÔŚŽ ╬╣G/K ,

and
                                      HomG (V, RG ) Ôćá HomG (V, RG/H )
                          ¤ÇG/HÔłŚ :
                                               ¤Ľ 7Ôćĺ ¤ÇG/H ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ.

We can now generalize the concept of right multiplication to the general case of transitive actions, a
concept necessary for stating Proposition 14, which we will then prove by following the approach
used in the proof of Proposition 13.
Definition 11. Define RHgK = ╬▒ Rg where the map ╬▒ = ¤ÇG/HÔłŚ ÔŚŽ ╬╣ÔłŚG/K is defined from
HomG (RG , RG ) to HomG (RG/K , RG/H ).
Proposition 14. The map RHgK is well-defined and the set {RHgK }HgKÔłłH\G/K is a basis for
HomG (RG/K , RG/H ). Finally,
                                          (
                                             1
                                                 if sH ÔŐć kKg Ôłĺ1 H,
                       RHgK (ekK )     = |K|
                                    sH     0     otherwise.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. To prove that RHgK is well-defined, we need to prove that ╬▒ Rg = ╬▒ Rhgk for each h Ôłł H
and k Ôłł K. Indeed,
                             1 X
  ¤ÇG/H Rhgk ╬╣G/K (esK ) =            estkÔłĺ1 gÔłĺ1 hÔłĺ1 H =
                           |K|
                               tÔłłK
                          1 X                          1 X
                                  estkÔłĺ1 gÔłĺ1 hÔłĺ1 H =         estgÔłĺ1 H = ¤ÇG/H Rg ╬╣G/K (esK ),
                         |K|                          |K|
                                       tÔłłK                                 tÔłłK
                                                           Ôłĺ1
where the penultimate equality is true because h                H = H and variable change t 7Ôćĺ tk Ôłĺ1 in the sum.
By Proposition 13 the set {Rg }gÔłłG is a basis for HomG (RG , RG ). By the previous observation
we have shown that the image of {Rg }gÔłłG under ╬▒ is {RHgK }HgKÔłłH\G/K . As ╬▒ is a surjection,
{RHgK }HgKÔłłH\G/K generates HomG (RG/K , RG/H ).
Proving linear independence is similar to the proof of linear independence in Proposition 13. Indeed,
let aHgK Ôłł R for each HgK Ôłł H\G/K such that
                                       X
                                                aHgK RHgK = 0.
                                        HgKÔłłH\G/K

Hence,
                           X                                           X          1       X
             0=                      aHgK RHgK (eK ) =                               aHgK   etgÔłĺ1 H .
                                                                                 |K|
                     HgKÔłłH\G/K                                   HgKÔłłH\G/K                tÔłłK
                      Ôłĺ1
Note that sets {tg H}tÔłłK are pairwise P disjoint with g varying between representatives of HgK.
This means that the respective vectors tÔłłK etgÔłĺ1 H are linearly independent, hence each aHgK = 0.
This proves that the maps RHgK are linearly independent. Finally, observing that
                                                 1 X
                                 RHgK (ekK ) =           ektgÔłĺ1 H ,
                                               |K|
                                                                     tÔłłK
it is clear that                                           (
                                                                1
                                                               |K|    if sH ÔŐć kKg Ôłĺ1 H,
                                   RHgK (ekK )         =
                                                  sH        0         otherwise.


Remark 2. In our case of interest, in which G is a finite group, the map v 7Ôćĺ v ┬Ě w is equivalent at
convolving v by w. Proposition 14 is just a restatement and integration of Theorem 1 in Kondor &
Trivedi (2018) in the restricted case of homogeneous spaces of finite groups.

B     M AIN R ESULTS
B.1    T HE C HARACTERIZATION T HEOREM

To formally state and prove Theorem 1, we need to understand how bias terms in neural spaces
transform under the twin network trick. Note that, in general, we have ¤ä (Aff G (V, W )) ÔŐŐ
¤ä (Aff G (V ÔŐĽ V, W ÔŐĽ W )), as illustrated by the following Example 7.
Example 7 (Twin Layers in 2-IGNs). Let us consider IGN layers. In this case, V = W = RX . The
twin layer takes and has values in RX ÔŐĽ RX Ôł╝
                                                       ÔÇ▓
                                             = RXÔŐöX where X ÔÇ▓ is a disjoint copy of X. Hence, the
                                           ÔÇ▓           ÔÇ▓
twin IGN layer is an affine function RXÔŐöX Ôćĺ RXÔŐöX defined as follows:
                  (A, B) 7Ôćĺ (L(A), L(B)) + y1 1X1 + y2 1X2 + y1 1X1ÔÇ▓ + y2 1X2ÔÇ▓ ,              (5)
where X1ÔÇ▓ and X2ÔÇ▓ are the copies of X1 and X2 in X ÔÇ▓ , respectively. Note that they share
the same parameter for 1X1 and 1X1ÔÇ▓ and for 1X2 and 1X2ÔÇ▓ , while the translational part of
Aff Sn (RXÔŐöX , RXÔŐöX ) is y1 1X1 + y2 1X2 + y1ÔÇ▓ 1X1ÔÇ▓ + y2ÔÇ▓ 1X2ÔÇ▓ . Alternatively, we have
            ÔÇ▓      ÔÇ▓


                                                                                    ÔÇ▓      ÔÇ▓
                   dim ¤ä (Aff Sn (RX , RX )) = 2 and dim ¤ä (Aff Sn (RXÔŐöX , RXÔŐöX )) = 4.
Hence,
                                                               ÔÇ▓      ÔÇ▓
                           ¤ä Aff Sn (RX , RX ) ÔŐŐ ¤ä Aff Sn (RXÔŐöX , RXÔŐöX ) .


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example 7 shows that we need a definition of bias that can describe the bias terms in (5). This will be
provided in Definition 12.
Definition 12 (Complete Bias). We say that the subspace M of Aff G (V, RX ) has complete bias if
╬╗(M ) ÔŐĽ ¤ä (M ) Ôł╝= M through ╬Ş and ¤ä (M ) = ÔčĘ1P ÔčęP ÔłłP , where P is a partition of X. In this case,
we say that the bias of M is subordinate to the partition P. In the opposite case, we say that M has
incomplete bias. In particular, we say that M has null bias if its translational part ¤ä (M ) is zero; in
other words, M is simply a subspace of HomG (V, RX ) and M = ╬╗(M ).
The following observations are necessary to justify this definition.
Remark 3. Note that each subspace M of Aff G (V, RX ) such that M = ╬╗(M ) ÔŐĽ ¤ä (M ) and ¤ä (M ) =
¤ä (Aff G (V, RX )) has complete bias. Indeed, in this case we have P = {X1 , . . . , Xn }, the G-orbit
decomposition of X and
                                          ¤ä (M ) = ÔčĘ1Xi ÔčęXi ÔłłP
as proven in Proposition 1. Therefore, all examples in Section 4.2 have complete bias.
Remark 4. Note that each subspace M of Aff G (V, RX ) has complete bias if and only if there exist
¤Ľ1 , . . . , ¤Ľs in HomG (V, RX ) and a partition P of X such that each map in M can be written as
                                                                     yP 1Y
                                                                  X
                             ╬▓ 7Ôćĺ x1 ¤Ľ1 (╬▓) + ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě + xs ¤Ľs (╬▓) +                                  (6)
                                                                        Y ÔłłP
where xi and yP are real parameters for each i = 1, . . . , s and each P in P.
Proposition 15. Let M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 be subspaces with complete bias, then the space of twin networks
                                          N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ )
has intermediate layers with complete bias and output layer with null bias.
The proof of Proposition 15 relies on Proposition 16 and Lemma 1 which will be stated shortly.
Definition 13. Let X be a finite set, we define the duplicate set of X as the set X ÔŐö X ÔÇ▓ where X ÔÇ▓
is a disjoint copy of X. Let P be a partition of X, we define the duplicate partition of P as the
partition P ÔÇ▓ of the duplicate of X such that P ÔÇ▓ = {Y ÔŐö Y ÔÇ▓ | Y Ôłł P}. For each y Ôłł Y , we will
usually indicate the respective element in Y ÔÇ▓ as y ÔÇ▓ , although when it will be clear from the context we
may abuse notation and call both y.
Proposition 16. If M is a sub-vector space of Aff G (V, RX ) with complete bias subordinate to parti-
tion P then the twin space M is a subspace of Aff G (V ÔŐĽ V, RX ÔŐĽ RX ) Ôł╝
                                                                                                    ÔÇ▓
                                                                            = Aff G (V ÔŐĽ V, RXÔŐöX ) and
has complete bias subordinate to the duplicate partition of P. In particular, dim ¤ä (M ) = dim ¤ä (M )
and dim ¤ä (Aff G (V ÔŐĽ V, RX ÔŐĽ RX )) = 2 dim ¤ä (Aff G (V, RX )) = 2 dim ¤ä (Aff G (V, RX )).

Proof. Trivially, if M = ╬╗(M ) ÔŐĽ ¤ä (M ), then M = ╬╗ M ÔŐĽ ¤ä M . Noticing that ╬Â : RX ÔŐĽ RX Ôł╝

                                                                                              =
       ÔÇ▓
RXÔŐöX such that ╬Â((ex , 0)) = ex and ╬Â((0, ex )) = exÔÇ▓ is an isomorphism. First we show that that
Aff G (V ÔŐĽ V, RX ÔŐĽ RX ) Ôł╝
                                                ÔÇ▓
                          = Aff G (V ÔŐĽ V, RXÔŐöX ). If M has P complete bias subordinate to P then
¤ä (M ) = ÔčĘ1Y ÔčęY ÔłłP and each v Ôłł ¤ä (M ) can be written as v = Y ÔłłP aY 1Y for some (aY )Y Ôłł RP .
Remember that ¤ä (M ) = {¤Ľ(0) | ¤Ľ Ôłł M }, then
                    ¤ä (M ) = {(¤Ľ(0), ¤Ľ(0)) | ¤Ľ Ôłł M } = {(v, v) | v Ôłł ¤ä (M )} =
                                 (                                          )
                                         aY 1Y ,     aY 1Y ) | (aY )Y Ôłł R
                                     X           X
                                                                          P
                                   (                                          .
                                          Y ÔłłP           Y ÔłłP
                             X        X    Ôł╝     XÔŐöX ÔÇ▓
                                                         , we can write ╬Â( Y ÔłłP aY 1Y , Y ÔłłP aY 1Y ) =
                                                                          P            P
By the isomorphism ╬Â : R         ÔŐĽR        = R
  Y ÔłłP aY 1Y ÔŐöY .
P
               ÔÇ▓


Lemma 1. The output space of a twin network M ÔÇ▓ always has null bias, independently of the bias
space ¤ä (M ).

Proof. Let ¤Ľ : v 7Ôćĺ f (v) + y be an affine map in M < Aff G (V, W ). Then the output layer of the
twin network is
                 ¤ĽÔÇ▓ (v, w) = ¤Ľ(v) Ôłĺ ¤Ľ(w) = f (v) + y Ôłĺ f (w) Ôłĺ y = f (v) Ôłĺ f (w),
which is always a linear map in Aff G (V ÔŐĽ V, W ). Equivalently, ¤ä (M ÔÇ▓ ) = 0.


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Proposition 15. Apply Proposition 16 to M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 and Lemma 1 to Md .

Together Remark 3 and Proposition 15 show that we only need to solve zero locus problems for
networks with complete bias in the intermediate layers and null bias in the final layer. We are now
able to give the complete and formal statement and proof of Theorem 1.
Theorem 7. Let M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 have complete bias and let Md have null bias. Let ¤Ľd,1 , . . . , ¤Ľd,sd
be a set of generators of Md < Aff G (RXd , RXd+1 ), and let the bias of MdÔłĺ1 be subordinate to the
partition P. Furthermore, for each h = 1, . . . , sd and each k Ôłł Xd+1 define
                                  (                                   )
                                                 X d,h
                            ╬Ęh,k = Q ÔëĄ P |           ¤Ľki = 0, ÔłÇP Ôłł Q .
                                                    iÔłłP

If ¤â is a non-polynomial activation function, then we have the following recursive formula with
respect to network depth
                                       \ [     \
           I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) =             I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ2 , (MdÔłĺ1 )ij )),
                                        h,k QÔłł╬Ęh,k P ÔłłQ
                                                   i,jÔłłP

where (MdÔłĺ1 )ij = {¤ĽÔÇ▓ : x 7Ôćĺ ¤Çi ¤Ľ(x) Ôłĺ ¤Çj ¤Ľ(x) | ¤Ľ Ôłł ╬╗(MdÔłĺ1 )}, ¤Çi : RX Ôćĺ R is the projection on
the i-th component of RX for each i in X, and ╬╗(MdÔłĺ1 ) is the linear part of MdÔłĺ1 .

Proof. Denote F d = {¤Ľd,1 , . . . , ¤Ľd,sd }. We can restrict to compute I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d ))
since, by Lemma 7, we know
                        I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) = I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d )).

Each d-layer neural network ╬Ě d,h in N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d ) can be written, for each input ╬▓, as
                                  ╬Ě d,h (╬▓) = ¤Ľd,h ¤â╠â(╬Ě dÔłĺ1 (╬▓) + y)                          (ÔłÇh = 1, . . . , sd )    (7)
where

        ÔÇó The map ¤Ľd,h is the h-th element in F d and is linear since Md has null bias.
        ÔÇó The the map ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 is (d Ôłĺ 1)-layer network belonging to N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ2 , ╬╗(MdÔłĺ1 )).
        ÔÇó The vector y is a bias term in the translational part of MdÔłĺ1 , namely the invariant sub-space
          of RXd , and has complete bias subordinate to a partition Q. Hence,
                                                            yP 1P .
                                                       X
                                                 y=                                                  (8)
                                                          P ÔłłQ


In a similar fashion, define ╬Ě dÔłĺ1,t in N (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , ╬╗(MdÔłĺ2 )) for each t = 1, . . . , sdÔłĺ1 and
some sdÔłĺ1 Ôëą 1. Note that, due to Remark 4,
                                                       sdÔłĺ1
                                                       X
                                          ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 =             xt ╬Ě dÔłĺ1,t                                               (9)
                                                       t=1

for some x1 , . . . , xsdÔłĺ1 Ôłł R. Therefore, by substituting both (8) and (9) into (7), we get
                                                   sdÔłĺ1
                                                                          !
                                                   X
                               ╬Ě d,h (╬▓) = ¤Ľd,h ¤â╠â      xt ╬Ě dÔłĺ1,t (╬▓) + y .                                          (10)
                                                       t=1

Recall that ¤Ľd,h is a linear map from RXd to RXd+1 , defined by the elements ¤Ľd,h   d,h
                                                                              ki = ¤Ľk (ei ) for
each input entry i Ôłł Xd and output entry k Ôłł Xd+1 .
With this notation, we can express (10) in coordinates as follows
                                                         sdÔłĺ1
                                                                                      !
                                        X                X
                          ╬Ěkd,h (╬▓) =          ¤Ľd,h
                                                ki ¤â            xt ╬ĚidÔłĺ1,t (╬▓) + yi       .                           (11)
                                        iÔłłXd             t=1


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For each i Ôłł Xd , let P be the unique element in Q containing i. Then yi = yP , where yi is the
coefficient defined in (11), and yP is the one defined in (8).
Hence, we can write (11) as follows
                                                          sdÔłĺ1
                                                                                       !
                                           X               X
                             ╬Ěkd,h (╬▓) =          ¤Ľd,h
                                                   ki ¤â          xt ╬ĚidÔłĺ1,t (╬▓) + yP
                                           P ÔłłQ            t=1
                                           iÔłłP

for each output entry k in RXd+1 .
Thus, an element ╬▓ belongs to I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d )) if and only if
                                        sdÔłĺ1
                                                                     !
                            X d,h       X           dÔłĺ1,t
                                ¤Ľki ¤â           xt ╬Ěi     (╬▓) + yP = 0                                 (12)
                                P ÔłłQ              t=1
                                iÔłłP

for each xt , yP , h, k, and ╬Ě dÔłĺ1,t .
Assuming that ¤â is non-polynomial and setting ai = ¤Ľd,h  ki and bi = (╬Ěi
                                                                          dÔłĺ1,t
                                                                                (╬▓))t , the second part of
                          dÔłĺ1,t
Theorem 9 implies that (╬Ěi      (╬▓))i,t solves (12) for specific h and k if and only if
                              [      \ n dÔłĺ1,t                                             o
           (╬ĚidÔłĺ1,t (╬▓))i Ôłł                 (╬Ěi     (╬│))i | ╬ĚidÔłĺ1,t (╬│) Ôłĺ ╬ĚjdÔłĺ1,t (╬│) = 0 .
                                QÔłł╬Ęh,k P ÔłłQ
                                       i,jÔłłP

Note that ╬▓ satisfies (12) for specific h and k if and only if (╬Ě dÔłĺ1,t (╬▓))i,t satisfies it. Hence,
                              [       \ n                                        o
                       ╬▓Ôłł                   ╬│ | ╬ĚidÔłĺ1,t (╬│) Ôłĺ ╬ĚjdÔłĺ1,t (╬│) = 0 ÔłÇt .                     (13)
                              QÔłł╬Ęh,k P ÔłłQ
                                     i,jÔłłP


By the definition of (MdÔłĺ1 )ij , we get

               I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ2 , (MdÔłĺ1 )ij )) = {╬▓ | ╬ĚidÔłĺ1,t (╬▓) Ôłĺ ╬ĚjdÔłĺ1,t (╬▓) = 0}.
Therefore, ╬▓ satisfies (12) for specific h and k if and only if
                               [      \
                        ╬▓Ôłł                 I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ2 , (MdÔłĺ1 )ij )).
                               QÔłł╬Ęh,k P ÔłłQ
                                      i,jÔłłP

Since ╬▓ has to satisfy (12) for each h and k, we finally get
                                      \ [        \
          I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) =                 I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ2 , (MdÔłĺ1 )ij )).
                                           h,k QÔłł╬Ęh,k P ÔłłQ
                                                      i,jÔłłP


Remark 5. Theorem 1 could actually be stated with different activation functions for each layer, as
long as they are all non-polynomial. However, for readability and simplicity, we have presented the
results using a single activation function.
Remark 6. Here, we demonstrate that the complete bias assumption is necessary for all non-
polynomial activations to achieve maximal separation power. Specifically, let us examine the
separation power of the set of shallow neural networks where all representation spaces are one-
dimensional and the hidden layer has a null, and therefore incomplete, bias term. The main concern
is the separability of opposite inputs ╬▓ and Ôłĺ╬▓. This reduces to study the identification equation
                                              y¤â(╬▓x) = y¤â(Ôłĺ╬▓x)
for each x, y Ôłł R. Any even function ¤â, including non-polynomial ones, solves this equation but
does not achieve maximal separation power, which could be reached by adding a bias term, as shown
in Theorem 2.


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2    T HE ROLE OF ACTIVATIONS

Proof of Theorem 2. We prove that non-polynomial activation functions have equivalent separation
power by induction on d.
If d = 1 then I(N ¤â (M1 )) = I(M1 ) which does not depend on ¤â.
Now suppose that I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 )) does not depend on ¤â for each sequence M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 .
Then, observing (3)
                                      \ [        \
          I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) =                 I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ2 , (MdÔłĺ1 )ij )),
                                            h,k PÔłł╬Ęh,k P ÔłłP
                                                       i,jÔłłP

we note that I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) is independent of ¤â as indices such as h, k and i, j are independent
of ¤â, as well as I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ2 , (MdÔłĺ1 )ij )) is by inductive hypothesis.
Finally, the first part of Theorem 2 follows directly from the proof of Theorem 1 and the last part of
Theorem 9.

B.3    T HE ROLE OF D EPTH

Proof of Theorem 3. To prove the first part of the statement, by Lemma 5, it suffices to show that
                  N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Mi , . . . , Md ) ÔŐć N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Mi , . . . , Mi , . . . , Md ).      (14)
                                                                          |     {z      }
                                                                                     n-times

for each n Ôëą 1.
Moreover, Theorem 2 implies that is enough to prove this inclusion for a fixed non-polynomial ¤â;
then Theorem 3 will hold for any other non-polynomial activation as well. Therefore, let ¤â be the
ReLU activation function, noting that in this case ¤â ÔŚŽ ¤â = ¤â.
In particular,
                                 | ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ{z┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â} = |¤â╠â ÔŚŽ idRXi ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ{z┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ idRX}i ,
                            ¤â╠â = ¤â╠â
                                       n-times                             n-times
for each n Ôëą 1.
Thus, each neural network ¤Ľd ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ1 in N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Mi , . . . , Md ) can be written as
            ¤Ľd ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ľi+1 ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ idRXi ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ idRXi ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤ĽiÔłĺ1 ÔŚŽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ1
                                          |               {z                 }
                                                            n-times

which is an element of N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Mi , . . . , Mi , . . . , Md ), thereby proving (14).
                                         |     {z      }
                                                  n-times

The final step is to prove the stabilization property. This is achieved by recalling that, by Proposition 2
and Theorem 1,
                                           \ [         \
     I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ )) =                 I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M dÔłĺ2 , (MdÔłĺ1 )ij )).  (15)
                                              h,k PÔłł╬Ęh,k P ÔłłP
                                                         i,jÔłłP

Define
                               Cn = I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M i , . . . , M i , . . . , MdÔÇ▓ ))
                                                         |      {z      }
                                                                      n times
for each n Ôłł N. Recursively applying (15), both Cn and Cm can be represented as unions and
intersections of elements in the finite set
                              C = {I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M iÔłĺ1 , (M i )hk ))}h,kÔłłXi .
We can reformulate the descending sequence (14) as follows
                                          ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐć Cn ÔŐć CnÔłĺ1 ÔŐć ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐć C1
which stabilizes due to Lemma 2.


                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 2. Let C = {C1 , . . . , Cd } be a finite collection of sets. The following statements are true:

        ÔÇó Let C Ôł¬ = {Ci1 Ôł¬ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě Ôł¬ Cir | 1 ÔëĄ i1 , . . . , ir ÔëĄ d, r Ôłł N} be the collection of unions of a
          finite number of sets in C. Then C Ôł¬ is finite.
        ÔÇó Let C Ôłę = {Ci1 Ôłę ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě Ôłę Cir | 1 ÔëĄ i1 , . . . , ir ÔëĄ d, r Ôłł N} be the collection of intersections
          of a finite number of sets in C. Then C Ôłę is finite.

        ÔÇó Let C╠â the smaller collection containing C which is closed by intersection and union. Then
          C╠â = (C Ôłę )Ôł¬ = (C Ôł¬ )Ôłę and, in particular, is finite.

In particular, ascending and descending sequences of inclusions in C╠â stabilize.

Proof. To prove the first point, it is sufficient to note that duplicates in the expression Ci1 Ôł¬ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě Ôł¬ Cir
can be removed. Therefore, the cardinality of C Ôł¬ is bounded by the number of possible tuples
i1 , . . . , ir which are 2d . The proof of the second point is analogous.
By the distributive property of intersections with respect to unions we obtain that each element in C╠â
can be written as
                        (Ci1,1 Ôłę ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě Ôłę Ci1,d1 ) Ôł¬ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě Ôł¬ (Cir,1 Ôłę ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě Ôłę Cir,dr ).
Hence, C╠â = (C Ôłę )Ôł¬ . Similarly, using the distributive property of unions with respect to intersections,
we get C╠â = (C Ôł¬ )Ôłę . In particular, C╠â is finite as C Ôł¬ and, hence, (C Ôł¬ )Ôłę are finite.

The repetition threshold may vary depending on the model and representation. For example, k-IGNs,
being equivalent to k-WL, have a repetition threshold proportional to that of k-WL itself (Maron
et al., 2019a; Geerts, 2020). In contrast, the Proposition 3 demonstrates an example of stabilization
after just one repetition.

Proof of Proposition 3. From previous observations, we know that
                         ¤ü(N ¤â (V, RG , . . . , RG , RG/H )) ÔŐć ¤ü(N ¤â (V, RG , RG/H )).                              (16)
                                                                              G/H
Note that the family of equivariant continuous functions C G (V, R   ) cannot separate H-orbits in V .
Indeed, for each f Ôłł C G (V, RG/H ), f (hv) = hf (v) = f (v) for each h Ôłł H. Hence, Proposition 4
implies that N ¤â (V, RG , RG/H ) has the finer separation power between families of functions in
C G (V, RG/H ). This implies equality in (16), concluding the proof.

B.4    T HE ROLE OF I NTERMEDIATE R EPRESENTATIONS

For now, we focus on developing the notation necessary to state and prove Theorem 4. The structure
of our network of interest is as follows:
                        ¤Ľ1       ¤â╠â         ¤Ľi             ¤â╠â              ¤Ľi+1        ¤â╠â     ¤Ľd+1
                            Ôćĺ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔłĺÔćĺ ViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ Ôłĺ
                ╬Ě : V ÔłĺÔćĺ V1 Ôłĺ                     Ôćĺ ViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ÔłĺÔłĺÔłĺÔćĺ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě Ôłĺ
                                                                          Ôćĺ Vd ÔłĺÔłĺÔłĺÔćĺ W
with ╬Ě Ôłł N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ).
To formulate the identification equivalence relation of these networks in terms of the identification
relations of simpler architectures with only V ÔÇ▓ and V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ as intermediate representations, we need to
define the projection map ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ : V ÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ Ôćĺ V ÔÇ▓ and the immersion map ╬╣ÔÇ▓ : V ÔÇ▓ Ôćĺ V ÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ . Similarly,
we can define ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ and ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ . Furthermore, for any G-representation W , we define
              Aff G (W, V ÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) Ôćĺ Aff G (W, V ÔÇ▓ )                Aff G (V ÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ , W ) Ôćĺ Aff G (V ÔÇ▓ , W )
      ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ :                                               and ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ :                                             .
                             f 7Ôćĺ ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ f                                           f 7Ôćĺ f ÔŚŽ ╬╣ÔÇ▓
Similarly, we define ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ and ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ . Let M be a subspace of Aff G (W, V ÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ), its image ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (M ) is a
subspace of Aff G (W, V ÔÇ▓ ) and
                                         M = ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (M ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (M ).
Indeed, each f Ôłł M can be expressed as f = ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ f + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ f = ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (f ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (f )f , identifying V ÔÇ▓ and
V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ as subspaces of V . Similarly, for M subspace of Aff G (V ÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ V ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ , W ),
                                                 M = ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (M ) + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (M )


                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence, we can write
      N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ) = N ¤â (M1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ) + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ), . . . , Md ),
and the problem informally stated above reduces to determining the separation power of the
entire family N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ) by understanding the separation power of the smaller families
N ¤â (M1 , . . . , ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ Mi , ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ), . . . , Md ) and N ¤â (M1 , . . . , ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ Mi , ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ), . . . , Md ). This is
achieved by the following theorem.
Theorem 8. With the notation defined above, we have
   ¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) =
¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ), ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ), . . . , Md )) Ôłę ¤ü(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ), . . . , Md )).

Proof. Note that ¤ł ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ = ¤ł ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ. Indeed, ¤ł ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ = (¤Ľ, ¤Ľ) ÔŚŽ (¤ł, ¤Ľ) = (¤Ľ ÔŚŽ ¤ł, ¤Ľ ÔŚŽ ¤ł) = ¤Ľ ÔŚŽ ¤ł, and
¤â╠â╬╣ÔÇ▓ = ╬╣ÔÇ▓ ¤â╠â and ¤â╠â¤Ç ÔÇ▓ = ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ ¤â╠â. Similarly, for ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ and ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ .
Furthermore, (╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ÔŚŽ (¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) = (╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ÔŚŽ (¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) since

                 (╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ÔŚŽ (¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) = idViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ = idViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ 0ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ + 0ViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ idViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓

                                             = ╬╣ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ = ╬╣ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓

                                             = ╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ .
We now need to prove that
                         (¤ł╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ¤ł╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ¤â╠â (¤Ç ÔÇ▓ ¤Ľ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ¤Ľ) = (¤ł╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ¤ł╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ¤â╠â (¤Ç ÔÇ▓ ¤Ľ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ¤Ľ).                       (17)
Indeed,
      (¤ł╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ¤ł╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ¤â╠â (¤Ç ÔÇ▓ ¤Ľ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ¤Ľ) = ¤ł ÔŚŽ (╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ )¤â╠â(¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ
                                        = ¤ł ÔŚŽ (╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ )(¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â¤Ľ = ¤ł ÔŚŽ (╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ )(¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â¤Ľ
                                        = ¤ł ÔŚŽ (╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ )¤â╠â(¤Ç ÔÇ▓ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ )¤Ľ = (¤ł╬╣ÔÇ▓ + ¤ł╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) ¤â╠â (¤Ç ÔÇ▓ ¤Ľ + ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ¤Ľ).
Hence, thanks to (17),


                                                                          N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ ) =
             N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ) + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ), . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ ) =
                N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ) + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ), . . . , M dÔłĺ1 , MdÔÇ▓ ).
By Theorem 1 and the previous observations, we can limit to study spaces of the type
                     N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), (╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ) + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ))uv ) =
                                      N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), (╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ))uv )+
                                        N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), (╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ))uv )
thanks to the linearity of the map ¤Ľ 7Ôćĺ (¤Ľ)uv . Note that
      N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), (╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ))uv ) = N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ), (╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ))uv )
as ¤Ç ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ = 0 and both projections and immersions commute with activations. From Lemma 6 we get
      I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ) + ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), (╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ) + ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ))uv )) =
         = I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ (Mi ), (╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ))uv ) Ôłę I(N ¤â (M 1 , . . . , ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ (Mi ), (╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ (Mi+1 ))uv ).
Combining all the above results, we conclude the proof of the theorem.

Proof of Theorem 4. Theorem 4 is a consequence of Theorem 8 in the case where Mi is the full set
Aff G (ViÔłĺ1 , Vi ). Note that
                                    ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ Aff G (Vi , ViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ ) = Aff G (ViÔłĺ1 , ViÔÇ▓ )
and
                                  ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ Aff G (ViÔÇ▓ ÔŐĽ ViÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ , Vi+1 ) = Aff G (ViÔÇ▓ , Vi+1 ).
Similarly, for ¤ÇÔłŚÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ and ╬╣ÔÇ▓ÔÇ▓ÔłŚ .


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.5    T HE ROLE OF R EPRESENTATION T YPE

Proof of Theorem 5. Write H/K = {h1 K, . . . , hs K}, we have the following injection
                                                        RG/H ÔłĺÔćĺ RG/K
                                                                 s
                                                ╬╣:            1X                                                (18)
                                                       egH 7Ôćĺ       eghi K
                                                              s i=1

and projection
                                                           RG/K ÔłĺÔćĺ RG/H
                                                 ¤Ç:                                                             (19)
                                                             egK 7Ôćĺ egH .

Note that ¤Ç╬╣ = idRG/H , indeed,
                                                  s                  s
                                               1X                 1X
                              ¤Ç╬╣(egH ) =             ¤Ç(eghi K ) =       eghi H = egH ,
                                               s i=1              s i=1

as ghi H = gH for each i = 1, . . . , s.
Consider the following diagram
                                                  ¤Ľ               ¤â                ¤ł
                            ╬Ě : V ÔłĺÔćĺ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔłĺÔćĺ RG/H ÔłĺH
                                                   ÔłĺÔćĺ RG/H ÔłĺÔćĺ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔłĺÔćĺ W
                                                       ¤Ç    ╬╣            ¤Ç     ╬╣

                                                 ¤ĽÔÇ▓               ¤âÔÇ▓               ¤łÔÇ▓
                            ╬Ě ÔÇ▓ : V ÔłĺÔćĺ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔłĺÔćĺ RG/K ÔłĺH
                                                     ÔłĺÔćĺ RG/K ÔłĺÔćĺ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔłĺÔćĺ W.

From the network ╬Ě in N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/H , . . . , W ) composed by ¤Ľ, ¤ł, and ¤â we want construct a
new representation ╬Ě ÔÇ▓ defined as follows. Let ¤ĽÔÇ▓ = ╬╣ ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ, ¤ł ÔÇ▓ = ¤ł ÔŚŽ ¤Ç, and ¤â╠â ÔÇ▓ = ╬╣ ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ç and note that
¤ł ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤ĽÔÇ▓ = ¤ł ÔŚŽ ¤Ç ÔŚŽ ╬╣ ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ç ÔŚŽ ╬╣ ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ = ¤ł ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ. Hence, substituting ¤ł ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ with ¤ł ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤ĽÔÇ▓ inside
the definition of ╬Ě do not change the function, and embeds it into a parameter space with intermediate
representation RG/K instead of RG/H . But to prove that ╬Ě is a neural network, we need to prove that
¤â╠â ÔÇ▓ is a point-wise activation function for some real-valued function ¤â ÔÇ▓ .
If ¤â╠â is a point-wise activation associated to ¤â : R Ôćĺ R defined on RG/H we have that
                                   X                   X
                              ¤â╠â(        agH egH ) =          ¤â(agH )egH .
                                      gHÔłłG/H                          gHÔłłG/H

On the other hand, we have
                                     X                                       X
                            ¤â╠â ÔÇ▓ (            agK egK ) = ╬╣ ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ç(                   agK egK ) =
                                 gKÔłłG/K                                  gKÔłłG/K
                                X                                 X                X
                  ╬╣ ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â(                 aghK egH ) = ╬╣                 ¤â(                 aghK )egH =
                         gHÔłłG/H                                 gHÔłłG/H       ghKÔłłgH/K
                        ghKÔłłgH/K

                                 1    X                X                       X
                                               ¤â(                 aghK )                 eghK =
                                 s
                                     gHÔłłG/H       ghKÔłłgH/K                 hKÔłłH/K

                                          1     X                X
                                                           ¤â(            aghK )egK .
                                          s
                                              gKÔłłG/K            hKÔłłH/K

Note that the map                          X                             X
                                     ╬▒:               agK egK 7Ôćĺ                   aghK egK
                                          gKÔłłG/K                       hKÔłłH/K

is linear and G-equivariant. In particular, note that ¤â╠â ÔÇ▓ = ¤â╠âKsÔŚŽ ╬▒ , where we denote the
standard point-wise activation induced by ¤â on RG/K as ¤â╠âK , to distinguish it from ¤â╠â, the


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


point-wise activation induced by ¤â but defined on RG/H . Hence, substituting ¤ł ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ¤Ľ with
¤ł ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤ĽÔÇ▓ = ¤ł ÔÇ▓ ÔŚŽ ¤â╠âKsÔŚŽ ╬▒ ÔŚŽ ¤ĽÔÇ▓ , we obtain an immersion of ╬Ě in N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/K , . . . , W ). Hence
N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/H , . . . , W ) ÔŐć N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/K , . . . , W ) and ¤ü(N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/K , . . . , W )) ÔŐć
¤ü(N ¤â (V, . . . , RG/H , . . . , W ))

We are now going to develop the tools to prove Proposition 4.
Lemma 3. Let M = Aff G (V, RG ), then I(Mu,v ) = I(MvÔłĺ1 u,e ) = I(MuvÔłĺ1 ,e ). Moreover,
(╬▓, ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ ) Ôłł I(Mg,e ) if and only if g╬▓ = ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ .

Proof. Let V = V1 ÔŐĽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐĽ Vs where Vi = RG/Ki for each i = 1, . . . , s. By Proposition 14 and
setting H = {e}, we know that HomG (V, RG ) = HomG (RG/K1 , RG ) ÔŐĽ ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐĽ (RG/Ks , RG ) is
generated by functions Rgi Ki ¤ÇG/Ki for each gi Ki Ôłł G/Ki for each i = 1, . . . , s, and ¤ÇG/Ki is the
projection of V onto Vi = RG/Ki . Moreover,
                                                  X                               1
          Rgi Ki ¤ÇG/Ki (╬▓) = Rgi Ki ¤ÇG/Ki                 ╬▓kKi ekKi        =          ╬▓ugi Ki .
                             u                                          u      |Ki |
                                                          kKi ÔłłG/Ki

For each g Ôłł G, we have that
                                                                                        I(Mu,v ) =
        n                                                                                     o
         (╬▓, ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ ) | Rgi Ki ¤ÇG/Ki (╬▓) Ôłĺ Rgi Ki ¤ÇG/Ki (╬▓ ÔÇ▓ ) = 0 ÔłÇiÔłÇgi Ki Ôłł G/Ki =
                                       u                            v
                                        (╬▓, ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ ) | ╬▓ugi Ki Ôłĺ ╬▓vg
                                                               ÔÇ▓
                                                                  K
                                                                 i i
                                                                      = 0 ÔłÇiÔłÇgi Ki Ôłł G/Ki =
                                                                        (╬▓, ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ ) | v Ôłĺ1 u╬▓ = ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ .



In particular, we have that I(Mu,v ) = I(MvÔłĺ1 u,e ). Hence, (╬▓, ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ ) Ôłł I(Mg,e ) if and only if
g╬▓ = ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ .
Finally, in a similar way, we are able to observe that I(Mu,v ) = I(MuvÔłĺ1 ,e ).



Proof of Proposition 4. In what follows we have to consider G ÔŐö G, to distinguish the two distinct
copies of G, we denote GÔÇ▓ as the second copy of G and, and when g is an element of G, we will
indicate as g ÔÇ▓ the analogous element in GÔÇ▓ .
                                                                                       ÔÇ▓
Define M = Aff G (V, RG ) and N = Aff G (RG , RG/H )ÔÇ▓ < HomG (RG ÔŐĽRG , RG/H ). Proposition 2
implies
                              ¤ü(N ¤â (V, RG , R)) = I(N ¤â (M, N )).

Note that N = ÔčĘRHg Ôłĺ RH ÔÇ▓ g ÔčęHgÔłłH\G where functions RHg are defined as
                                                1 if s Ôłł kg Ôłĺ1 H,

                              RHg (ek )     =
                                         sH     0 otherwise.

An element Q in ╬ĘHg,sH is a partition of G ÔŐö GÔÇ▓ , where for each P Ôłł Q the intersection P Ôłę sHg ÔŐö
sH ÔÇ▓ g have the same number of elements in sHg and sH ÔÇ▓ g. Due to Remark 8, we can just consider
╬ĘÔÇ▓Hg,sH containing the partitions of G ÔŐö GÔÇ▓ whose only parts are P = {u, v} for u Ôłł sHg and
v Ôłł sH ÔÇ▓ g, otherwise P is a singleton not containing elements in sHg or sH ÔÇ▓ g.
Hence, by Theorem 1,
                                                  \          [        \
                          I(N ¤â (M, N )) =                                   I(Mu,v ).                        (20)
                                                Hg,sH QÔłł╬ĘÔÇ▓Hg,sH {u,v}ÔłłQ


If we prove that for each Hg and sH
                              [               \                     [
                                                     I(Mu,v ) =          I(Mh,e ).                            (21)
                               QÔłł╬ĘÔÇ▓Hg,sH {u,v}ÔłłQ                   hÔłłH



                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


then we are done. Indeed, thanks to Lemma 3, (╬▓, ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ ) Ôłł hÔłłH I(Mh,e ) if and only if there exists
                                                        S
some h Ôłł H such that h╬▓ = ╬▓ ÔÇ▓ . Moreover, (21) does not depend on Hg and sH then the outer
intersection in (20) is trivial.
Now to prove (21), we first show that
                               [            \                    [
                                                   I(Mu,v ) ÔŐć          I(Mh,e ).
                              QÔłł╬ĘÔÇ▓Hg,sH {u,v}ÔłłQ                 hÔłłH

Note that if {u, v} Ôłł Q and u, v Ôłł sHg, then, by Lemma 3,
                               I(Mu,v ) = I(Mshg,shÔÇ▓ g ) = I(MhhÔÇ▓Ôłĺ1 ,e ).
Therefore,                      \                                 [
                                       I(Mu,v ) ÔŐć I(Mu,v ) ÔŐć           I(Mh,e ).
                             {u,v}ÔłłQ                             hÔłłH

The right-hand side is independent of Q then the union on each Q in ╬ĘÔÇ▓Hg,sH of sets on the left-hand
side proves the searched inclusion.
To prove the opposite inclusion, for each h define P h Ôłł ╬ĘÔÇ▓Hg,sH as the partition containing the sets
{ghts, gts} for each t Ôłł H and the remaining singletons. Then, note that, by Lemma 3,
                                   \
                                            I(Mghts,gts ) = I(Mh,e ).
                                 {ghts,gts}ÔłłP h

Hence,
           [                  [         \                                [           \
                I(Mh,e ) =                        I(Mghts,gts ) ÔŐć                              I(Mu,v ).
          hÔłłH                hÔłłH {ghts,gts}ÔłłP h                     QÔłł╬ĘÔÇ▓Hg,sH {u,v}ÔłłQ

This concludes the proof.



C    I MPLICATIONS ON P RACTICAL M ODELS
Lemma 4. An element (╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł ¤ü(1-CNN) if and only if there exist a permutation of ¤â Ôłł Sn such
that ╬▒i = ╬▓¤â(i) for each i = 1, . . . , n.

Proof. Write [n] ÔŐö [n]ÔÇ▓ = {1, . . . , n, 1ÔÇ▓ , . . . , nÔÇ▓ }, and notice that Aff Zn (Rn , R)ÔÇ▓ = ÔčĘ1[n] Ôłĺ 1[n]ÔÇ▓ Ôčę,
hence ╬ĘÔÇ▓ as defined in Remark 8 is composed by partitions Q of [n] ÔŐö [n]ÔÇ▓ such that
                                     Q = {{i, j ÔÇ▓ } | i Ôłł [n], j Ôłł [n]ÔÇ▓ }.
Recall M 1 = ÔčĘidRn ÔŐĽRnÔÇ▓ Ôčę. Note that (╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł I(Mi,j     1
                                                           ÔÇ▓ ) = ÔčĘidRn ÔŐĽRnÔÇ▓ Ôčę if and only if ╬▒i = ╬▓j .
                             ÔÇ▓                                    1
                                                  T
Moreover, for a given Q in ╬Ę , we have (╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł i,j ÔÇ▓ ÔłłQ I(Mi,j       ÔÇ▓ ) if and only if, given the bijection
             ÔÇ▓                  ÔÇ▓
¤â : [n] Ôćĺ [n] associating i to j , ╬▒i = ╬▓¤â(i) for each i = 1, . . . , n.
Notice that, by Theorem 1,
                                                                   [     \
                     (╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł ¤ü(N ¤â (M 1 , Aff Zn (Rn , R)) =                       1
                                                                                 I(Mi,j ÔÇ▓ ),

                                                                  QÔłł╬Ę i,j ÔÇ▓ ÔłłQ

which is equivalent at saying that there exist a permutation of ¤â Ôłł Sn such that ╬▒i = ╬▓¤â(i) for each
i = 1, . . . , n.

Proof of Proposition 6. Note that ¤ü(1-CNN) is characterized by Lemma 4 as follows: (╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł
¤ü(1-CNN) if and only if there exists a permutation ¤â Ôłł Sn such that ╬▒i = ╬▓¤â(i) for each i = 1, . . . , n.
In contrast, Proposition 4 shows that (╬▒, ╬▓) Ôłł ¤ü(N ¤â (M n , Aff Zn (Rn , R))) if and only if there exists
an element g Ôłł Zn such that ╬▒i = ╬▓i+g (mod n) for each i = 1, . . . , n. Notice that for n > 1,
Zn Ô¬ç Sn , hence ¤ü(n-CNN) ÔŐŐ ¤ü(1-CNN), as desired. The proof of the chain of inclusions
                              ¤ü(n-CNN) ÔŐć ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐć ¤ü(2-CNN) ÔŐć ¤ü(1-CNN)
is a direct consequence of Lemma 5 since: 1-CNN ÔŐć 2-CNN ÔŐć ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě ÔŐć n-CNN.


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     F UNCTIONAL E QUATIONS
In this section, we introduce key results from the theory of functional equations that are necessary to
prove Theorem 1. A functional equation, by definition, is an identity involving unknown functions
as variables, and common examples include differential and integral equations (Kannappan, 2009).
Here, we are particularly interested in the class of linear functional equations, which we explore in
greater detail in the following section.

D.1    L INEAR F UNCTIONAL E QUATIONS

Linear functions equations are functional equations which, for given ai Ôłł R and bi Ôłł Rd , are defined
by
                            Xn
                                ai ¤â(bi x) = 0               (ÔłÇx Ôłł Rd ).
                                 i=1
In particular, Theorem 9 is a fundamental tool in the proof of Theorem 1, since it characterizes the
set of parameters b1 , . . . , bn for which the specific case of linear functional equation in (22) is always
satisfied for a non-polynomial ¤â and arbitrary a1 , . . . , an Ôłł R.
Theorem 9. Let ¤â : R Ôćĺ R be a non-polynomial continuous function and a1 , . . . , an Ôłł R. Let P be
a partition of [n] and define
                                                    X
                                     ╬Ę = {Q ÔëĄ P |         ai = 0 ÔłÇP Ôłł Q}.
                                                       iÔłłP

The set B of elements b = (b1 , . . . , bn ) Ôłł Rn├Śm which satisfy
               XX
                                                       ÔłÇx Ôłł Rm ÔłÇy = (yP )P ÔłłP Ôłł RP

                       ai ¤â bi ┬Ě x + yP = 0                                                             (22)
                 P ÔłłP iÔłłP

is                      [
                            {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł Q}.           (23)
                       QÔłł╬Ę
Equivalently,                          [ \
                                 B=                {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi Ôłĺ bj = 0}.
                                       QÔłł╬Ę P ÔłłQ
                                           i,jÔłłP
For arbitrary continuous functions ¤â, it is only true that the set defined in (23) is contained in B.

To prove Theorem 9, we first need to prove some auxiliary results. Theorem 10, stated below, is a
reformulation of Theorem 2.27 in Kiss & Laczkovich (2014) adapted here to the context of continuous
real functions for convenience. For further discussion, refer to Appendix D.2.
Theorem 10. Let a1 , . . . , an non-null real values, and let b1 , . . . , bn Ôłł Rm be distinct real vectors.
Continuous solutions ¤â : R Ôćĺ R of
                          X
                               ai ¤â bi ┬Ě x + y = 0       (ÔłÇx Ôłł Rm ÔłÇy Ôłł R)                              (24)
                             i

are polynomial.

Moreover, to prove Theorem 9, the following notions and auxiliary results are required.
Definition 14. Let b = (b1 , . . . , bn ) Ôłł Rn├Śm , the identity pattern of b is the coarser partition P of
[n] such that bi = bj for each i, j Ôłł P and P Ôłł P.
Theorem 11. Let ¤â : R Ôćĺ R be a non-polynomial continuous function, and a1 , . . . , an Ôłł R. Then
b = (b1 , . . . , bn ) Ôłł Rn├Śm satisfies
                            n
                            X
                                  ai ¤â bi ┬Ě x + y = 0            (ÔłÇx Ôłł Rm ÔłÇy Ôłł R)                       (25)
                            i=1
                 P
if and only if    iÔłłP ai = 0 for each P in the identity pattern of b.


                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                            P
Proof. Let P1 , . . . , Pq be the parts in the identity pattern of b such that                 iÔłłPj ai         ╠Ş= 0, define
aÔÇ▓j = iÔłłPj ai then we can rewrite the equation in (25) as
     P

                                            q
                                            X
                                                  aÔÇ▓j ¤â bÔÇ▓j ┬Ě x + y = 0,
                                            j=1

where, for each j = 1, . . . , q, the value of bÔÇ▓j is set to the value of the bi s for i Ôłł Pj , which are
all equal to each other. Since the aÔÇ▓j are non-null and bÔÇ▓j are distinct, by Theorem 10, ¤â have to be
polynomial which is impossible. To prove the opposite implication, let P be the identity pattern of b
and write
          Xn                        XX                            X  X
              ai ¤â bi ┬Ě x + y =             ai ¤â bi ┬Ě x + y =                ai ¤â bi ┬Ě x + y ,
          i=1                          P ÔłłP iÔłłP                            P ÔłłP    iÔłłP

where the last equality is possible because bi = bj for each i, j Ôłł P .
Remark 7. Note that the second implication of Theorem 11 holds for any ¤â, including polynomial
functions.
This theorem gives the following corollary, which is the one actually needed to prove Theorem 9.
Corollary 2. Let ¤â : R Ôćĺ R be a non-polynomial continuous function and a1 , . . . , an Ôłł R. Let P n
be the set of all partition of [n] and define
                                                 X
                                  ╬Ž = {P Ôłł P n |   ai = 0 ÔłÇP Ôłł P}.
                                                         iÔłłP
                                                     n├Śm
The set B of elements b = (b1 , . . . , bn ) Ôłł R       satisfying (25) is
                      [
                         {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł P}.                             (26)
                        PÔłł╬Ž

Or equivalently,                         [ \
                                B=                  {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi Ôłĺ bj = 0}.
                                        PÔłł╬Ž P ÔłłP
                                            i,jÔłłP
For arbitrary continuous functions ¤â, it is only true that the set defined in (26) is contained in B.

Proof. Define
                               [
                     BÔÇ▓ =          {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł P}.
                              PÔłł╬Ž
                                                  P
By Theorem 11, b satisfies (25) if and only if iÔłłP ai = 0 for each P in the identity pattern of
b. Thus, B ÔŐć B ÔÇ▓ . To prove the opposite inclusion, note that                               ÔÇ▓
                                                             P if b = (b1 , . . . , bn ) Ôłł B then there
exist P Ôłł ╬Ž such that b has identity pattern P, then, as iÔłłP ai = 0 for each P Ôłł P, (25) is
verified. Finally, note that this implication holds for any ¤â by Remark 7, proving the last claim in
Corollary 2.

Proof of Theorem 9. Notice that the problem
              XX
                                                                ÔłÇx Ôłł Rm ÔłÇy = (yP )P ÔłłP Ôłł RP

                     ai ¤â bi ┬Ě x + yP = 0                                                                              (27)
                P ÔłłP iÔłłP

is equivalent to
                   XX
                                                                    ÔłÇx Ôłł Rm ÔłÇy Ôłł RP ÔłÇy╠é Ôłł R

                              ai ¤â bi ┬Ě x + yP + y╠é = 0
                   P ÔłłP iÔłłP

through the change of variables yP 7Ôćĺ yP + y╠é for each P Ôłł P. This problem is in turn equivalent to
                     Xn
                                                     ÔłÇx╠é Ôłł Rm ÔŐĽ RP ÔłÇy╠é Ôłł R

                         ai ¤â b╠éi ┬Ě x╠é + y╠é = 0                                               (28)
                         i=1


                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


due to the following change of variables

                                    bi                            x
                           b╠éi 7Ôćĺ        for i Ôłł P , and x╠é 7Ôćĺ          ,
                                   eP                           yP eP

where {eP }P ÔłłP is the canonical base of RP . Corollary 2 implies that the solution to (28) is
                      [
                         {(b╠é1 , . . . , b╠én ) | b╠éi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = b╠éik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł Q}.          (29)
                         QÔłł╬Ž

Note that b╠éi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = b╠éik if and only if bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik and {i1 , . . . , ik } ÔŐć P for some P Ôłł P if
and only if bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik and {i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł Q for some Q ÔëĄ P.
Recall the definitions
                               X                                             X
          ╬Ž = {Q Ôłł P n |             ai = 0 ÔłÇP Ôłł Q} and ╬Ę = {Q ÔëĄ P |               ai = 0 ÔłÇP Ôłł Q}.
                               iÔłłP                                           iÔłłP

Noting that ╬Ę = {Q Ôłł ╬Ž | Q ÔëĄ P}, equation (29) implies that the solutions of (27) are
                    [
                       {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł Q}.
                         QÔłł╬Ę


The final claim follows directly from the concluding statement in Corollary 2.
Remark 8. In Theorem 9 the union
                    [
                        {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł Q}                (30)
                         QÔłł╬Ę

has redundancies. Indeed, {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł Q} is contained in
{(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł R} for each Q ÔëĄ R finer partitions of P. Hence,
the set defined by (30) is the same as
                             [
                                  {(b1 , . . . , bn ) | bi1 = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = bik ÔłÇ{i1 , . . . , ik } Ôłł Q}
                         QÔłł╬ĘÔÇ▓

where ╬ĘÔÇ▓ is the subset of ╬Ę containing only the minimal partitions with respect to the refinement
ordering.

D.2    G ENERALIZED P OLYNOMIALS IN THE C ONTINUOUS C ASE

In Appendix D.1, we employ Theorem 10, a reformulation of Theorem 2.27 in Kiss & Laczkovich
(2014), adapted here for convenience to the context of continuous real functions. In particular, the
original version of this theorem proves that arbitrary complex functions satisfying (24) are generalized
polynomials, defined as follows.
Definition 15. A function ¤â : C Ôćĺ C is a generalized monomial function if there exist a symmetric
function F : Cn Ôćĺ C additive in each of its variables, such that ¤â(x) = F (x, . . . , x) for each x Ôłł C.
A function ¤â : C Ôćĺ C is a generalized polynomial if it is a finite sum of generalized monomials,
we say that a generalized polynomial ¤â is real if ¤â is real and there exists a symmetric function
F : Cn Ôćĺ R additive in each of its variables, such that ¤â(x) = F (x, . . . , x) for each x Ôłł R.

Trivially, since complex functions satisfying (24) are generalized polynomials, any real solutions are
real generalized polynomials.
To conclude the proof of Theorem 10, it remains to show that continuous real generalized polynomials
are simply real polynomial functions, as shown by Proposition 17.
Proposition 17. A real continuous generalized polynomial is a real polynomial function.

Proof. The proof of Theorem 17 will be analogous to the proof of the classical proof that any
continuous real additive function is linear, see Theorem 1.1 in Kannappan (2009).
First, we show that real generalized monomials are monomial functions on rational numbers.


                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Indeed, suppose first that f is a real generalized monomial and let F : Rn Ôćĺ R be the symmetric
function additive in each variable and such that f (x) = F (x, . . . , x) for each x Ôłł R. Note that for
each r Ôłł N,
                                      F (x1 , . . . , rxi , . . . , xn ) = F (x1 , . . . , xi + ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě + xi , . . . , xn ) =
          F (x1 , . . . , xi , . . . , xn ) + ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě + F (x1 , . . . , xi , . . . , xn ) = rF (x1 , . . . , xi , . . . , xn ).   (31)
Note that F (x1 , . . . , xiÔłĺ1 , 0, xi+1 , . . . , xn ) = 0, indeed
                                                                F (x1 , . . . , xiÔłĺ1 , 0, xi+1 , . . . , xn ) =
                                                           F (x1 , . . . , xiÔłĺ1 , 0 + 0, xi+1 , . . . , xn ) =                  (32)
                  F (x1 , . . . , xiÔłĺ1 , 0, xi+1 , . . . , xn ) + F (x1 , . . . , xiÔłĺ1 , 0, xi+1 , . . . , xn )

Eliminating a term F (x1 , . . . , xiÔłĺ1 , 0, xi+1 , . . . , xn ) from both the sides of (32), we get the required
result.
Furthermore, F (x1 , . . . , xi , . . . , xn ) = ÔłĺF (x1 , . . . , Ôłĺxi , . . . , xn ). Indeed,
     F (x1 , . . . , xi , . . . , xn ) + F (x1 , . . . , Ôłĺxi , . . . , xn ) = F (x1 , . . . , xi Ôłĺ xi , . . . , xn ) = 0.       (33)
Equations (31) and (33) yields
                               F (x1 , . . . , rxi , . . . , xn ) = rF (x1 , . . . , xi , . . . , xn )                          (34)
for each r Ôłł Z. Note that by substituting rxi = yi , we obtain
                                                                                   1
                               F (x1 , . . . , yi , . . . , xn ) = rF (x1 , . . . , yi , . . . , xn )
                                                                                   r
Equivalently,
                                      1                   1
                       F (x1 , . . . , yi , . . . , xn ) = F (x1 , . . . , yi , . . . , xn )                                    (35)
                                      r                   r
Equations (34) and (35) prove
                                         F (x, . . . , rx, . . . , x) = rF (x, . . . , x)                                       (36)
for each r Ôłł Q. Hence,
                             f (rx) = F (rx, . . . , rx) = rn F (x, . . . , x) = rn f (x).
for each r Ôłł Q. In particular set x = 1 and f (1) = c Ôłł R,
                                                   f (r) = rn f (1) = crn .
Hence, a real generalized monomial is a monomial on Q.
Finally, we can prove the general case where f is a real generalized polynomial. Recalling that real
generalized polynomials are sums of real generalized monomials, they are sums of real monomial
functions on Q, namely polynomial functions on Q.
We conclude by noting that, since f is continuous, it extends as a polynomial function on R due to
continuity.


E     T ECHNICAL L EMMAS

In what follows, let C, D and F be families of functions in C(X, V ), where X is a topological space
and V a real vector space.
Lemma 5. If C ÔŐć D, then ¤ü(D) ÔŐć ¤ü(C).
Lemma 6. Let C and D be two families of real-valued functions such that each of them contains
at least a constant function. The equivalence relations induced by their identification condition are
linked by the following conditions ¤ü(C + D) = ¤ü(C Ôł¬ D) = ¤ü(C) Ôłę ¤ü(D).


                                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Let us prove the first equality. Let c be the constant function in D. Hence ¤ü(C + D) ÔŐć
¤ü(C +c) = ¤ü(C) ÔŐć ¤ü(C) Ôł¬ ¤ü(D). To prove the inverse inclusion, suppose there exists a function f
either in C or D separating x and y. Without loss of generality, suppose f Ôłł C, f + c Ôłł C + D would
be separating x and y. This conclude the proof of the first equality. The proof of the second equality
follows from the definition of ¤ü. Indeed,
                               ¤ü(C Ôł¬ D) = {(x, y) Ôłł X ├Ś X | f (x) = f (y) ÔłÇf Ôłł C Ôł¬ D} =
     {(x, y) Ôłł X ├Ś X | f (x) = f (y) ÔłÇf Ôłł C} Ôłę {(x, y) Ôłł X ├Ś X | f (x) = f (y) ÔłÇf Ôłł D} =
                                                                             ¤ü(C) Ôłę ¤ü(D).



Remark 9. Note that, with slight modifications to the proofs, analogous results to all previous lemmas
can be derived by substituting ¤ü with I.
Lemma 7. If F d is a set spanning a null-bias space Md , then
                             I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) = I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d )).

Proof. Trivially,
                               N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d )) ÔŐć N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )).
For the zero-locus analogous of Lemma 5,
                             I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )) ÔŐć I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d )).
To prove the opposite inclusion, write F d = {¤Ľ1 , . . . , ¤Ľs } and note that each neural network ╬Ě d in
N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md ) can be written as
        ╬Ě d = (x1 ¤Ľ1 + ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě + xs ¤Ľs ) ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 = x1 (¤Ľ1 ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 ) + ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě + xs (¤Ľs ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 ),
for some x1 , . . . , xs Ôłł R and ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 Ôłł N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 ).
Moreover, note that
                                    ¤Ľi ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 Ôłł N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d ),
for each i = 1, . . . , s.
If ╬▓ Ôłł I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d )), then
                        ╬Ě d (╬▓) = x1 (¤Ľ1 ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 ) + ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě + xs (¤Ľs ÔŚŽ ¤â╠â ÔŚŽ ╬Ě dÔłĺ1 ) = 0.
Thus,
                             I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , MdÔłĺ1 , F d )) ÔŐć I(N ¤â (M1 , . . . , Md )),
completing the proof.


                                                           33
