Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B ROADENING TARGET D ISTRIBUTIONS FOR ACCELER -
ATED D IFFUSION M ODELS VIA A N OVEL A NALYSIS
A PPROACH
 Yuchen Liang† , Peizhong Ju‡ , Yingbin Liang† , Ness Shroff†
 †                           ‡
   The Ohio State University   University of Kentucky



                                            A BSTRACT

         Accelerated diffusion models hold the potential to significantly enhance the ef-
         ficiency of standard diffusion processes. Theoretically, these models have been
         shown to achieve faster convergence rates than the standard O(1/ϵ2 ) rate of vanilla
         diffusion models, where ϵ denotes the target accuracy. However, current theoretical
         studies have established the acceleration advantage only for restrictive target distri-
         bution classes, such as those with smoothness conditions imposed along the entire
         sampling path or with bounded support. In this work, we significantly broaden
         the target distribution classes with a new accelerated stochastic DDPM sampler.
         In particular, we show that it achieves accelerated performance for three broad
         distribution classes not considered before. Our first class relies on the smoothness
         condition posed only to the target density q0 , which is far more relaxed than the
         existing smoothness conditions posed to all qt along the entire sampling path. Our
         second class requires only a finite second moment condition, allowing for a much
         wider class of target distributions than the existing finite-support condition. Our
         third class is Gaussian mixture, for which our result establishes the first accelera-
         tion guarantee. Moreover, among accelerated DDPM type samplers, our results
         specialized for bounded-support distributions show an improved dependency on
         the data dimension d. Our analysis introduces a novel technique for establishing
         performance guarantees via constructing a tilting factor representation of the con-
         vergence error and utilizing Tweedie’s formula to handle Taylor expansion terms.
         This new analytical framework may be of independent interest.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Generative modeling is a fundamental task in machine learning, aiming to generate samples out
of a distribution similar to that of training data. Classical generative models include variational
autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2022), generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), and normalizing flows Rezende & Mohamed (2015), etc. Recently, diffusion models
(Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019) have arisen as an appealing
generative model and have received wide popularity due to their excellent performance over a variety
of tasks and applications as summarized in many surveys of diffusion models (Yang et al., 2023;
Croitoru et al., 2023; Kazerouni et al., 2023).

The empirical success of diffusion models has also inspired extensive theoretical studies, aiming to
characterize the convergence guarantee for diffusion models. The convergence rate (i.e., the total
number of steps to attain a target accuracy ε) for standard vanilla Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (DDPMs) has been established to be O(ε−2 ) for wide classes of target distributions (Chen
et al., 2023a; Benton et al., 2024a; Conforti et al., 2023) (see Appendix A for a more complete
summary). More recently, various accelerated samplers have been proposed and been shown to
achieve an improved convergence rate of O(ε−1 ). One such acceleration approach is to redesign the
(stochastic) DDPM reverse process. This includes augmenting the original reverse process with an
additional estimate (Li et al., 2024c), introducing intermediate sampling points along the generation
path (Li et al., 2024a), and employing special Markov-chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) algorithms
(Huang et al., 2024b). Another acceleration method is to sample with the corresponding probability
ODE (Li et al., 2024c; Chen et al., 2023c; Huang et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024d).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Target distribution Q0         Method          Num √of steps
                                                                                              Results
                                                      dL2
 ∇ log qt , st L-Lips. ∀t     ODE-based          O                                  (Chen et al., 2023c, Thm 3)
                                                    √ ε 2
 ∇ log qt L-Lips. ∀t          DDPM accl.         O    dL
                                                       ε                          (Huang et al., 2024b, Thm 4.4)†
                                                    p+1    ∗
                                                       p
  ∂ak st (x) ≤ L ∀x, t, a         ODE           O   d
                                                       1                          (Huang et al., 2024a, Thm 3.10)†
 and ∀k ≤ p + 1, Q0                                         εp

 Bounded Support                                    1.5
                                                    d       log1.5 M
 ∇2 log q0 M -Lips.           DDPM accl.      O               ε                         (This paper, Thm 4)
                                                      1.5           1.5

                                                        d    N
 Q0 Gaussian Mixture          DDPM accl.        O            ε                          (This paper, Thm 2)
                                                          3  ∗                        (Li et al., 2024c, Thm 4)
                                                            d
                              DDPM accl.            O        ε                       (Li et al., 2024a, Thm 2)†
 Q0 Bounded Support                                       3  ∗                        (Li et al., 2024c, Thm 2)
                                                            d
                                  ODE              O        √
                                                          2  ∗
                                                                ε                    (Li et al., 2024a, Thm 1)†
                                                            d
                                  ODE             O          ε                        (Li et al., 2024c, Thm 1)
                                                     1.5  ∗
 Q0 Finite Variance           DDPM accl.          O dε                                  (This paper, Thm 3)

Table 1: Summary of accelerated convergence results in terms of the number of steps needed to
achieve ε-accuracy in total variation, where d is the dimension. For Gaussian mixture, assume
that N ≤ d. The first 4 rows of this table correspond to the results under those target distributions
with some smoothness conditions imposed, while the last 4 rows correspond to the results under
(possibly) non-smooth targets with finite variance. (∗) Those results correspond to an early-stopped
                                                                                     2
procedure that compares the sampling distribution to Q1 (δ), where W2 (Q0 , Q1 ) ≲ δd. Here the
dependencies on δ are omitted. (†) Those studies are concurrent to our work based on the time that
they were posted on arXiv. Note that this table does not include the studies within two months of the
conference submission, but those are discussed in the related works.
However, existing results on the acceleration guarantee suffer from strong assumptions on the target
distribution. (i) For smooth target distributions, the analyses of Chen et al. (2023c); Huang et al.
(2024a;b) require that all the scores (or their close estimates or both) satisfy certain Lipschitz-smooth
condition along the entire sampling path, i.e., the smoothness condition is posed to the density qt for
all iteration time t. However, such smoothness at intermediate steps is generally restrictive and hard to
verify in practice. (ii) For (possibly) non-smooth targets, the analysis of Li et al. (2024a;c;d) requires
the distribution to have finite support for early-stopped sampling procedures. Such an assumption
is, however, restrictive if compared to that for early-stopped vanilla samplers, where convergence
guarantees have been established only under the assumption of finite variance (Chen et al., 2023a;
Benton et al., 2024a). The above discussions raise the following important open question:
Question 1: Can we obtain an accelerated convergence rate for a much broader set of target
distributions? Namely, for smooth target distributions, can the smoothness condition be imposed
only on the target distribution; and for (possibly) non-smooth targets, can we broaden the target
distribution to only have finite variance?
Further,
        the existing
                      accelerated diffusion samplers suffer as high dimensional dependencies as
O d3 or O d2 (Li et al., 2024a;c) for target distributions with bounded support. This motivates us
to explore the following intriguing question:
Question 2: While addressing Question 1 to relax the assumption from finite support to finite variance
for possibly non-smooth distributions, can we achieve a lower dimensional dependency?
This paper will provide affirmative answers to both of the above questions.
1.1 O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS
Our main contribution is to provide accelerated convergence results for a significantly wider range
of distributions than those addressed in previous works (see Table 1 (particularly column 1) for a
comparison). To this end, we design a new accelerated stochastic DDPM sampler and develop a
novel analytical technique that characterizes its acceleration guarantees across this broader spectrum
of distributions. Our detailed contributions are summarized as follows.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Broadening Target Distributions: Inspired by optimization methods, we design a new Hessian-
based accelerated sampler for the stochastic diffusion processes. We show that       our accelerated

sampler achieves an accelerated convergence rate of O d1.5 min{d, N }1.5 /ε , O d1.5 /ε , and
O d1.5 log1.5 M/ε respectively for Gaussian mixtures, any target distributions having finite variance

(with early-stopping), and any target distributions having M -Lipschitz Hessian of log-densities. In
particular, (i) for smoothness Q0 that has p.d.f., the smoothness condition is only imposed on the
log-density of Q0 , which is much less restrictive than that imposed on all Qt ’s (Chen et al., 2023c;
Huang et al., 2024a;b); (ii) for possibly non-smooth Q0 , we only require Q0 to have finite variance
for the early-stopped procedure, which is a much broader class of distributions than those having
bounded support (Li et al., 2024a;c;d); (iii) we provide the first accelerated convergence result for
Gaussian mixture Q0 ’s.1
For possibly non-smooth targets with
                                  bounded support, our sampler improves the dependency of the
convergence rate on d by O d1.5 compared with previous accelerated diffusion samplers (Li et al.,
2024a;c).
Novel Analysis Technique: We develop a novel technique for analyzing the accelerated DDPM
process. Our approach features two new elements: (i) characterization of the error incurred at each
discrete step of the reverse process using tilting factor; and (ii) analysis of the mean value of tilting
factor via Tweedie’s formula to handle power terms in the Taylor expansion. Such a technique enables
us to (a) analyze more general distributions beyond those with restrictive distribution assumptions;
(b) tightly identify the dominant term and reduce the dimensional dependency; and (c) handle the
estimation error in accelerated samplers for both score and Hessian estimation. This analytical
framework is different from the main previous theoretical techniques for analyzing the convergence
of diffusion models: (a) the SDE-type analysis for regular diffusion samplers (Chen et al., 2023a;
Benton et al., 2024a; Conforti et al., 2023), (b) any ODE-type analysis (Li et al., 2024d; Huang et al.,
2024a; Gao & Zhu, 2024), and (c) the use of typical sets (Li et al., 2024a;c).
1.2 R ELATED W ORKS ON ACCELERATED S AMPLING
Here, we focus on the related studies of accelerated samplers. Note that all of these works we discuss
below, only except Chen et al. (2023c;e); Li et al. (2024c), are concurrent to or after ours based on
their posting time on arXiv. In Appendix A, we provide a thorough summary of convergence analysis
of standard samplers as well as other theoretical perspectives of diffusion models.
Accelerated Stochastic Samplers: In Li et al. (2024c), accelerated stochastic variants to the original
DDPM sampler are proposed and analyzed, when there is no estimation error. In Li et al. (2024a), a
new accelerated stochastic sampler are proposed by inserting intermediate sampling points along the
diffusion path. Both algorithms are analyzed only when the target distribution has bounded support
and suffer from large dimensional dependencies. In Huang et al. (2024b), the authors proposed the
RTK-MALA and RTK-ULD algorithms which uses MCMC algorithms, such as the Metropolis-
adjusted Langevin Algorithm or the Underdamped Langevin Dynamics, at each diffusion step. The
analysis is performed under the assumption that all the scores of log qt ’s are Lipschitz-smooth. In
comparison, our work substantially broadens the set of target distributions to include those with
unbounded support and with smooth log-density only imposed upon Q0 with a completely different
analytical technique. Our result also improves the dimensional dependencies of accelerated stochastic
samplers in Li et al. (2024a;c) for distributions with bounded support.
Deterministic Samplers: Beyond stochastic samplers, another line of research to achieve an accel-
erated convergence rate is to sample from the corresponding probability flow ordinary differential
equation (PF-ODE). Early work provided polynomial guarantees under rather restrictive Lipschitz
conditions Chen et al. (2023e). Later in Chen et al. (2023c), an accelerated convergence rate was
first derived with the DPUM sampler by mixing the deterministic predictor steps with stochastic
corrector steps. The analysis was performed under the assumption of Lipschitz ∇ log qt ’s and st ’s.
Note that this assumption is relatively restrictive and hard to verify in practice. After that, for target
distributions having bounded support, Li et al. (2024c) provided the first analysis of a purely deter-
ministic sampler (along with an accelerated deterministic sampler), albeit with a high dimensional
dependency. Recently, under strong assumptions on st ’s, Huang et al. (2024a) provided an acceler-
ated rate using the p-th order Runge-Kutta time integrator for ODEs for those target distributions
   1
     Although the technique in Huang et al. (2024a) may be applied to Gaussian mixtures, the authors do not
provide explicit dependencies in their paper. Also, Huang et al. (2024a) is posted on arXiv after our first draft.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


having bounded support. Specifically, for first-order Runge-Kutta methods, it is assumed that the
first two orders of partial derivatives of st ’s are uniformly bounded in space and time, which implies
Lipschitz-smoothness of st and its derivative along the entire sampling path. Most recently, Li
et al. (2024d) obtained a linear convergence rate both in d and ε−1 using PF-ODEs as long as st ’s
(and their derivatives) are well estimated. However, it is analyzed only on bounded-support targets.
Beyond these works, further acceleration to deterministic samplers is sought in Li et al. (2024a;c) that
gives the convergence rate of O(ε−1/2 ), which are still performed under bounded-support targets. In
comparison, our work substantially broadens the target distributions to include those with unbounded
support (yet with finite variance) while achieving an accelerated convergence rate.

2    P RELIMINARIES OF DDPM
In this section, we provide the background of the DDPM sampler (Ho et al., 2020).
2.1 F ORWARD P ROCESS
Let x0 ∈ Rd be the initial data, and let xt ∈ Rd , t ∈ {1, . . . , T } be the latent variables in the diffusion
algorithm. Let Q0 be the initial data distribution, and let Qt be the marginal latent distribution at
time t in the forward process, for all 1 ≤ t ≤ T . In the forward process, white Gaussian noise is
                                   √                 √                                          i.i.d.
gradually added to the data: xt = 1 − βt xt−1 + βt wt , ∀t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, where wt ∼ N (0, Id ).
Equivalently, this can be expressed as a conditional distribution at each time t:
                                                        p
                           Qt|t−1 (xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt Id ),                               (1)
which means that under Q, X0 → X1 → · · · → XT . Here βt ∈ (0, 1) captures the “amount” of
noise that is injected at time t, and βt ’s are called the noise schedule. Define
                                                       Qt
                             αt := 1 − βt , ᾱt := i=1 αi , 1 ≤ t ≤ T.
An immediate result by accumulating the steps is that
                                                       √
                               Qt|0 (xt |x0 ) = N (xt ; ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt )Id ),                       (2)
                                 √         √
or, written equivalently, xt = ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt w̄t , ∀t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, where w̄t ∼ N (0, Id ) denotes
the aggregated noise at time t. Intuitively, for large T , since QT |0 ≈ N (0, Id ) (which is independent
of x0 ), it is expected that QT ≈ N (0, Id ) when T becomes large, as long as the variance under Q0 is
finite. Finally, since the conditional noises are Gaussian, each Qt (t ≥ 1) is absolutely continuous
w.r.t the Lebesgue measure. Let the corresponding p.d.f. of each Qt be qt (t ≥ 1). Similarly define
qt,t−1 , qt|t−1 , and qt−1|t for t ≥ 1. In case Q0 is also absolutely continuous w.r.t. the Lebesgue
measure, let q0 be the corresponding p.d.f. of Q0 .
2.2 R EGULAR R EVERSE P ROCESS
The goal of the reverse sampling process is to generate samples approximately from the data
distribution Q0 . We first draw the latent variable at time T from a Gaussian distribution: xT ∼
N (0, Id ) =: PT . Then, to achieve effective sampling, each forward step is approximated by a reverse
sampling step, in which the mean matches the posterior mean of Qt−1|t . Define

                              µt (xt ) := √1αt (xt + (1 − αt )∇ log qt (xt )) .                             (3)

Here ∇ log qt (x) is called the score of qt , which can be estimated via a training process called
score matching. At each time t = T, T − 1, . . . , 1, the true regular reverse process is defined as
xt−1 = µt (xt ) + σt z, where z ∼ N (0, Id ). Two choices of σt2 are commonly used in practice, where
σt2 = 1 − αt or σt2 = 1−  ᾱt−1
                         1−ᾱt (1 − αt ), and similar results are reported for these choices (Ho et al.,
2020). Let Pt be the marginal distributions of xt in the true regular reverse process, and let pt be the
corresponding p.d.f. of Pt w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure.
2.3 M ETRICS
In case where Q is absolutely continuous w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure, we are interested in measuring
the mismatch between Q and P through the total-variation distance, defined as
                               TV(Q, P ) := supA⊆B(Rd ) |Q(A) − P (A)|


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where B(Rd ) contains all Borel-measureable sets in Rd . This metric is commonly used in prior
theoretical studies (Chen et al., 2023a). From Pinsker’s inequality, the total-variation (TV) distance is
upper bounded as TV(Q, P )2 ≤ 12 KL(Q||P ), where the KL divergence is defined as KL(Q||P ) :=
  log dQ
R
      dP dQ ≥ 0. Thus, we control the KL divergence when Q is absolutely continuous w.r.t. P .
When q0 does not exist (say, when Q0 has point masses), we use the Wasserstein distance to
measure the mismatch at t = 0, namely W2 (Q0 , Q1 ), which is a technique commonly adopted
(Chen
q     et al., 2023a; Benton et al., 2024a). The Wasserstein-2 distance is defined as W2 (Q0 , Q1 ) :=
                   R                 2
  minΓ∈Π(Q0 ,Q1 ) Rd ×Rd ∥x − y∥ dΓ(x, y), where Π(Q0 , Q1 ) is the set of all joint probability
measures on Rd × Rd with marginal distributions Q0 and Q1 , respectively.

3       ACCELERATED D IFFUSION S AMPLER
To generate samples from the data distribution Q0 , the idea of DDPM is to design a reverse process
in which each reverse sampling step well approximates the corresponding forward step. Below,
we propose a new accelerated sampler along with a new variance estimator, in which both the
conditional mean and variance of the reverse process match the corresponding posterior quantities.
3.1 ACCELERATED R EVERSE P ROCESS
At each time t = T, T − 1, . . . , 1, define the true accelerated reverse process as xt−1 = µt (xt ) +
    1
Σt2 (xt )z, where µt is defined in (3), z ∼ N (0, Id ), and (cf. Lemma 8)
                              Σt (xt ) := 1−α

                                           αt
                                              t
                                                Id + (1 − αt )∇2 log qt (xt ) .                                 (4)
Let Pt′ be the marginal distributions of xt in the true accelerated reverse process, and let p′t be the
                                                                     ′
corresponding p.d.f.. Thus, the transition kernel can be written as Pt−1|t = N (xt−1 ; µt (xt ), Σt (xt )),
              ′
and we let PT := PT = N (0, Id ). When (1 − αt ) is vanishing for large T , Σt (xt ) ≻ 0 for all large
T ’s, and thus the conditional Gaussian process is well-defined.2 The above accelerated sampler has
a close relationship to Ozaki’s discretization method to approximate a continuous-time stochastic
process (Ozaki, 1992; Shoji, 1998; Stramer & Tweedie, 1999).
In practice, one has no access to either ∇ log qt or ∇2 log qt . Thus, their estimates, denoted as st and
                                                                                           1
Ht , are used. Define the estimated accelerated reverse process: xt−1 = µ    bt (xt ) + Σ
                                                                                        b t2 (xt )z, where

                                    bt (xt ) := xt + (1 − αt )st (xt ),
                                    µ                                                                           (5)
                                    b t (xt ) := 1−αt (Id + (1 − αt )Ht (xt )) .
                                    Σ                                                                           (6)
                                                 αt

Here, st can be obtained through score-matching (Song & Ermon, 2019). In Section 3.2, we propose
an estimator for ∇2 log qt , which we refer to as Hessian matching. Let Pbt′ be the marginal distributions
of xt in the estimated reverse process with corresponding p.d.f. pb′t .
3.2 H ESSIAN M ATCHING E STIMATOR FOR ACCELERATION
Below we provide a method to obtain Ht (x), which estimates ∇2 log qt (x). Note that
                                2
           ∇2 log qt (x) = ∇qtq(x)
                                t (x)
                                       − (∇ log qt (x))(∇ log qt (x))⊺
                             2
                         = ∇qtq(x) t (x)
                                         + 1−1ᾱt Id − 1−1ᾱt Id − (∇ log qt (x))(∇ log qt (x))⊺ .              (7)

Apart from the original score estimate, we require an additional Hessian estimate:
                                                                2                        2
          vt (x) := arg minvθ :Rd →Rd×d EXt ∼Qt vθ (Xt ) − ∇qtq(X  t (Xt )
                                                                      t)
                                                                           + 1−1ᾱt Id     .
                                                                                                   F

In order to train for vt , the following lemma provides an analogy to score matching, which we refer
to as Hessian matching.
    2
      More rigorously, we can project the matrices Σt and Σ   b t onto the space of positive-semi definite (PSD)
matrices for those xt ’s where either of these two matrices is not PSD. Since the probability of the events
containing such bad xt ’s decreases to zero asymptotically, all theoretical results in this paper, which are derived
in expectation, will not be affected.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 1. With the forward process in (1), we have
                                          2                       2
  arg minvθ :Rd →Rd×d EXt ∼Qt vθ (Xt ) − ∇qtq(X
                                              t (Xt )
                                                 t)
                                                      +   1
                                                             I
                                                        1−ᾱt d
                                                                                  F
                                                                 √           √                                     2
    = arg minvθ :Rd →Rd×d E(X0 ,W̄t )∼Q0 ⊗N (0,Id ) vθ ( ᾱt X0 +                1 − ᾱt W̄t ) − 1−1ᾱt W̄t W̄t⊺       .
                                                                                                                   F

With the Hessian estimate vt using Lemma 1, from (7), an estimate for ∇2 log qt (x) is given by
                             Ht (x) = vt (x) − 1−1ᾱt Id − st (x)s⊺t (x).                       (8)

With the estimator of Ht in (8), the Hessian-based sampler using the Σb̃ later in (9) is the same as the
                                                                        t
accelerated stochastic sampler in Li et al. (2024c). Yet, our analysis is applicable when estimation
errors exist, whereas in Li et al. (2024c) the estimators are assumed to be perfect for the accelerated
sampler. In the literature, several other estimators have been proposed for higher order derivatives
of log qt (x) (Meng et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022; Dockhorn et al., 2022). In our paper, we proposed
another method, the Hessian matching method, which can guarantee accurate Hessian estimations
with extra computation resources. Yet, our analysis can be applied to any estimator for Ht as long as
Assumption 3 is satisfied.

4       ACCELERATED C ONVERGENCE B OUNDS FOR B ROADER TARGETS
In this section, we provide convergence guarantees for the accelerated stochastic samplers for general
Q0 . We will first establish our main result for smooth Q0 , and then extend it for more general
(possibly non-smooth) Q0 . We will also provide a sketch of proof to describe key analysis techniques.
4.1 T ECHNICAL A SSUMPTIONS FOR ACCELERATED S AMPLER
We first provide the following four technical assumptions for the accelerated sampler.
Assumption 1 (Finite Second Moment). There exists a constant M2 < ∞ (that does not depend on
                                   2
d and T ) such that EX0 ∼Q0 ∥X0 ∥ ≤ M2 d.
Assumption 2 (Absolute Continuity). Q0 is absolutely continuous w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure, and
thus q0 exists. Also, suppose that q0 is analytic 3 and that q0 (x) > 0.
The above Assumptions 1 and 2 are commonly adopted in the literature (Chen et al., 2023a;d).
Assumption 3 (Score and Hessian Estimation Error). The estimates st ’s and Ht ’s satisfy
                    1
                      PT                                         2   2      −2
                   T     t=1 EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt )∥ ≤ ε = Õ(T    ),
                 1
                   P  T                          2              2    2      −1
                T     t=1 EXt ∼Qt Ht (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt ) F ≤ εH = Õ(T       ).
                                                               1/ℓ
                                                            ℓ
Also, suppose that Ht satisfies supℓ≥1 EXt ∼Qt ∥Ht (Xt )∥          = Õ(1).

The above assumption (Assumption 3) describes the estimation error for both the score and Hessian.
In particular, compared with regular samplers, the score function needs to be estimated at a higher
accuracy in order to achieve acceleration. Such higher accuracy is also required in previous analyses
of ODE samplers (e.g., Li et al. (2024a;d)). The regularity condition on Ht can be satisfied, for
example, when ∥Ht ∥ is bounded as Õ(1). As another example, it suffices that ∥Ht (x)∥ has a
polynomial upper bound in x when Qt is sub-exponential. In Lemma 2 (in Appendix C), we provide
sufficient conditions such that the Ht in (8) satisfies Assumption 3.
Assumption 4 (Regular Partial Derivatives). For all t ≥ 1, ℓ ≥ 1, and a ∈ [d]p such that |a| = p ≥ 1,
                                          ℓ                                                    ℓ
               EXt ∼Qt |∂ap log qt (Xt )| = O (1) ,       EXt ∼Qt |∂ap log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))| = O (1) .
When q0 does not exist, this is required only for t ≥ 2.4
The above regularity assumption (Assumption 4) on the partial derivatives is needed for our analysis
based on Taylor expansion. It is rather soft, and it can be verified on the following two common cases:
(1) when Q0 has finite variance, and (2) when Q0 is Gaussian mixture (see Section 5). Case 1 clearly
covers a broad set of target distributions of practical interest, such as images, and many theoretical
studies of diffusion models have been specially focused on such a distribution (Li et al., 2024a;c).
Case 2 has also been well studied for diffusion models (Chen et al., 2024; Gatmiry et al., 2024).
    3
        Here a function is analytic if its Taylor series converges to the functional value at each point in the domain.
    4
        In the Appendix, we have provided the more general Assumption 5 under which Theorem 1 would hold.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2 ACCELERATED C ONVERGENCE B OUNDS
We first define a new noise schedule as follows, which will be useful for acceleration.
Definition 1 (Noise Schedule for Acceleration). For large T ’s, the step-size αt satisfies that
                                                               QT
                  1 − αt ≲ logT T , ∀t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, ᾱT = t=1 αt = o T −2 .


When q0 does not exist, the upper bound on 1 − αt is only required for t ≥ 2.
In Definition 1, the upper bound on 1 − αt requires that αt is large enough to control the reverse-step
error, while the upper bound on ᾱT requires that αt is small enough to control the initialization error.
An example of αt that satisfies Definition 1 is the constant step-size: 1 − αt ≡ c log
                                                                                     T
                                                                                       T
                                                                                         , ∀t ≥ 1 with
                                      T                                       −c log   T

                             c log T                         c log T
                                                                                            = o T −2 .

c > 2. Then, ᾱT = 1 − T                = exp T log 1 − T               = O eT T
Thus, such αt satisfies Definition 1.
The following theorem provides the first convergence result for accelerated diffusion samplers for
general smooth target distributions that have finite second moment (along with some mild regularity
conditions). The complete proof is given in Appendix D.
Theorem 1 (Accelerated Sampler for Smooth Q0 ). Under Assumptions 1 to 4, with the αt satisfying
Definition 1, we have
                                     2
    KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ ) ≲(log T )ε2 + logT T ε2H
                       PT                    Pd
                     + t=1 (1 − αt )3 EXt ∼Qt i,j,k=1 ∂ijk
                                                       3                       3
                                                           log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt ).

Theorem 1 characterizes the convergence in terms of KL divergence (and thus TV distance) for
smooth (possibly unbounded) Q0 . The bound in Theorem 1 will be further instantiated with explicit
dependency on system parameters for example distributions Q0 in Section 5. To further explain
the upper bound in Theorem 1, the first two terms arise from the score and Hessian estimation
error, and the last term captures the errors accumulated during the reverse steps over t = T, . . . , 1,
which can be further bounded by Õ(T −2 ) under Assumption 4 (cf. (52)). Thus, when ε2H satisfies
Assumption 3, the upper bound in Theorem 1 can be more explicitly characterized w.r.t. T as
KL(Q0 ||Pb0 ) ≲ Õ(T −2 ) + (log T )ε2 (where the dependency on d will be explicitly characterized
for specific distributions in Section 5). Thus, in order to achieve O(ε2 ) error in KL divergence, the
number of steps required is O(ε−1 ). This improves the dependency of the convergence rate on ε of
the regular sampler by a factor of O(ε−1 ).
We next extend Theorem 1 for smooth Q0 to general Q0 that can be possibly non-smooth and hence
the density function q0 does not exist. Such distributions occur often in practice; for example, when
Q0 has a discrete support such as for images, or when Q0 is supported on a low-dimensional manifold.
For non-smooth Q0 , its one-step perturbation Q1 does have a p.d.f. q1 , which is further analytic
(Lemma 6). This enables us to apply Theorem 1 on Q1 to obtain the following convergence bound.
Also, we use the Wasserstein distance to measure the perturbation between Q0 and Q1 (Chen et al.,
2023d;a; Lee et al., 2023).
Corollary 1 (General (possibly non-smooth) Q0 ). Under Assumptions 1, 3 and 4, if the noise
schedule satisfies Definition 1 at t ≥ 2, the distribution Pb1′ satisfies
                                     2
    KL(Q1 ||Pb1′ ) ≲(log T )ε2 + logT T ε2H
                       PT                    Pd
                     + t=2 (1 − αt )3 EXt ∼Qt i,j,k=1 ∂ijk
                                                       3                       3
                                                           log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt ),
where Q1 is such that W2 (Q0 , Q1 )2 ≲ (1 − α1 )d.
In particular, Corollary 1 applies to any general target distribution when the second moment is finite.
4.3 P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 1
We next provide a proof sketch of Theorem 1 to describe the idea of our analysis approach. The full
proof is provided in Appendix D. Our approach is very different from previous SDE-type approaches,
which invoke Fokker-Planck equation to express the evolution of p.d.f. and use Girsanov’s Theorem
to bound the divergence, both along the continuous diffusion path. In comparison, we develop a
novel Bayesian approach based on tilting factor representation and Tweedie’s formula to handle
power terms, which is applicable to a much wider class of target distributions, including those having


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


infinite support. In particular, compared with Li et al. (2024a;c;d), our approach does not assume that
the target distribution has finite support.
To begin, we decompose the total error as
                             h                i
KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ ) ≤ EXT ∼QT log pqT′ (X       T)
                                        (XT )
                 |            {z T            }
                     initialization error
                                          p′     (Xt−1 |Xt )
                                  h                          i P                        h                       i
     PT                                                          T                           qt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
   + t=1 EXt ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1 log pbt−1|t     ′     (Xt−1 |Xt )  +  t=1 EX t ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1  log pt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt ) .
                                                                                              ′
                                           t−1|t
     |                         {z                            } |                     {z                         }
                         estimation error                                      reverse-step error
The initialization error can be bounded easily (Lemma 3). Below we focus on the remaining two
terms in five steps.
Step 1: Bounding estimation error (Lemma 4). At each time t = 1, . . . , T , rather than upper-
bounding via typical sets as in Li et al. (2024c), we directly evaluate the expected value of
log(p′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt )/b
                        p′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt )). This is straightforward since Pt−1|t
                                                                             ′           ′
                                                                                   and Pbt−1|t are Gaus-
sian. We then use Taylor expansion for the log det(·) function and the matrix inverse to identify the
dominant-order terms under the mismatched variance.
Step 2: Tilting factor expression of log-likelihood ratio (Lemmas 5 and 6 and Equation (20)).
With Bayes’ rule, we show that qt−1|t is an exponentially tilted form of p′t−1|t with tilting factor:
 ′                           √
ζt,t−1  = (∇ log qt−1 (µt ) − αt ∇ log qt (xt ))⊺ (xt−1 − µt )
                                                                      P∞
                                          αt
 + 12 (xt−1 − µt )⊺ ∇2 log qt−1 (µt ) − 1−α  t
                                               B  (x
                                                 t t )  (xt−1 − µt ) + p=3 Tp (log qt−1 , xt−1 , µt ).
where Bt (xt ) describes the correction due to the modified variance for acceleration (see (14)), and
Tp (f, x, µ) is the p-th order Taylor power term of function f around x = µ. With this tilting factor,
we can upper-bound the reverse-step error as, for each fixed xt ,
                     h                     i
                          q    (Xt−1 |xt )                       ′                                 ′
 EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t log pt−1|t
                            ′  (Xt−1 |xt ) ≤ EXt ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1 [ζt,t−1 ] − EXt ∼Qt ,Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t [ζt,t−1 ].
                                                                                           ′
                           t−1|t

For regular DDPMs, there is no control for the variance of the reverse sampling process, and thus
Bt (xt ) ≡ 0. In this case, the dominating rate is determined by the expected values of T2 . With the
variance correction in our accelerated sampler, the corresponding Bt (xt ) enables us to cancel out
the second-order Taylor term (see Lemma 11). As a result, the rate-determining term becomes the
expected values of T3 , which decays faster. Thus, the acceleration is achieved.
                                                         ′
Step 3: Explicit expression for EXt ∼Qt ,Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                   ′   [ζt,t−1 ] (Lemma 7). Given the Taylor expansion
    ′
of ζt,t−1 , this step can be reduced to calculating the expected values of the power terms, which are
the Gaussian centralized moments. They are calculated using the classical Isserlis’s Theorem.
                                                        ′
Step 4: Explicit expression for EXt ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1 [ζt,t−1    ] (Lemmas 8 to 10). While Qt|t−1 is
Gaussian, Qt−1|t is not Gaussian in general, rendering the calculation of all moments non-trivial.
To calculate posterior moments, we extend Tweedie’s formula (Efron, 2011) in a non-trivial way.
Whereas the original Tweedie’s formula provides an explicit expression for the posterior mean for
Gaussian perturbed observations, we explicitly calculate the first six centralized posterior moments
and provide the asymptotic order of all higher-order moments, drawing techniques from combinatorics.
The results also justify the expressions of µt and Σt in (3) and (4).
Step 5: Bounding reverse-step error (Lemma 11) In order to employ the moment results for
Taylor expansion, we guarantee that it is valid to change the limit (in the Taylor expansion) and the
                                                                                                   ′
expectation operator. Finally, substituting the calculated moments into EXt ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1 [ζt,t−1       ]−
                        ′
EXt ∼Qt ,Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                ′     [ζt,t−1 ] and noting that higher-order partial derivatives do not affect the rate (by
Assumption 4), we can determine the dominating term and obtain the desirable result.

5    E XAMPLE Q0 ’ S : ACCELERATED C ONVERGENCE R ATE WITH E XPLICIT
     PARAMETER D EPENDENCY
Now, we specialize Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 to several interesting distribution classes, for which
convergence bounds with explicit dependency on system parameters can be derived. The key is to
locate the dependency in the dominating terms in the reverse-step error.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1 G AUSSIAN M IXTURE Q0
We first investigate the case where Q0 is Gaussian mixture. This is a rich class of distributions with
strong approximation power (Bacharoglou, 2010; Diakonikolas et al., 2017). The following theorem
establishes the first accelerated convergence result with explicit dimensional dependencies for such a
distribution class.
Theorem 2 (Accelerated Sampler for Gaussian Mixture Q0 ). Suppose that Q0 is Gaussian mixture,
                                     PN
whose p.d.f. is given by q0 (x0 ) = n=1 πn q0,n (x0 ), where q0,n is the p.d.f. of N (µ0,n , Σ0,n ) and
                                             PN
πn ∈ [0, 1] is the mixing coefficient where n=1 πn = 1. Under Assumption 3, if the αt satisfies
Definition 1, we have
                                      3         3       3                 2
                                               } log T
                    KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ ) ≲ d min{d,N
                                            T2         + (log T )ε2 + logT T ε2H .

Therefore, for  any Gaussian mixture target Q0 with N ≤ d, it takes the accelerated algorithm
O d1.5 N 1.5 /ε steps to reach convergence under accurate score and Hessian estimation. This is the
first result for accelerated DDPM samplers to achieve an accelerated convergence rate for Gaussian
mixture targets under score and Hessian estimation error. Compared with the results for regular
samplers, the number of convergence steps improves by a factor of O(ε−1 ).
The proof of Theorem 2 is non-trivial because in order to show that Assumption 4 holds for Gaussian
mixture distributions with any αt according to Definition 1, it is generally difficult to evaluate and
provide an upper bound for all orders of partial derivatives of the logarithm of a mixture density. To
this end, we employ the multivariate Faá di Bruno’s formula (Constantine & Savits, 1996) to develop
an explicit bound (Lemmas 13 and 14).
Below we numerically evaluate the performance of our Hessian-accelerated DDPM when Q0 is
Gaussian mixture. The original accelerator requires calculating the square-root matrix of Σ
                                                                                          b t (see
(4)), which might be computational burdensome. Below, we propose an approximated Hessian-based
accelerated sampler, where µ
                           b is still defined in (5) and Σ
                              t
                                                         b is replaced by Σ
                                                             t
                                                                          b̃ (x ) where
                                                                              t   t
                                                     2 b̃                                   2
       Σ̃t (xt ) := 1−α
                     αt
                        t
                          Id + 1−α
                                 2 ∇ log qt (xt )
                                  t
                                                      , Σt (xt ) := 1−α
                                                                     αt
                                                                        t
                                                                          Id + 1−α
                                                                                 2 Ht (xt )
                                                                                  t
                                                                                              .    (9)
With a similar tilting-factor analysis as in Theorem 1, we can verify that the approximated sampler
still achieves an accelerated convergence rate (see Corollaries 2 and 3 and Remark 3).
In Figure 1, we compare the following four accelerated samplers: (1) the regular DDPM sampler
(in blue); (2) our Hessian-accelerated sampler (in red); (3) the accelerated stochastic sampler in Li
et al. (2024a) (in cyan); and (4) the deterministic sampler using PF-ODE, which is analyzed in Li
et al. (2024c;d); Huang et al. (2024a). Here N = 4 and d = 4. The performance is averaged over 30
different trials. In a single trial, 200000 samples are used to estimate the KL divergence. The αt in
(10) is used with c = 4 and δ = 0.001. From the comparison, it is observed that our Hessian-based
sampler achieves the best convergence (at similar computation levels) in non-asymptotic regimes.


Figure 1: Comparison of different accelerated samplers for Gaussian mixture Q0 ’s. The x-axes are
the number of steps (left) and the computation time of a trial (right), respectively.

5.2 F INITE VARIANCE Q0 WITH E ARLY-S TOPPING
Next, we specialize Corollary 1 to a special noise schedule, first proposed in Li et al. (2024c):
                                                             t
                              c log T               c log T
                    1 − αt = T min δ 1 + T                    , 1 , ∀2 ≤ t ≤ T,                   (10)


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and 1 − α1 = δ. Here c and δ satisfy that c > 2 and δec > 1. Intuitively, δ characterizes the amount
of perturbation between Q1 and Q0 (Lemma 12). Note that any noise schedule satisfying the above
condition also satisfies Definition 1 at t ≥ 2 (see (49)), and hence Corollary 1 still holds here.
Theorem 3 (Accelerated Sampler for Q0 with Finite Variance). Under Assumptions 1 and 3, using
the αt defined in (10) with c > 2 and c ≍ log(1/δ), we have
                                       3   3        3                      2
                     KL(Q1 ||Pb1′ ) ≲ d log (1/δ)
                                             T2
                                                  log T
                                                        + (log T )ε2 + logT T ε2H ,
where Q1 is such that W2 (Q0 , Q1 )2 ≲ δd.
Theorem 3 indicates  that for any Q0 having finite variance, it takes the accelerated algorithm
O d1.5 log1.5 (1/δ)/ε steps to approximate an early-stopped data distribution Q1 within O(ε2 ) error
in KL divergence (or O(ε) in TV distance). For early-stopped procedures, this theorem significantly
relaxes the previous assumption on the target distribution that requires Q0 to have bounded support
(Li et al., 2024a;c; Huang et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024d). Compared to previous accelerated diffusion
samplers for bounded-support targets (Li et al., 2024a;c), our number of convergence steps to achieve
ε-TV distance has improved by a factor of O(d1.5 ).
The proof of Theorem 3 involves the following novel elements. (i) Verifying Assumption 4 requires
evaluating and providing an upper bound for all orders of partial derivatives of the logarithm of
a continuous mixture density. Differently from the case of Gaussian (discrete) mixture, here we
can only have an upper bound in expectation (i.e., in Lp (Qt )) (Lemma 15). (ii) The second half of
Assumption 4 requires an upper bound for the one-step perturbed score, which can be shown using
the change-of-variable formula and the data processing inequality for large T (Lemmas 16 and 17).
5.3 Q0 WITH L IPSCHITZ H ESSIAN L OG -D ENSITY
With the αt in (10), we derive a convergence result when only the log-density of Q0 is smooth.
Theorem 4 (Accelerated Sampler for Smooth Hessian Log-Density). Suppose that ∇2 log q0 (x) is
2-norm M -Lipschitz. This means that ∃M > 0 such that
                    ∇2 log q0 (x) − ∇2 log q0 (y) ≤ M ∥x − y∥ ,         ∀x, y ∈ Rd .
                                                                          2   3                  2   3
Then, under Assumptions 1 and 3, using the αt in (10) with δ = 1/(M 3 T 2 ) and c ≥ log(M 3 T 2 ),
we have                           3    3       3
                                                 T ) log3 T                    2
                KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ ) ≲ d (log M +log
                                           T2               + (log T )ε2 + logT T ε2H .

We also provide an accelerated convergence result with linear d dependency when all the
∇2 log qt (x) (t ≥ 0) are 2-norm M -Lipschitz (see Theorem 5 in Appendix G.3).
Theorem 4 provides us with the first accelerated DDPM result with only a smoothness constraint on
log q0 , under the score and Hessian estimation error. In words, in order to reach O(ε) TV-distance
when ε2H /T ≲ ε2 , the number of steps needed under Lipschitz-Hessian Q0 ’s is O(d1.5 log1.5 M/ε).
This is different from Chen et al. (2023c); Huang et al. (2024a;b) in which some smoothness
condition is imposed on all ∇ log qt ’s (or st ’s or both). Compared with Theorem 3, this upper bound
in Theorem 4 is directly over KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ ) instead of for some early-stopped distribution. Our results
provide new contributions that complement existing studies by exploring different assumptions of
distributions, which enriches the existing set of distributions studied in the literature.
Our analysis is significantly different from that in (Chen et al., 2023a, Theorem 5). There, the
Poincaré inequality is key to guarantee that the Lipschitz smoothness in ∇ log q0 is preserved when
δ is small, but this inequality may not hold in our case with smoothness only in ∇2 log q0 . Instead,
with smooth ∇2 log q0 , we expand the tilting factor only to its third-order Taylor polynomial and
directly provide an upper bound with techniques used in proving Theorems 3 and 5.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have provided accelerated convergence guarantees for a much larger set of target
distributions than in prior literature, including both smooth Q0 and general Q0 with early-stopping.
The accelerated rates are achieved with a new accelerated Hessian-based DDPM sampler using a
novel analysis technique. One future direction is to further shrink the d dependency for general Q0 .
It is also interesting to investigate other acceleration schemes to further improve diffusion samplers.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under the grants:
DMS-2134145, CCF-1900145, NSF AI Institute (AI-EDGE) 2112471, CNS-2312836, CNS-2225561,
ONR grant N000142412729, and was sponsored by the Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative
Agreement Number W911NF-23-2-0225. The views and conclusions contained in this document are
those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed
or implied, of the Army Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government
is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any
copyright notation herein.

R EFERENCES
Athanassia G. Bacharoglou. Approximation of probability distributions by convex mixtures of
  gaussian measures. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 138(7):2619–2628, 2010.
Joe Benton, Valentin De Bortoli, Arnaud Doucet, and George Deligiannidis. Nearly d-linear con-
  vergence bounds for diffusion models via stochastic localization. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a.
Joe Benton, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Error bounds for flow matching methods.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024b.
Stefano Bruno, Ying Zhang, Dong-Young Lim, Ömer Deniz Akyildiz, and Sotirios Sabanis. On
  diffusion-based generative models and their error bounds: The log-concave case with full conver-
  gence estimates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13584, 2023.
Yu Cao, Jingrun Chen, Yixin Luo, and Xiang ZHOU. Exploring the optimal choice for generative
  processes in diffusion models: Ordinary vs stochastic differential equations. In Thirty-seventh
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Jinyuan Chang, Zhao Ding, Yuling Jiao, Ruoxuan Li, and Jerry Zhijian Yang. Deep conditional
   generative learning: Model and error analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01460, 2024.
Hongrui Chen, Holden Lee, and Jianfeng Lu. Improved analysis of score-based generative model-
  ing: user-friendly bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. In Proceedings of the 40th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023a.
Minshuo Chen, Kaixuan Huang, Tuo Zhao, and Mengdi Wang. Score approximation, estimation and
 distribution recovery of diffusion models on low-dimensional data. In Proceedings of the 40th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023b.
Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Holden Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Jianfeng Lu, and Adil Salim. The probability flow
   ODE is provably fast. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
   2023c.
Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru Zhang. Sampling is as easy as
   learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. In The Eleventh
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023d.
Sitan Chen, Giannis Daras, and Alexandros G. Dimakis. Restoration-degradation beyond linear diffu-
   sions: a non-asymptotic analysis for ddim-type samplers. In Proceedings of the 40th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, 2023e.
Sitan Chen, Vasilis Kontonis, and Kulin Shah. Learning general gaussian mixtures with efficient
   score matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18893, 2024.
Xiuyuan Cheng, Jianfeng Lu, Yixin Tan, and Yao Xie. Convergence of flow-based generative models
  via proximal gradient descent in wasserstein space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17582, 2023.
Frank Cole and Yulong Lu. Score-based generative models break the curse of dimensionality in
  learning a family of sub-gaussian distributions. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2024.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Giovanni Conforti, Alain Durmus, and Marta Gentiloni Silveri. Score diffusion models without early
  stopping: finite fisher information is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12240, 2023.
G Constantine and T Savits. A multivariate faa di bruno formula with applications. Transactions of
  the American Mathematical Society, 348(2):503–520, 1996.
F. Croitoru, V. Hondru, R. Ionescu, and M. Shah. Diffusion models in vision: A survey. IEEE
   Transactions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, 45(9):10850–10869, Sep 2023.
Valentin De Bortoli. Convergence of denoising diffusion models under the manifold hypothesis.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schrödinger
  bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 17695–17709, 2021.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M. Kane, and Alistair Stewart. Statistical query lower bounds for robust
   estimation of high-dimensional gaussians and gaussian mixtures. In 2017 IEEE 58th Annual
   Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 73–84, 2017.
Tim Dockhorn, Arash Vahdat, and Karsten Kreis. Genie: higher-order denoising diffusion solvers.
  In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.
Bradley Efron. Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  106(496):1602–1614, 2011.
Xuefeng Gao and Lingjiong Zhu. Convergence analysis for general probability flow odes of diffusion
  models in wasserstein distances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17958, 2024.
Xuefeng Gao, Hoang M. Nguyen, and Lingjiong Zhu. Wasserstein convergence guarantees for a
  general class of score-based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11003, 2023.
Yuan Gao, Jian Huang, Yuling Jiao, and Shurong Zheng. Convergence of continuous normalizing
  flows for learning probability distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00551, 2024.
Khashayar Gatmiry, Jonathan Kelner, and Holden Lee. Learning mixtures of gaussians using diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18869, 2024.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 27, 2014.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
Daniel Zhengyu Huang, Jiaoyang Huang, and Zhengjiang Lin. Convergence analysis of probability
  flow ode for score-based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09730, 2024a.
Xunpeng Huang, Difan Zou, Hanze Dong, Yi Zhang, Yi-An Ma, and Tong Zhang. Reverse transition
  kernel: A flexible framework to accelerate diffusion inference. 2405.16387, 2024b.
Yuling Jiao, Yanming Lai, Yang Wang, and Bokai Yan. Convergence analysis of flow matching in
  latent space with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02538, 2024.
Amirhossein Kazerouni, Ehsan Khodapanah Aghdam, Moein Heidari, Reza Azad, Mohsen Fayyaz,
 Ilker Hacihaliloglu, and Dorit Merhof. Diffusion models in medical imaging: A comprehensive
 survey. Medical Image Analysis, 88, August 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2022.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with
  polynomial complexity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence of score-based generative modeling for general
  data distributions. In Proceedings of The 34th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning
 Theory, volume 201, pp. 946–985, 2023.
Gen Li, Yu Huang, Timofey Efimov, Yuting Wei, Yuejie Chi, and Yuxin Chen. Accelerating
  convergence of score-based diffusion models, provably. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03852, 2024a.
Gen Li, Zhihan Huang, and Yuting Wei. Towards a mathematical theory for consistency training in
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07802, 2024b.
Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuxin Chen, and Yuejie Chi. Towards faster non-asymptotic convergence
  for diffusion-based generative models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024c.
Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuejie Chi, and Yuxin Chen. A sharp convergence theory for the probability
  flow odes of diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02320, 2024d.
Puheng Li, Zhong Li, Huishuai Zhang, and Jiang Bian. On the generalization properties of diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01797, 2024e.
Cheng Lu, Kaiwen Zheng, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Maximum likelihood
  training for score-based diffusion odes by high-order denoising score matching. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Junlong Lyu, Zhitang Chen, and Shoubo Feng. Sampling is as easy as keeping the consistency:
  convergence guarantee for consistency models, 2024.
Song Mei and Yuchen Wu. Deep networks as denoising algorithms: Sample-efficient learning of
  diffusion models in high-dimensional graphical models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11420, 2023.
Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, Wenzhe Li, and Stefano Ermon. Estimating high order gradients of the
  data distribution by denoising. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Pierre Moulin and Venugopal V. Veeravalli. Statistical Inference for Engineers and Data Scientists.
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2018.
Kazusato Oko, Shunta Akiyama, and Taiji Suzuki. Diffusion models are minimax optimal distribution
  estimators. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation
  Models, 2023.
Tohru Ozaki. A bridge between nonlinear times series models and nonlinear stochastic dynamical
  systems: A local linearization approach. Statistica Sinica, 2(1):113–135, 1992.
Francesco Pedrotti, Jan Maas, and Marco Mondelli. Improved convergence of score-based diffusion
  models via prediction-correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14164, 2023.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In Proceedings
  of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37, pp. 1530–1538, 2015.
Kulin Shah, Sitan Chen, and Adam Klivans. Learning mixtures of gaussians using the DDPM
  objective. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Isao Shoji. Approximation of continuous time stochastic processes by a local linearization method.
   Mathematics of Computation, 67(221):287–298, 1998.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37, pp. 2256–2265, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Consistency models. In Proceedings
  of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
O. Stramer and R. L. Tweedie. Langevin-type models ii: Self-targeting candidates for mcmc
  algorithms. Methodology And Computing In Applied Probability, 1(3):307–328, 1999.
Andre Wibisono, Yihong Wu, and Kaylee Yingxi Yang. Optimal score estimation via empirical bayes
  smoothing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07747, 2024.
Ling Yang, Zhilong Zhang, Yang Song, Shenda Hong, Runsheng Xu, Yue Zhao, Wentao Zhang,
  Bin Cui, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods and
  applications. ACM Computing Surveys, 56(4), Nov 2023.
Kaihong Zhang, Heqi Yin, Feng Liang, and Jingbo Liu. Minimax optimality of score-based diffusion
  models: Beyond the density lower bound assumptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15602, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Appendix
A Related Works                                                                                      16

B Full List of Notations                                                                             17

C Proofs of Lemmas 1 and 2                                                                           17
C.1 Proof of Lemma 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
C.2 Lemma 2 and its Proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18

D Proof of Theorem 1                                                                                 19
D.1 Step 0: Bounding term 1 – Initialization Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
D.2 Step 1: Bounding term 2 – Score and Hessian Estimation Error . . . . . . . . . . . . .           21
D.3 Step 2: Expressing Log-likelihood Ratio via Tilting Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
                                          ′            ′
D.4   Step 3: Conditional Expectation of ζt,t−1 under Pt−1|t     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
                                        ′
D.5 Step 4: Conditional Expectation of ζt,t−1 under Qt−1|t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
D.6 Step 5: Bounding term 3 – Reverse-step Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         26

E Proof of Corollary 1                                                                               27

F Auxiliary Proofs for Theorem 1 and Corollary 1                                                     27
F.1   Proof of Lemma 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
F.2   Proof of Lemma 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28
F.3   Proof of Corollary 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
F.4   Proof of Lemma 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
F.5   Proof of Lemma 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
F.6   Proof of Lemma 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
F.7   Proof of Lemma 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     32
F.8   Proof of Lemma 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     34
F.9   Proof of Lemma 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      35
F.10 Proof of Lemma 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       40
F.11 Proof of Corollary 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    42
F.12 Proof of Lemma 12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       43

G Proof of Theorems 2 to 4 and 5                                                                     43
G.1 Proof of Theorem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       43
G.2 Proof of Theorem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49
G.3 Theorem 5 and its Proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        53
G.4 Proof of Theorem 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       54


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H Auxiliary Proofs of Theorems 2 to 4                                                                55
H.1 Proof of Lemma 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        55
H.2 Proof of Lemma 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        58
H.3 Proof of Lemma 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        59
H.4 Proof of Lemma 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        59
H.5 Proof of Lemma 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        62
H.6 Proof of Lemma 18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        62

A    R ELATED W ORKS
Theory on Regular DDPM Samplers: Many works have explored the performance guarantees
of regular DDPM models. Specifically, a number of studies perform analyses under the L∞ score
estimation error (De Bortoli et al., 2021; De Bortoli, 2022). Later, under L2 score estimation error,
Lee et al. (2022) developed polynomial5 bounds for distributions that have Lipschitz scores and
satisfy log-Sobolev inequality. Soon after, Chen et al. (2023d); Lee et al. (2023) concurrently
developed polynomial bounds for those smooth distributions having Lipschitz scores and those
non-smooth distributions having bounded support using early stopping. Later, Chen et al. (2023a)
improved the number of steps for those target distributions with finite second moment. Recently,
the convergence result was further improved to linear dimensional dependency using stochastic
localization (Benton et al., 2024a). In Conforti et al. (2023), by transforming the original process to
the relative-score process, it is shown that linear dimensional dependency can also be achieved for
those target distributions having finite relative Fisher information against a Gaussian distribution. In
all the works above, the analysis technique is to discretize some continuous-time diffusion process
to use SDE-type analyses. In Li et al. (2024c), by carefully design a typical set, polynomial-time
guarantees are obtained directly for the discrete-time samplers under the L2 estimation error for target
distributions having bounded support. Other than the works above, Pedrotti et al. (2023) analyzed a
different sampling scheme (e.g., predictor-corrector), and Bruno et al. (2023); Gao et al. (2023); Gao
& Zhu (2024) analyzed sampling errors using a different error measure (the Wasserstein-2 distance).
Theory on Score Estimation: In order to achieve an end-to-end analysis, several works developed
sample complexity bounds to achieve the L2 score estimation error for a variety of distributions.
To name a few, this includes results for those having bounded support (Oko et al., 2023), Gaussian
mixture (Shah et al., 2023; Gatmiry et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024), certain families of sub-Gaussian
distributions (Cole & Lu, 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), high-dimensional graphical models (Mei &
Wu, 2023), and those supported on a low-dimensional linear subspace (Chen et al., 2023b). More
recently, Li et al. (2024e) considered the generalizability of the continuous-time diffusion models,
and Wibisono et al. (2024) proposed a regularized score estimator that attains the minimax rate of
estimating the scores.
Other Theoretical Works: Other than the works listed above and in Section 1.2, Gao & Zhu (2024)
studied the ODE convergence for strongly-concave target distributions under Wasserstein-2 error.
Cao et al. (2023) compared the performance of SDE and PF-ODE and investigated conditions where
one might outperform the other. Besides PF-ODE, Cheng et al. (2023); Benton et al. (2024b); Jiao
et al. (2024); Gao et al. (2024) provided guarantees for the closely-related flow-matching model,
which learns a deterministic coupling between any two distributions. Chang et al. (2024) proposed a
novel ODE for sampling from a conditional distribution. Lyu et al. (2024); Li et al. (2024b) provided
convergence guarantees for the more recent consistency models (Song et al., 2023).
Relationship to GENIE (Dockhorn et al., 2022): To obtain higher-order scores, another method
is to use automatic differentiation, as in GENIE (Dockhorn et al., 2022). There, higher-order
score functions are used to accelerate the diffusion sampling process empirically. In particular,
Dockhorn et al. (2022) shows that GENIE achieves better empirical performance than deterministic
samplers such as DDIM (Song et al., 2021). Our paper theoretically justifies the accelerated empirical
performance of Dockhorn et al. (2022) in the regime when the Hessian of log qt is well-estimated.
    5
      By “polynomial” we mean that the number of steps has polynomial dependency on the score estimation
error, along with other parameters.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B       F ULL L IST OF N OTATIONS
For any two functions f (d, δ, T ) and g(d, δ, T ), we write f (d, δ, T ) ≲ g(d, δ, T ) (resp. f (d, δ, T ) ≳
g(d, δ, T )) for some universal constant (not depending on δ, d or T ) L < ∞ (resp. L > 0) if
lim supT →∞ |f (d, δ, T )/ g(d, δ, T )| ≤ L (resp. lim inf T →∞ |f (d, δ, T )/g(d, δ, T )| ≥ L). We write
f (d, δ, T ) ≍ g(d, δ, T ) when both f (d, δ, T ) ≲ g(d, δ, T ) and f (d, δ, T ) ≳ g(d, δ, T ) hold. Note
that the dependency on δ and d is retained with ≲, ≳, ≍. We write f (d, δ, T ) = O(g(T )) (resp.
f (d, δ, T ) = Ω(g(T ))) if f (d, δ, T ) ≲ L(d, δ)g(T ) (resp. f (d, δ, T ) ≳ L(d, δ)g(T )) holds for some
L(d, δ) (possibly depending on δ and d). We write f (d, δ, T ) = o(g(T )) if lim supT →∞ |f (d, δ, T )
/g(T )| = 0. We write f (d, δ, T ) = Õ(g(T )) if f (d, δ, T ) = O(g(T )(log g(T ))k ) for some constant
k. Note that the big-O notation omits the dependency on δ and d. In the asymptotic when ε−1 → ∞,
we write f (d, ε−1 ) = O(g(d, ε−1 )) if f (d, δ, ε−1 ) ≲ g(d, δ, ε−1 )(log g(ε−1 ))k for some constant k.
Unless otherwise specified, we write xi (1 ≤ i ≤ d) as the i-th element of a vector x ∈ Rd and [A]ij
as the (i, j)-th element of a matrix A. For a function f (x) : Rd → R, we write ∂i f (z) as a shorthand
     ∂
for ∂x i f (x)               , and similarly for higher moments. For matrices A, B, Tr(A) is the trace of A, and
                     x=z
A ⪯ B means that B − A is positive semi-definite. For a positive integer n, [n] := {1, . . . , n}.

C       P ROOFS OF L EMMAS 1 AND 2
In this section, we provide lemmas and proofs related to Hessian estimation.
C.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
The idea is similar to score matching. Define vθ′ (x) := vθ (x) − 1−1ᾱt Id . For each i, j ∈ [d],
                                                                    !!2
                                        2
                           ij          ∂ij qt (Xt ) 1 {i = j}
              EXt ∼Qt vθ (Xt ) −                    +
                                        qt (Xt )          1 − ᾱt
                                                         !2
                                              2
                                            ∂ij qt (Xt )
               = EXt ∼Qt [vθ′ (Xt )]ij −
                                              qt (Xt )
                                                         "                          #
                              ′     ij 2
                                                             ′
                                                                        ∂ 2 q (Xt )
                                                                      ij ij t
               = EXt ∼Qt [vθ (Xt )]      − 2EXt ∼Qt [vθ (Xt )]                        + const
                                                                          qt (Xt )
                                                Z
                                       2
               = EXt ∼Qt [vθ′ (Xt )]ij − 2 [vθ′ (xt )]ij ∂ij   2
                                                                  qt (xt )dxt + const

where const denotes terms that are independent of θ, and
Z
  [vθ′ (xt )]ij ∂ij
                 2
                    qt (xt )dxt
   Z                Z
         ′       ij      2
= [vθ (xt )]            ∂ij qt|0 (xt |x0 )dQ0 (x0 )dxt
                                                2
                                               ∂ij qt|0 (xt |x0 )
       Z Z
 =               qt|0 (xt |x0 )[vθ′ (xt )]ij                      dQ0 (x0 )dxt
                                                qt|0 (xt |x0 )
       Z Z
 (i)
          qt|0 (xt |x0 )[vθ′ (xt )]ij ∂ij
                                        2

 =                                        log qt|0 (xt |x0 ) + ∂i log qt|0 (xt |x0 )∂j log qt|0 (xt |x0 ) dQ0 (x0 )dxt
                                                               √                  √       !
                                          1 {i = j} xit − ᾱt xi0 xjt − ᾱt xj0
     Z Z
                          ′        ij
 =       qt|0 (xt |x0 )[vθ (xt )]       −            +                   ·                  dQ0 (x0 )dxt
                                           1 − ᾱt           1 − ᾱt          1 − ᾱt

 (ii)                                 ′      ij     1 {i = j}          1        i   j
  = E (X0 ,W̄t )∼Q0 ⊗N (0,Id ) [vθ (Xt )]        −              +           W̄ W̄
          √          √
       X = ᾱ X + 1−ᾱ W̄
                                                     1 − ᾱt        1 − ᾱt t t
             t       t   0         t   t

                                                                      2                    ij          ∂ 2 f (x)
where (i) follows because for any function f (x) we have ∂ij            log f (x) =         f (x)                  −
                                                           √        √
(∂i log f (x))(∂j log f (x)), and (ii) follows because xt = ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt w̄t . Therefore,
                                                        !!2
                                  2
                    ij          ∂ij qt (Xt ) 1 {i = j}
       EXt ∼Qt vθ (Xt ) −                   −
                                  qt (Xt )      1 − ᾱt


                                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                              2
                                                         1 {i = j}          1
         = E (X0 ,W̄t )∼Q0 ⊗N (0,Id )  [vθ′ (Xt )]ij − −               +          W̄ti W̄tj     + const
                 √        √
            Xt = ᾱt X0 + 1−ᾱt W̄t
                                                           1 − ᾱt        1 − ᾱt
                                                                        2
                                                        1
         = E (X0 ,W̄t )∼Q0 ⊗N (0,Id ) [vθ (Xt )]ij −          W̄ti W̄tj + const
                 √        √
            X = ᾱ X + 1−ᾱ W̄
                                                      1 − ᾱt
               t       t     0         t   t


and the result follows immediately after we sum up over i, j ∈ [d].
C.2 L EMMA 2 AND ITS P ROOF
The following lemma provides sufficient conditions such that the Ht in (8) satisfies Assumption 3.
Lemma 2. Under Assumption 5, with the αt defined in Definition 1, suppose that vt and st satisfy,
as T → ∞,
                                                 2                       2
                   PT                           ∇ qt (Xt )
                 1
                 T  t=1 EX t ∼Q t
                                   v t (Xt ) −   qt (Xt )  +   1
                                                             1−ᾱt I d     = Õ(T −1 ),        (11)
                                                                         F
                                    q
                                                                            4
              max1≤t≤T (1 − αt )−2 EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt )∥ = Õ(1).                (12)
                                                                               1/ℓ
                                                                            ℓ
Also suppose that the Ht defined in (8) satisfies supℓ≥1 EXt ∼Qt ∥Ht (Xt )∥        = Õ(1). Then, the
Ht and the st from score matching (Song & Ermon, 2019) satisfy Assumption 3.

Proof of Lemma 2. The condition on the score estimation error in Assumption 3 is immediately
satisfied using Jensen’s inequality. We next focus on the condition on the Hessian estimation. Recall
that
                                                     1
                                Ht (x) = vt (x) −          Id − st (x)s⊺t (x).
                                                  1 − ᾱt
The goal is to show that Ht is close to ∇2 log qt (i.e., the second relationship in Assumption 3). Given
                        2
that ∇2 log qt (x) = ∇qtq(x)
                          t (x)
                                − (∇ log qt (x))(∇ log qt (x))⊺ , the key is to control the error incurred
by st (x)st (x)⊺ , which is
           d
           X                                                                    2
EXt ∼Qt             sit (Xt )sjt (Xt ) − [∇ log qt (Xt )]i [∇ log qt (Xt )]j
           i,j=1
               d
               X                                                                                                          2
= EXt ∼Qt                  (sit (Xt ) − [∇ log qt (Xt )]i )sjt (Xt ) + [∇ log qt (Xt )]i (sjt (Xt ) − [∇ log qt (Xt )]j )
              i,j=1

(i)                d
                   X
 ≤ 2EXt ∼Qt                (sit (Xt ) − [∇ log qt (Xt )]i )2 (sjt (Xt ))2 + ([∇ log qt (Xt )]i )2 (sjt (Xt ) − [∇ log qt (Xt )]j )2
                   i,j=1
                h                                                      i
                                      2                 2            2
= 2EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt )∥ (∥∇ log qt (Xt )∥ + ∥st (Xt )∥ )

where (i) follows because (a + b)2 = a2 + b2 + 2ab ≤ 2a2 + 2b2 . To continue, we use the
Cauchy-Schwartz inequality and obtain
                                                                               2
      EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt )s⊺t (Xt ) − (∇ log qt (Xt ))(∇ log qt (Xt ))⊺ ∥F
               q                                         r            h                    i
                                                       4                    4            4
           ≤ 2 EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt )∥ 2EXt ∼Qt ∥∇ log qt (Xt )∥ + ∥st (Xt )∥ .

Here the second term has that
                                   4                                       4                            4
                   E[∥st (Xt )∥ ] ≤ 8E[∥st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt )∥ ] + 8E[∥∇ log qt (Xt )∥ ]
                                                              4
                                       ≲ E[∥∇ log qt (Xt )∥ ].
Therefore,
                T
            1X                                       2
                  EXt ∼Qt Ht (Xt ) − ∇2 log qt (Xt ) F
            T t=1


                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     T                                                           2
                                                    ∇2 qt (Xt )

             1X                                                     1
           ≤       EXt ∼Qt vθ (Xt ) −                           +         Id
             T t=1                                   qt (Xt )     1 − ᾱt        F
                             T
                  1          X                                                          2
                   +    EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt )s⊺t (Xt ) − (∇ log qt (Xt ))(∇ log qt (Xt ))⊺ ∥F
                 T t=1
                T                        2                            2
             1X                           ∇ qt (Xt )        1
           ≲        EXt ∼Qt vθ (Xt ) −                +          Id
             T t=1                           qt (Xt )    1 − ᾱt      F
                             T
                     1X
                                 q                                     q
                                                                     4                         4
                   +              EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt )∥ EXt ∼Qt ∥∇ log qt (Xt )∥
                     T t=1
                      T                         2                         2
           (ii)    1X                          ∇ qt (Xt )        1
           =             EXt ∼Qt vθ (Xt ) −               +          Id
                   T t=1                         qt (Xt )    1 − ᾱt      F
                         v                                             
                          u
                          u1 X  T
                                                                      4
                    + Õ t        (1 − αt )2 EXt ∼Qt ∥∇ log qt (Xt )∥ 
                             T t=1
                         T                                              2
                                             ∇2 qt (Xt )

           (iii)   1X                                         1
            =            EXt ∼Qt vθ (Xt ) −              +         Id       + Õ(T −1 )
                   T t=1                       qt (Xt )    1 − ᾱt       F

                                                          √
                                                                 q P
                                                       T                  T
where (ii) follows from (12) using the fact that T1 t=1 at ≤ T1 t=1 at by Jensen’s inequality,
                                                    P

and (iii) follows under Assumption 5. Combining this with (11), we finally get
                    T                        2                           2
                1X                            ∇ qt (Xt )      1
                      EXt ∼Qt vt (Xt ) −                 +          Id      = Õ(T −1 )
                T t=1                           qt (Xt )    1 − ᾱt      F

and thus the second relationship in Assumption 3 is satisfied. The proof is now complete.

D    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Instead of Assumption 4, we will prove Theorem 1 under the following more general assumption,
which obviously implies Assumption 4 for any αt .
Assumption 5 (Regular Partial Derivatives+). For all t ≥ 1, ℓ ≥ 1, and a ∈ [d]p such that
|a| = p ≥ 1,

                                                       ℓ
               (1 − αt )pℓ/2 EXt ∼Qt |∂ap log qt (Xt )| = Õ (1 − αt )pℓ/2 ,

                                                              ℓ
               (1 − αt )pℓ/2 EXt ∼Qt |∂ap log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))| = Õ (1 − αt )pℓ/2 .
When q0 does not exist, this is required only for t ≥ 2.
To begin the proof of Theorem 1, note that

                                     q(X0 , . . . , XT )
 KL(Q||Pb′ ) = EX0 ,...,XT ∼Q log ′
                                    pb (X0 , . . . , XT )
                               "                QT                        #
             (i)                     q0 (X0 ) t=1 qt|t−1 (Xt |Xt−1 )
             = EX0 ,...,XT ∼Q log
                                               pb′ (X0 , . . . , XT )
                                "                QT                        #
             (ii)                      q0 (X0 ) t=1 qt|t−1 (Xt |Xt−1 )
              = EX0 ,...,XT ∼Q log               QT
                                      pb′0 (X0 ) t=1 pb′t|t−1 (Xt |Xt−1 )
                                                T
                                                                        "                       #
                                                                            qt|t−1 (Xt |Xt−1 )
                                           X
                              q0 (X0 )
             = EX0 ∼Q0 log ′                +       EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t log ′
                              pb0 (X0 )       t=1
                                                                            pbt|t−1 (Xt |Xt−1 )
                                                T
                                                                      "          "                        ##
                                                                                      qt|t−1 (Xt |Xt−1 )
                                           X
                              q0 (X0 )
             = EX0 ∼Q0 log ′                +       EXt−1 ∼Qt−1 EXt ∼Qt|t−1 log ′
                              pb0 (X0 )       t=1
                                                                                      pbt|t−1 (Xt |Xt−1 )


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        T
                                        X                h                                       i
               = KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ ) +                                                ′
                                              EXt−1 ∼Qt−1 KL(Qt|t−1 (·|Xt−1 )||Pbt|t−1 (·|Xt−1 )) .
                                        t=1

Here (i) holds because of the Markov property of the forward process. We explain (ii) below. By
the backward Markov property of the reverse process, for any t ≥ 1, given Xt−1 = xt−1 , each of
Xt−2 , . . . , X0 is independent with Xt . This implies that
                           pb′t|t−1,...,0 (xt |xt−1 , . . . , x0 ) = pb′t|t−1 (xt |xt−1 ), ∀t ≥ 1.
                                           QT
Thus, pb′ (x0 , . . . , xT ) = pb′0 (x0 ) t=1 pb′t|t−1 (xt |xt−1 ). In other words, X0 , . . . , Xt is also forward
Markov under Pb′ .
Following from similar arguments,
                                                     T
                                                     X            h                                   i
           KL(Q||Pb′ ) = KL(QT ||PbT′ ) +                                               ′
                                                           EXt ∼Qt KL(Qt−1|t (·|Xt )||Pbt−1|t (·|Xt )) .
                                                     t=1

Since KL-divergence is non-negative, an upper bound on KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ ) is given by
             KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ )
                                        T
                                        X            h                                    i
             = KL(QT ||PbT′ ) +                                            ′
                                              EXt ∼Qt KL(Qt−1|t (·|Xt )||Pbt−1|t (·|Xt ))
                                        t=1
                       T
                       X                h                                       i
                                                                ′
                   −         EXt−1 ∼Qt−1 KL(Qt|t−1 (·|Xt−1 )||Pbt|t−1 (·|Xt−1 ))
                       t=1
                                        T
                                        X            h                                    i
             ≤ KL(QT ||PbT′ ) +                                            ′
                                              EXt ∼Qt KL(Qt−1|t (·|Xt )||Pbt−1|t (·|Xt ))
                                        t=1

                                                                p′t−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
                                      X T
                                                            "                       #
                           qT (XT )
             = EXT ∼QT log ′         +     EXt ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1 log ′
                           p (XT )                              pbt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
               |        {z T        } |t=1                  {z                      }
                    Term 1: initialization error                       Term 2: estimation error
                       T
                                                    "            #
                       X                      qt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
                   +     EXt ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1 log ′                   .                                          (13)
                     t=1
                                              pt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
                     |                    {z                     }
                                          Term 3: reverse-step error

The last equality holds because pb′T = p′T .
Next, we bound the above three terms separately in a few steps.
D.1    S TEP 0: B OUNDING TERM 1 – I NITIALIZATION E RROR
Lemma 3. Suppose ᾱT ↘ 0 as T → ∞. Then, under Assumption 1,

                            qT (XT )    1
                                       ≤ M2 ᾱT d + O ᾱT2 , as T → ∞.

              EXT ∼QT log ′
                            pT (XT )    2
Remark 1. Under Assumption 1, if the noise schedule satisfies Definition 1, we have

                                            qT (XT )
                           EXT ∼QT log ′               = o(T −2 ).
                                            pT (XT )

Proof. See Appendix F.1.

We now introduce the following notation for analyzing the estimation error and the reverse-step error
for the accelerated sampler.
Definition 2 (Big-O in Lr space). For a random variable ZT , we say that ZT (x) = OLr (Q) (1) if
                   r 1/r
(EX∼Q |ZT (X)| )           = O(1) for all r ≥ 1 as T → ∞.


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


One property is that if ZT (x) = OLr (Q) (1) then EX∼Q |ZT (X)| = O(1). Another property is that
if Z1 = OLr (Q) (aT ) and Z2 = OLr (Q) (bT ) for all r ≥ 1, applying Cauchy-Schwartz inequality we
get, for all r ≥ 1,
                                    r 1/r                1/(2r)
                         (E |Z1 Z2 | )    ≤ EZ12r EZ22r         = O(aT bT ),
which implies that OLr (Q) (aT )OLr (Q) (bT ) = OLr (Q) (aT bT ). Now, with this notation, the regularity
condition on Ht can be written as
                            (1 − αt ) ∥Ht (Xt )∥ = ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt ), ∀r ≥ 1.
Also, Assumption 5 can be equivalently written as, ∀r ≥ 1,

                         (1 − αt )p/2 |∂ap log qt (Xt )| = ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )p/2 ,

                   (1 − αt )p/2 |∂ap log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))| = ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )p/2 .

D.2    S TEP 1: B OUNDING TERM 2 – S CORE AND H ESSIAN E STIMATION E RROR
We first bound the estimation error, which includes the errors that come from the score and the
Hessian estimation. In particular, Assumption 5 guarantees that all higher Taylor terms are well
controlled in expectation over Xt ∼ Qt .
Lemma 4. Under Assumptions 3 and 5, with the αt satisfying Definition 1, we have

                                        p′t−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
               T
                                   "                        #
              X                                                              log2 T 2
                  EXt ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1 log ′                     ≲ (log T )ε2 +       εH .
              t=1
                                        pbt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )                    T

Remark 2. Under Assumption 3, Lemma 4 guarantees that

                                          p′t−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
                  T
                                      "                       #
                 X                                                     1
                     EXt ,Xt−1 ∼Qt,t−1 log ′                    = Õ    2
                                                                          .
                 t=1
                                          p
                                          b t−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )         T


Proof. See Appendix F.2.

Before we proceed to the reverse-step error, we provide the following lemma to provide an upper
bound when we use the Σ̃t and its estimate according to (9).
Corollary 2. Under the same conditions of Lemma 4, the upper bound in Lemma 4 on the estimation
error still holds with the slightly perturbed Σ̃t provided in (9).

Proof. See Appendix F.3.

D.3    S TEP 2: E XPRESSING L OG - LIKELIHOOD R ATIO VIA T ILTING FACTOR
Next we focus on the reverse-step error for the accelerated process. Recall that Q0 is smooth under
Assumption 2. We introduce the following notations for analysis. Let
               At (xt ) := (1 − αt )∇2 log qt (xt ),        Bt (xt ) := Id − (Id + At (xt ))−1 ,      (14)
which imply that
                            1 − αt                                        αt
               Σt (xt ) =          (Id + At (xt )),     Σ−1
                                                         t (xt ) =             (Id − Bt (xt )).
                              αt                                        1 − αt

Now, with the notation in Definition 2, for each i, j ∈ [d], Aij
                                                              t (xt ) = ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt ) for all r ≥ 1
under Assumption 5. Also, when (1 − αt ) is small, we can perform Taylor expansion on Bt (·) around
At (·) and obtain, under Assumption 5,

                            Bt (Xt ) = At (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 .

                                                                                                       (15)


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              ′
Remark 3. In general, suppose that we choose Pt−1|t whose conditional covariance satisfies
                 1 − αt
                          Id + At (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 = Σt (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )3 ,

  Σ̃t (Xt ) =
                   αt
where a small perturbation is added to the covariance matrix. An immediate consequence is that
                 αt
 Σ̃−1
   t  (X t ) =          I d − B t (Xt ) + Õ r
                                            L (Qt ) (1 − αt )2
                                                                  = Σ−1
                                                                     t (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt ) .
               1 − αt
                 ′
Then, with such Pt−1|t having a slightly perturbed covariance, the following Lemmas 5 and 7 still
hold with Ãt (xt ) and B̃t (xt ) such that
                                 αt
                Ãt (xt ) :=          Σ̃t (xt ) − Id ,           B̃t (xt ) := Id − (Id + Ãt (xt ))−1 .
                              1 − αt

Note that Ãt (Xt ) = At (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 and B̃t (Xt ) = Bt (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 .
In the following we write µt = µt (xt ), At = At (xt ), and Bt = Bt (xt ) for brevity.
Lemma 5. For any fixed xt ∈ Rd , as long as qt−1 is defined, we have
                                                                                ′
                                                      p′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt )eζt,t−1 (xt ,xt−1 )
                              qt−1|t (xt−1 |xt ) =                          ′                   ,
                                                      EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                              ′     [eζt,t−1 (xt ,Xt−1 ) ]

where
                                                                                √
      ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) := log qt−1 (xt−1 ) − log qt−1 (µt ) − (xt−1 − µt )⊺ ( αt ∇ log qt (xt )),      (16)
and
         ′                                              αt
        ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) := ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) −            (xt−1 − µt )⊺ Bt (xt−1 − µt )
                                                    2(1 − αt )
                                                                                  √
                             = log qt−1 (xt−1 ) − log qt−1 (µt ) − (xt−1 − µt )⊺ ( αt ∇ log qt (xt ))
                                         αt
                                 −              (xt−1 − µt )⊺ Bt (xt−1 − µt ).                            (17)
                                    2(1 − αt )

Proof. See Appendix F.4.
                                                            ′         ′
In the following we write ζt,t−1 = ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) and ζt,t−1 = ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) and omit depen-
dencies on xt and xt−1 for brevity. As we will see, (16) is the tilting factor for the regular diffusion
                                   ′
process. Given the definition of ζt,t−1 in (17), below we analyze log qt−1 (x) around x = µt using
Taylor expansion. We first provide the following notations for the Taylor expansion.
Definition 3 (Taylor Expansion). Recall that xi (1 ≤ i ≤ d) denotes the i-th element of a vector x.
Given an analytic function f (x), its Taylor expansion around x = µ is given by
                    ∞
                    X
f (x) = f (µ) +           Tp (f, x, µ)
                    p=1
                                              d                              d
                                           1X 2                         1 X 2
       = f (µ) + ∇f (µ)⊺ (x − µ) +               ∂ii f (µ)(xi − µi )2 +        ∂ f (µ)(xi − µi )(xj − µj )
                                           2 i=1                        2 i,j=1 ij
                                                                                        i̸=j
                 ∞
                 X
             +         Tp (f, x, µ)
                 p=3

where, for p ≥ 1, we define
                                                                                 d
                                              1         X                        Y                   i
                            Tp (f, x, µ) :=                          ∂ap f (µ)         (xi − µi )γ        (18)
                                              p!            P
                                                                                 i=1
                                                   γ∈Nd :      i
                                                            i γ =p


where in a ∈ [d]p the multiplicity of i (∈ [d]) is γ i .


                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


If we specialize it to the case where f = log qt−1 , x = xt−1 , and µ = µt , we need the following
lemma to guarantee the validity of Taylor expansion for t ≥ 1.
Lemma 6. Fix t ≥ 1. For any Q0 (not necessarily having a p.d.f. w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure), given
any k ≥ 1 and any vector of indices a ∈ [d]k , qt exists and |∂ak log qt (xt )| < ∞, ∀xt ∈ Rd (which
possibly depends on T ). Further, qt and log qt are both analytic.

Proof. See Appendix F.5.

Thus, by Assumption 2 and Lemma 6, since log qt−1 is analytic, its Taylor expansion around
xt−1 = µt is equal to (cf. (16))
                                                                  ∞
                                √                                 X
  ζt,t−1 = (∇ log qt−1 (µt ) − αt ∇ log qt (xt ))⊺ (xt−1 − µt ) +   Tp (log qt−1 , xt−1 , µt ), (19)
                                                                     p=2
                             ′
and the Taylor expansion of ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) around xt−1 = µt is (cf. (17))
             ′                            √
            ζt,t−1 = (∇ log qt−1 (µt ) − αt ∇ log qt (xt ))⊺ (xt−1 − µt )

                          1            ⊺     2              αt
                        + (xt−1 − µt ) ∇ log qt−1 (µt ) −        Bt (xt−1 − µt )
                          2                               1 − αt
                          ∞
                          X
                        +   Tp (log qt−1 , xt−1 , µt ).                                              (20)
                           p=3
In order to differentiate the second-order terms in (19) and (20), we reserve T2 for (19) and employ
for (20):

                                    1                                    αt
      T2′ (log qt−1 , xt−1 , µt ) := (xt−1 − µt )⊺ ∇2 log qt−1 (µt ) −        Bt (xt−1 − µt ).
                                    2                                  1 − αt

Compared with the tilting factor for the regular process in ζt,t−1 , an additional term that is related to
                                    ′
Σt (and thus Bt ) is introduced in ζt,t−1 . From the perspective of Taylor expansion, we can further
control the second-order term in the Taylor expansion of log qt−1 around µt through this extra term,
which improves the accuracy of posterior approximation at each step.
To use Taylor expansion to upper-bound the reverse-step error in (13), we first note that, for any fixed
xt ,
                                  "                        #
                                        qt−1|t (Xt−1 |xt )
                    EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t log ′
                                        pt−1|t (Xt−1 |xt )
                                     h                                  ′
                                                                               i
                                        ′
                     = EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t ζt,t−1   − log EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                               ′     [eζt,t−1 ]
                                       ′                                  ′
                                                                      [eζt,t−1 ]

                     = EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t ζt,t−1    − log EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                                 ′


                     (i)               ′                           h          ′
                                                                                  i
                                                                    − log eζt,t−1

                     ≤ EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t ζt,t−1     + EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                             ′


                                        ′                         ′
                      = EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [ζt,t−1 ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                          ′     [ζt,t−1 ]                            (21)
where in (i) we use Jensen’s inequality and note that − log(·) is convex. In the remaining steps, we
analyze the expected values of the tilting factor separately.
                                              ′            ′
D.4    S TEP 3: C ONDITIONAL E XPECTATION OF ζt,t−1 UNDER Pt−1|t

With Taylor expansion around the posterior mean, the calculation of the expected values is reduced
to that of all the (centralized) moments. To start, it is useful to examine the rate of 1−α
                                                                                         αt . A direct
                                                                                            t


implication of Definition 1 is that, with some constant C1 , since αt ↘ 0 as T → ∞,
                  (1 − αt )p       C1p logp T /T p               p
                              ≤                    q ≲ (1 − αt ) ,    ∀p, q ≥ 1, t ≥ 1.           (22)
                      αtq        (1 − C1 log T /T )
                                                           ′
Below, we first calculate the centralized moments under Pt−1|t . We employ Isserlis’s Theorem for
our help, which constitutes the main idea in the lemma below. Note that the results in this subsection
hold as long as Q0 has a p.d.f..


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  i
Lemma 7. Fix t ≥ 1. For brevity write Zi = Xt−1       − µit , ∀i ∈ [d], A = At (xt ), and E[·] as a
                                                     ij
shorthand for EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                       ′    [·]. Note that we have At (xt ) = ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt ) for all i, j ∈ [d]
under Assumption 5. Thus, the following results hold: ∀p ≥ 1,
                      "         #
                         Y
                    E       Zi = 0, ∀a : |a| odd,
                                i∈a
                            "           #
                                Y                              |a|

                        E             Zi = ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt ) 2 ,     ∀a : |a| even.
                                i∈a

Specifically, for i, j, k, l ∈ [d] all differ, the fourth moment is
                                                  2
                                        1 − αt
                         E[Zi4 ] = 3                 (1 + Aii )2
                                           αt
                                                  2
                          3             1 − αt
                     E[Zi Zj ] = 3                   Aij (1 + Aii )
                                           αt
                                                2
                                      1 − αt
                     E[Zi2 Zj2 ] =                 (1 + Aii )(1 + Ajj ) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 )
                                        αt
                                                2
                       2              1 − αt
                 E[Zi Zj Zk ] =                    (1 + Aii )Ajk + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 )
                                        αt
               E[Zi Zj Zk Zl ] = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ).
For i, j, k ∈ [d] all differ, the sixth moment is
                                             3
                      6            1 − αt
                 E[Zi ] = 15                    (1 + Aii )3
                                     αt
                                            3
                                  1 − αt
              E[Zi4 Zj2 ] = 3                  (1 + Aii )2 (1 + Ajj ) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 )
                                    αt
                                        3
               2 2 2            1 − αt
          E[Zi Zj Zk ] =                     (1 + Aii )(1 + Ajj )(1 + Akk ) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ),
                                  αt
        hQ                  i
and E       i∈a:|a|=6  Z  i   = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ) otherwise. All the rates are under Assumption 5.

Proof. See Appendix F.6.
                                                     ′
D.5 S TEP 4: C ONDITIONAL E XPECTATION OF ζt,t−1           UNDER Qt−1|t
Although each Qt|t−1 is conditionally Gaussian, the posterior Qt−1|t is not Gaussian in general. In
the following, we analyze the posterior centralized moments under Qt−1|t using the idea of Tweedie’s
formula Efron (2011). Then, we apply them to analyze EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [ζt,t−1 ], again using the Taylor
expansion in (19). Again, the result is more generally applicable to non-smooth Q0 at t ≥ 2 due to
Lemma 6.                                                   √
                                                              α
Lemma 8. Fix t ≥ 1 such that qt−1 exists. Define x̃t := 1−αtt xt , and

                                   1 − αt        1 − αt       2 d
               κ(x̃t ) := log qt    √     x̃t +         ∥x̃t ∥ + log (2π(1 − αt )) .            (23)
                                      αt           2αt          2
Let 1 ≤ i, j, k, l ≤ d, which are possibly equal to each other. The first 3 centralized moments under
Qt−1|t satisfy
    EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Xt−1 ] = ∇κ = µt
                                                        1 − αt       (1 − αt )2 2
    EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [(Xt−1 − µt )(Xt−1 − µt )⊺ ] = ∇2 κ =         Id +           ∇ log qt (xt )
                                                           αt           αt
                     h                                        i
                                     j
                         i
    EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t (Xt−1 − µit )(Xt−1 − µjt )(Xt−1
                                                  k
                                                      − µkt )


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       3               (1 − αt )3             3
           = EXt ∼Qt [∂ijk κ] =             3/2
                                                    EXt ∼Qt [∂ijk log qt (Xt )] = Õ((1 − αt )3 ).
                                           αt
The fourth centralized moment satisfies
                              h                                                        i
                                                 j
                                   i
             EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t (Xt−1    − µit )(Xt−1 − µjt )(Xt−1
                                                              k
                                                                  − µkt )(Xt−1
                                                                           l
                                                                               − µlt )
                              2       2        2      2
                 = EXt ∼Qt [(∂ij κ)(∂kl κ) + (∂ik κ)(∂jl κ) + (∂il2 κ)(∂jk
                                                                        2        4
                                                                           κ) + ∂ijkl κ]
                              2
                        1−αt
                   3
                   
                   
                        αt       + Õ((1 − αt )3 ), if i = j = k = l,
                             2
                 =     1−αt
                               + Õ((1 − αt )3 ),    if i = k ̸= j = l,
                    αt
                   
                   Õ((1 − α )3 ),
                   
                                                     otherwise.
                               t

Note that all derivatives above are w.r.t. x̃t . All the rates are under Assumption 5.

Proof. See Appendix F.7.

Lemma 8 also justifies the expression of µt and Σt in the diffusion process (i.e., (3) and (4)), which
match the posterior mean and variance, respectively.
Next we turn to calculate the fifth and sixth centralized moment under Qt−1|t , again drawing the idea
of Tweedie’s formula (Efron, 2011). This is a direct extension to Lemma 8.
Lemma 9. Fix t ≥ 1 such that qt−1 exists. Fix xt ∈ Rd . Under Assumption 5, with the same
definitions of x̃t and κ(x̃t ) as in Lemma 8, the fifth centralized moment is
                   h                                                                           i
                                       j
   EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (Xt−1 i
                           − µit )(Xt−1     − µjt )(Xt−1k
                                                             − µkt )(Xt−1
                                                                       l
                                                                           − µlt )(Xt−1
                                                                                    m
                                                                                        − µmt )
                                    X
                          =                     (∂ξ2 κ)(∂{i,j,k,l,m}\ξ
                                                          3                  5
                                                                       κ) + ∂ijklm κ = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 )
                               ξ∈({i,j,k,l,m}
                                       2      )
where, given a set A, we define

                             A    n                                  o
                                := {a1 , a2 } : a1 , a2 ∈ A, a1 ̸= a2 .
                             2
Let Pnk be the set that contains all distinct size-k partitions of [n]. Define
                                                                              2
                              part2 (A) := {((ai , aj ) : {i, j} ∈ p) : p ∈ P|A| }.
The sixth centralized moment is
                h                                                                                   i
                                  j
 EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (Xt−1 i
                        − µit )(Xt−1  − µjt )(Xt−1
                                                k
                                                    − µkt )(Xt−1
                                                             l
                                                                   − µlt )(Xt−1
                                                                            m
                                                                                 − µm
                                                                                    t )(X n
                                                                                         t−1 − µn
                                                                                                t )
                 X
                                    2     2       2                           4
  =                              (∂ξ1 κ)(∂ξ2 κ)(∂ξ3 κ) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt ) )
     (ξ1 ,ξ2 ,ξ3 )∈part2 ({i,j,k,l,m,n})
                  3
   
   
    15 1−α αt
                t
                     + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ), if i = j = k = l = m = n
   
    1−αt 3
   
   
     3 αt          + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ), if i = k = m = n ̸= j = l
  =           3
       1−α
    αt t + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ),
   
   
   
                                                if i = l, j = m, k = n while i, j, k all differ
   
                          4
     ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt ) ),                    otherwise
   

Again note that all derivatives above are w.r.t. x̃t .

Proof. See Appendix F.8.

The following lemma provides the correct order (in terms of (1 − αt )) for all higher-order posterior
centralized moments. In other words, this shows that Qt−1|t has nice Gaussian-like concentration.


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 10. Fix t ≥ 1 and p ≥ 2. Let a = (a1 , . . . , ap ) ∈ [d]p be a vector of indices of length p.
Under the same conditions as in Lemma 8, if p is odd,
                               " p                #
                                Y                                  p+3

                                     ai
             EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t     (Xt−1 − µat i ) = Õ (1 − αt ) 2 , ∀a ∈ [d]p .              (24)
                                           i=1

If p is even,
                                           " p                       #
                                            Y                                        p
                                                   ai
                    EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t            (Xt−1 − µat i ) = Õ((1 − αt ) 2 ), ∀a ∈ [d]p .                 (25)
                                             i=1

Proof. See Appendix F.9.

D.6 S TEP 5: B OUNDING TERM 3 – R EVERSE - STEP E RROR
We are now ready to assemble the respective moments into the final convergence rate. In the following
                                                                                              ′
lemma, we use the results in the previous lemmas to control the difference EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [ζt,t−1  ]−
                ′
EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
         ′    [ζt,t−1 ] in (21).
Lemma 11. Suppose that Assumption 5 holds and that qt−1 exists. Then,

                                               ′
  EXt ∼Qt EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t′     [ζt,t−1 ]
                               d
                    (1 − αt )3 X                     3                       3
                =       3/2
                                           EXt ∼Qt [∂ijk log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )] + Õ((1 − αt )4 ).
                     3!αt        i,j,k=1


Proof. See Appendix F.10.

Therefore, under Assumptions 2 and 5 we combine Lemma 11 and (21) and get
   T
                       "                      #
  X                        qt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
      EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1|t log ′
  t=1
                           pt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
                                                    d
                                                    X
                                 ≲ (1 − αt )3                          3
                                                             EXt ∼Qt [∂ijk                     3
                                                                           log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )]. (26)
                                                   i,j,k=1

This completes the proof of Theorem 1.
Before we end this section, we provide an upper bound of the reverse-step error when the conditional
               ′
covariance of Pt−1|t is slightly perturbed (see Remark 3).
Corollary 3. Suppose that Assumption 5 holds and that qt−1 exists. Suppose that the conditional
                ′
covariance of Pt−1|t is slightly perturbed, which satisfies
                                                   1 − αt
                                   Σ̃t (xt ) =            (Id + At (xt ) + Ξt (xt )) ,
                                                     αt

where Ξt (Xt ) = ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 for all r ≥ 1. Then,
         T
                              "                        #
       X                            qt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
           EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1|t log ′
       t=1
                                    pt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )
                                                     ∇2 log qt−1 (µt (Xt )) − αt ∇2 log qt (Xt ) Ξt (Xt )

                ≲ −(1 − αt )EXt ∼Qt Tr
                                   d
                                   X
                + (1 − αt )3                         3
                                           EXt ∼Qt [∂ijk                     3
                                                         log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )]
                                 i,j,k=1

                    1
         = Õ                .
                    T2

Proof. See Appendix F.11.


                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1
Note that q1 always exists and is analytic by Lemma 6. Therefore, it remains to upper-bound the
mismatch between Q0 and Q1 . In the following lemma we provide such a common bound in
Wasserstein distance, which is provided only for completeness.
Lemma 12. For any Q0 ,
                               W2 (Q0 , Q1 )2 ≤ (1 − α1 )(M2 + 1)d.
Remark 4. If 1 − α1 = δ, this implies that
                                          W2 (Q0 , Q1 )2 ≲ δd.

Proof. See Appendix F.12.

The proof of this corollary is thus complete. A consequence of Lemma 12 is that, in order to obtain
convergence guarantees for general distributions, one can view 1 − α1 as controlling the mismatch
between Q0 and Q1 (in terms of the Wasserstein distance), and 1 − αt , ∀t ≥ 2 as controlling the
mismatch between Q1 and Pb1′ (in terms of the KL-divergence).

F    AUXILIARY P ROOFS FOR T HEOREM 1 AND C OROLLARY 1
In this section, we provide the proofs for those auxiliary lemmas in the proof of Theorem 1 and Corol-
lary 1.
F.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA 3
First, note that
                                   qT (xT ) = EX0 ∼Q0 [qT |0 (xT |X0 )].
Also note that the function f (x) = x log(x) is convex. Thus, by Jensen’s inequality,
                                   Z
       EXT ∼QT [log qT (XT )] = EX0 ∼Q0 [qT |0 (xT |X0 )] log EX0 ∼Q0 [qT |0 (xT |X0 )]dxT
                                   Z

                                ≤ EX0 ∼Q0 qT |0 (xT |X0 ) log qT |0 (xT |X0 ) dxT
                                            Z
                                = EX0 ∼Q0        qT |0 (xT |X0 ) log qT |0 (xT |X0 )dxT .
                                           √
Since QT |0 is conditional Gaussian N ( ᾱT x0 , (1 − ᾱT )Id ), its negative conditional entropy equals
                 Z
                                                              d d
                    qT |0 (xT |x0 ) log qT |0 (xT |x0 )dxT = − − log(2π(1 − ᾱT ))
                                                              2 2
for any x0 ∈ Rd . On the other hand, since PT′ = N (0, Id ),
                                               d         1             2
                    EXT ∼QT [log p′T (XT )] = − log(2π) − EXT ∼QT ∥XT ∥
                                               2         2
where
                              2                          2                               2
             EXT ∼QT ∥XT ∥ = ᾱT EX0 ∼Q0 ∥X0 ∥ + (1 − ᾱT )EW̄T ∼N (0,Id ) W̄T
                                                         2
                                  = ᾱT EX0 ∼Q0 ∥X0 ∥ + (1 − ᾱT )d.
Putting the two together,

                      qT (XT )
        EXT ∼QT log ′            = EXT ∼QT [log qT (XT )] − EXT ∼QT [log p′T (XT )]
                      pT (XT )
              d d                       d             1                     2

         ≤ − − log(2π(1 − ᾱT )) + log(2π) +              ᾱT EX0 ∼Q0 ∥X0 ∥ + (1 − ᾱT )d
              2 2                       2             2
           1                  2    dᾱT    d
         = ᾱT EX0 ∼Q0 ∥X0 ∥ −          − log(1 − ᾱT ).
           2                        2      2
When T is large (and thus when ᾱT is small), the Taylor expansion w.r.t. ᾱT around 0 yields
                                 log(1 − ᾱT ) = −ᾱT + O ᾱT2 .



                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore,

                       qT (XT )    1                 2  dᾱT  d
                                                             − (−ᾱT ) + O ᾱT2

            EXT ∼QT log ′         ≤ ᾱT EX0 ∼Q0 ∥X0 ∥ −
                       pT (XT )    2                     2    2
                                   1
                                  ≤ ᾱT M2 d + O ᾱT2 .

                                   2

F.2 P ROOF OF L EMMA 4
                              ′         ′
To start, note that both Pt−1|t   and Pbt−1|t are Gaussian (yet having different mean and variance).
Thus, for each t = 1, . . . , T ,
      p′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt )
log
   pb′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt )
                    1

                            b t )− 12
= log det(Σt )− 2 − log det(Σ
       1                                    1
    − (xt−1 − µt )⊺ Σ−1    t (xt−1 − µt ) + (xt−1 − µ
                                                          b −1
                                                    bt )⊺ Σ t (xt−1 − µ bt )
       2                                    2
  1
              b t )) − log(det(Σt )) + 1 (xt−1 − µt )⊺ (Σ

                                                        b −1     −1
=     log(det(Σ                                           t − Σt )(xt−1 − µt )
  2                                       2
       1                 b −1               1             b −1
    + (xt−1 − µ    bt )⊺ Σ           bt ) − (xt−1 − µt )⊺ Σ
                           t (xt−1 − µ                      t (xt−1 − µt )
       2                                    2
  1
              b t )) − log(det(Σt )) + 1 (xt−1 − µt )⊺ (Σ

                                                        b −1     −1
=     log(det(Σ                                           t − Σt )(xt−1 − µt )
  2                                       2
       1              b −1                1          ⊺ b −1              1           b −1
    + (µt − µ bt )⊺ Σ   t (xt−1 − µt ) + (xt−1 − µt ) Σt (µt − µ               bt )⊺ Σ
                                                                  bt ) + (µt − µ       t (µt − µ
                                                                                               bt ).
       2                                  2                              2
                                                                                             (27)
There are five terms in (27). We first consider the third and the fourth term, for which we have
                 h                                i
 EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (µt − µ         b −1
                         bt )⊺ Σ t  (X  t−1 − µt )                b −1
                                                            bt )⊺ Σ
                                                    = (µt − µ       t EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Xt−1 − µt ] = 0,
                 h                                i
                                   b −1                                         ⊺ b −1
 EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (Xt−1 − µt )⊺ Σ       t (µt − µbt ) = EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Xt−1 − µt ] Σ   t (µt − µ
                                                                                            bt ) = 0.


Now consider the expectation of the last term in (27). From the definition of Σ
                                                                              b t in (6), for small 1−αt
        b t ≻ 0, and we can define B
we have Σ                           bt := Id − (Id + (1 − αt )Ht )−1 , and thus Σb −1       αt
                                                                                   t = 1−αt (Id − Bt ).
                                                                                                      b
                                                                           2
                                  bt = (1 − αt )Ht + ÕLp (Q ) ((1 − αt ) ). Thus, for each t ≥ 1,
From Taylor expansion, we have B                                     t
       h                                                        i
EXt ∼Qt (µt (Xt ) − µ          b −1
                    bt (Xt ))⊺ Σ t  (Xt )(µt (Xt ) − µ
                                                     bt (X t ))
                   h                                                                          i
= (1 − αt )EXt ∼Qt (st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt ))⊺ (Id − B  bt (Xt ))(st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt ))

= (1 − αt )EXt ∼Qt (st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt ))⊺ (Id + (1 − αt )Ht (Xt ))−1 (st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt ))


                                                      2
≲ (1 − αt )EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt )∥
where the last line follows from the regularity condition on Ht in Assumption 3. Therefore, the
expectation of the last term in (27) can be bounded as
                     T
                     X              h                                                      i
                             EXt ∼Qt (µt (Xt ) − µ          b −1
                                                 bt (Xt ))⊺ Σ t (Xt )(µt (Xt ) − µ
                                                                                 bt (Xt ))
                     t=1
                            T
                            X                                             2
                      ≲       (1 − αt )EXt ∼Qt ∥st (Xt ) − ∇ log qt (Xt )∥
                            t=1
                      ≲ (log T )ε2 ,                                                               (28)
where the last line follows by the score estimation error in Assumption 3.


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next we turn to the first two terms in (27). First, note that for all i, j ∈ [d], we have (1−αt )Htij (Xt ) =
ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt ) under Assumption 3. Now, the first term of (27) is given by
        b t )) − log(det(Σt )) = log(det(Id + (1 − αt )Ht )) − log(det(Id + (1 − αt )∇2 log qt (xt ))).
log(det(Σ
When (1 − αt ) is small, we can use Taylor expansion for the functions det(·) and log(·) to get
log(det(Id + (1 − αt )Ht ))
                                 (1 − αt )2

                                                    2           2                       3
= log 1 + (1 − αt )Tr(Ht ) +                (Tr(Ht ) − Tr(Ht )) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt ) )
                                     2
                      (1 − αt )2                            (1 − αt )2
= (1 − αt )Tr(Ht ) +             (Tr(Ht )2 − Tr(Ht2 )) −               Tr(Ht )2 + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 )
                          2                                      2
                      (1 − αt )2
= (1 − αt )Tr(Ht ) −             Tr(Ht2 ) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 ).
                          2
Similar expression can be obtained for log(det(Id + (1 − αt )∇2 log qt (xt ))). Thus, the first term in
(27) is equal to
            b t )) − log(det(Σt ))
    log(det(Σ
                                                (1 − αt )2
     = (1 − αt ) Tr(Ht ) − Tr(∇2 log qt (xt )) −            Tr(Ht2 ) − Tr((∇2 log qt (xt ))2 )

                                                    2
         + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 ).
For the second term in (27), we first take expectation over xt−1 and get
                     h                                            i
       EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (Xt−1 − µt )⊺ (Σ   b −1
                                          t  − Σ −1
                                                 t  )(Xt−1 −  µt )  = Tr   (Σb −1
                                                                               t  − Σ −1
                                                                                      t  )Σ t   .

To proceed, note that
                              (iii)
       (Id + (1 − αt )Ht )−1 = Id − (1 − αt )Ht + (1 − αt )2 Ht2 + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 ).            (29)
To see (iii), we write St as the true inverse of Id + (1 − αt )Ht . Its existence is guaranteed if (1 − αt )
is small. Since
         (Id + (1 − αt )Ht )(Id − (1 − αt )Ht + (1 − αt )2 Ht2 ) = Id + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 ),
we have
         (Id + (1 − αt )Ht )(Id − (1 − αt )Ht + (1 − αt )2 Ht2 − St ) = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 )
which implies that St = Id − (1 − αt )Ht + (1 − αt )2 Ht2 + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 ). This shows the
validity of (iii). Therefore,

             Tr (Σ b −1     −1             b −1
                     t − Σt )Σt = Tr(Σt Σt − Id )
                    h                                                            i
             = Tr Id − (1 − αt )Ht + (1 − αt )2 Ht2 + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 )

                                   2

                    Id + (1 − αt )∇ log qt (xt ) − Id

             = (1 − αt ) Tr(∇2 log qt (xt )) − Tr(Ht )


                   + (1 − αt )2 Tr(Ht2 ) − Tr(Ht ∇2 log qt (xt )) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 ).


Adding this to the first term of (27) and taking expectation over Xt ∼ Qt (noting Assumption 5 here),
we get
                      h
  EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t log(det(Σ      b t (Xt ))) − log(det(Σt (Xt )))
                                                                              i
        + (Xt−1 − µt (Xt ))⊺ (Σ   b −1
                                    t   (X t ) − Σ −1
                                                   t  (Xt ))(Xt−1 − µt (Xt ))
       (1 − αt )2
                  EXt ∼Qt Tr(Ht (Xt )2 ) − 2Tr(Ht (Xt )∇2 log qt (Xt )) + Tr((∇2 log qt (Xt ))2 )

   =
           2

                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          + Õ((1 − αt )3 )
                  2
    (iv) (1 − αt )                                          2
    =                 EXt ∼Qt Ht (Xt ) − ∇2 log qt (Xt ) F + Õ((1 − αt )3 ),
              2
where (iv) follows because for two symmetric matrices A and B,
              Tr(A2 ) − 2Tr(AB) + Tr(B 2 ) = Tr(A2 ) − Tr(AB) − Tr(BA) + Tr(B 2 )
                                                                                 2
              = Tr((A − B)(A − B)) = Tr((A − B)⊺ (A − B)) = ∥A − B∥F .
Thus, following from Assumption 3,
   T
   X                           h
         EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t               b t (Xt ))) − log(det(Σt (Xt )))
                                 log(det(Σ
   t=1
                                                                                 i log2 T
               + (Xt−1 − µt (Xt ))⊺ (Σb −1
                                        t  (X t ) − Σ −1
                                                      t  (Xt ))(Xt−1 − µt (Xt ))  ≲       ε2H . (30)
                                                                                     T
Here εH is the Hessian estimation error. Combining (28) and (30) yields the desired result for the
accelerated estimation error, which is in the order Õ(1/T 2 ).
F.3 P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 2
Given the perturbed Σ̃t in (9), following the definition in (14), we define, ∀p ≥ 1,
                                                   (1 − αt )2 2
                 Ãt := (1 − αt )∇2 log qt (xt ) +           (∇ log qt (xt ))2
                                                       4
                                                       1 − αt 2
                       = (1 − αt ) ∇2 log qt (xt ) +          ∇ log qt (xt ) ,
                                                         4
                             1 − αt −1
                 B̃t := Id −         Σ̃t = Id − Ãt + Ã2t + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 )
                                αt
                              1 − αt
                 H̃t := Ht +          Ht .
                                 4
Note that under Assumption 3,
                                                                  2
          (1 − αt ) H̃t ≲ (1 − αt ) ∥Ht ∥ + (1 − αt )2 ∥Ht ∥ = ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt ), ∀r ≥ 1.

Then, the rest of the proof Lemma 4 still holds with ∇2 log qt (xt ) and Ht replaced by ∇2 log qt (xt ) +
1−αt 2
  4 ∇ log qt (xt ) and H̃t . The proof is complete by noting that
                                                                                    2
                                                          1 − αt 2
                  EXt ∼Qt H̃t (Xt ) − ∇2 log qt (Xt ) +             ∇ log qt (Xt )
                                                              4                      F
                                                                             2
                     ≲ (1 + (1 − αt ))EXt ∼Qt Ht (Xt ) − ∇2 log qt (Xt ) F
                     ≲ ε2H .

F.4 P ROOF OF L EMMA 5
By Bayes’ rule, for any xt−1 given fixed xt , we have
qt−1|t (xt−1 |xt )
                          √        2
                                     !
                     xt − αt xt−1
∝ qt−1 (xt−1 ) exp −
                        2(1 − αt )
                                                                                        √   2
                                                                                              !
                                            1             ⊺ −1               xt−1 − xt / αt
∝ qt−1 (xt−1 )p′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt ) exp         (xt−1 − µt ) Σt (xt−1 − µt ) −
                                            2                                 2(1 − αt )/αt
                                                                                                        √   2
                                                                                                              !
                                               αt                                            xt−1 − xt / αt
= qt−1 (xt−1 )p′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt ) exp                              ⊺
                                                       (xt−1 − µt ) (Id − Bt )(xt−1 − µt ) −
                                            2(1 − αt )                                        2(1 − αt )/αt


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     (by Equation (14))

                                                             αt
∝ p′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt ) exp           ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) −                        ⊺
                                                                     (xt−1 − µt ) Bt (xt−1 − µt ) ,
                                                          2(1 − αt )
where the last line follows from the definition of ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) in (16). Now, with the definition of
 ′
ζt,t−1 (xt , xt−1 ) in (17), we have
                                                                                     ′
                                                            p′t−1|t (xt−1 |xt )eζt,t−1 (xt ,xt−1 )
                                 qt−1|t (xt−1 |xt ) =                           ′                    .
                                                            EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                                    ′     [eζt,t−1 (xt ,Xt−1 ) ]

F.5 P ROOF OF L EMMA 6
                                                         √
Recall Equation (2). Let Q̃0 denote the distribution
                                               √       of ᾱt x0 , and let g(z) denote the p.d.f. (w.r.t.
                    R of the distribution of 1 − ᾱt w̄t . Note that g is a scaled version of the unit
the Lebesgue measure)
Gaussian p.d.f., and z∈Rd g(z)dz = 1 < ∞. Now, for any event A ⊆ B(λ),
               Z     Z                                  Z       Z
     Qt (A) =                g(x − x̃0 )dQ̃0 (x̃0 )dx =                  g(x − x̃0 )dx dQ̃0 (x̃0 )
                      x∈A    x̃0 ∈Rd                                       x̃0 ∈Rd        x∈A
                                                                              R
by Fubini’s theorem. If A has Lebesgue measure 0, by continuity of g(x) we get x∈A g(x− x̃0 )dx =
0, and thus Qt (A) = 0. This shows that Qt is absolutely continuous w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure,
and its p.d.f. exists, denoted as qt .
Now, since any order of derivative of the Gaussian p.d.f. is bounded away from infinity and Q̃0 is a
probability measure, we can invoke the dominated convergence theorem here to change the order of
derivative and integral as
                             Z                             Z
            ∂ak qt (x) = ∂ak      g(x − x̃0 )dQ̃0 (x̃0 ) =       ∂ak g(x − x̃0 )dQ̃0 (x̃0 ).   (31)
                                       x̃0 ∈Rd                                x̃0 ∈Rd

Thus, for any k ≥ 1 and any vector of indices a ∈ [d]k , we have
                                           Z
                 k                 k
                ∂a qt (x) ≤ sup ∂a g(x)           dQ̃0 (x̃0 ) = sup ∂ak g(x) < ∞.
                                       x∈Rd                  x̃0 ∈Rd                     x∈Rd

This also implies that the Taylor term |Tk (qt , x, µ)| < ∞ for any x and µ, and
                Z                                  Z           p
                                               (i)            X
       qt (x) =         g(x − x̃0 )dQ̃0 (x̃0 ) =          lim     Tk (g(x − x̃0 ), x, µ)dQ̃0 (x̃0 )
                      x̃0 ∈Rd                                    x̃0 ∈Rd p→∞ k=0
                            Z            p
              (ii)                       X
              = lim                              Tk (g(x − x̃0 ), x, µ)dQ̃0 (x̃0 )
                     p→∞        x̃0 ∈Rd k=0
                                p
              (iii)             X
               = lim                  Tk (qt , x, µ)
                      p→∞
                                k=0

where (i) follows because (scaled) Gaussian density is analytic, (ii) follows from dominated conver-
gence theorem and the fact that g is a Gaussian density and has an upper bound independent of x̃0 ,
and (iii) follows from (31). This shows that qt is analytic.
Finally, since ∂ak log qt is a smooth function of qt , ∂ 1 qt , . . . , ∂ k qt , we have ∂ak log qt (xt ) < ∞
(possibly depending on T ) for all k ≥ 1 and fixed (finite) xt ∈ Rd . Also, log qt is analytic because
log(·) is analytic and qt (xt ) > 0, ∀xt ∈ Rd .
F.6 P ROOF OF L EMMA 7
The result follows directly from Isserlis’s Theorem, which says that
                    " n      #
                      Y           X Y                     X Y
                  E       Zi =                E[Zi Zj ] =            Cov(Zi , Zj )
                            i=1             p∈Pn2 {i,j}∈p                   p∈Pn2 {i,j}∈p



                                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


since each Zi is centered. Here Pn2 is the set that contains all distinct size-2 partitions of [n]. For
example, P42 = {({1, 2}, {3, 4}), ({1, 3}, {2, 4}), ({1, 4}, {2, 3})}. Thus, since At = ÕLp (Q) (1 −
αt ) under Assumption 5,
            " n    #
             Y
          E      Zi = 0, if n is odd
               i=1
               " n     #                               n2 !
                Y                           1 − αt                                   n
           E         Zi = ÕLp (Qt )                          = ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt ) 2 , if n is even.
               i=1
                                              αt

More specifically, following from Isserlis’s Theorem, the fourth moment is

  E[Zi Zj Zk Zl ] = Cov(Zi , Zj )Cov(Zk , Zl )+
                         Cov(Zi , Zk )Cov(Zj , Zl ) + Cov(Zi , Zl )Cov(Zj , Zk ), ∀i, j, k, l ∈ [d].

Here Cov(Zi , Zj ) = 1−α                               ij
                            αt (1 {i = j} + (1 − αt )A ). The fourth moment result follows immediately
                               t


by plugging into the formula. Turning to the sixth moment, we note that we are interested only in the
coefficients for the terms that grow at a rate ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 ). Since the sixth moment consists
of sum of product terms in which three covariance matrices are multiplied (giving us a rate at least
ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 )), at least one product term in the sum must take covariance values only on the
diagonal of the matrix. Therefore, only E[Zi6 ], E[Zi4 Zj2 ], and E[Zi2 Zj2 Zk2 ] with i, j, k all differ satisfy
this requirement, and we immediately get the desired result from Isserlis’s Theorem.
F.7 P ROOF OF L EMMA 8
We first fix xt  and will take expectation at the end.                        Note that qt|t−1 (xt |xt−1 )    =
                            √
                        ∥x − αt xt−1 ∥2

      1
(2π(1−αt ))d/2
               exp     − t 2(1−α t)
                                            . Following from the idea of Tweedie Efron (2011), we have

     qt−1|t (xt−1 |xt )
        qt−1 (xt−1 )
      =              qt|t−1 (xt |xt−1 )
            qt (xt )
                                          √
        qt−1 (xt−1 )                          αt ⊺                αt              2
      =              qt|t−1 (xt |0) exp           xt xt−1 −               ∥xt−1 ∥
            qt (xt )                       1 − αt              2(1 − αt )
                                                  √
                            αt          2
                                                      α t
      = qt−1 (xt−1 )e− 2(1−αt ) ∥xt−1 ∥ exp               x⊺t xt−1 − log qt (xt ) + log qt|t−1 (xt |0)
                                                  1 − αt
                          ⊺
      =: f (xt−1 ) exp xt−1 x̃t − κ(x̃t )                                                                (32)
where we have used the definitions of x̃t and κ(x̃t ) in (23). This shows that xt−1 is a conditional
exponential family given x̃t . Thus, the first moment can be found as (cf. Prop. 11.1 in Moulin &
Veeravalli (2018))
                 Z                                Z
        0 = ∇x̃t qt−1|t (xt−1 |xt )dxt−1 = ∇x̃t f (xt−1 ) exp x⊺t−1 x̃t − κ(x̃t ) dxt−1


             Z
           = f (xt−1 )∇x̃t exp x⊺t−1 x̃t − κ(x̃t ) dxt−1


             Z
           = f (xt−1 ) exp x⊺t−1 x̃t − κ(x̃t ) (xt−1 − ∇x̃t κ(x̃t )) dxt−1


             Z
           = f (xt−1 ) exp x⊺t−1 x̃t − κ(x̃t ) xt−1 dxt−1 − ∇x̃t κ(x̃t )



which implies that
                                        EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Xt−1 ] = ∇κ.                                          (33)

For the second moment,
          Z
        2
 0 = ∂ij    qt−1|t (xt−1 |xt )dxt−1


                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



        Z
                          ∂
                                  exp x⊺t−1 x̃t − κ(x̃t )       xit−1 − ∂i κ(x̃t ) dxt−1

   =        f (xt−1 )
                        ∂ x̃jt
        Z

   =        f (xt−1 ) exp x⊺t−1 x̃t − κ(x̃t ) (xit−1 − ∂i κ(x̃t ))(xjt−1 − ∂j κ(x̃t )) − ∂ij
                                                                                          2
                                                                                             κ(x̃t ) dxt−1

which yields
                                                                        1 − αt      (1 − αt )2 2
  EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [(Xt−1 − µt )(Xt−1 − µt )⊺ ] = ∇2 κ =                          Id +           ∇ log qt (xt ). (34)
                                                                          αt           αt

Below, we write x = xt−1 and κ = κ(x̃t ) for brevity. We remind readers that all derivatives are w.r.t.
x̃t instead of x = xt−1 . For the third moment,
                             Z              Z
                          3
                   0 = ∂ijk qt−1|t dx =: f (x) exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) D3 (x, x̃t )dx

where

        D3 (x, x̃t ) = exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂k exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ) − ∂ij
                                                                                       2
                                                                                          κ
                     = (xk − ∂k κ) (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ) − ∂ij
                                                             2

                                                                κ
                                      2
                                 + (−∂ik κ)(xj − ∂j κ) + (−∂jk
                                                            2
                                                               κ)(xi − ∂i κ) − ∂ijk
                                                                                3
                                                                                    κ.                         (35)
Now, for any function fn(x̃t ) and 1 ≤ i ≤ d,
                        Z
                             f (x) exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) fn(x̃t )(xi − ∂i κ)dx = 0

by the first moment result (33). Thus, we get
                                h                                        i
                                                 j
                EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (Xt−1 i
                                        − µit )(Xt−1 − µjt )(Xt−1
                                                              k
                                                                  − µkt ) = ∂ijk
                                                                             3
                                                                                 κ,
                               3
and by Assumption 5, EXt ∼Qt [∂ijk κ] = Õ((1 − αt )3 ).
For the fourth moment, we have
                           Z           Z
                       4
                 0 = ∂ijkl qt−1|t dx =: f (x) exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) D4 (x, x̃t )dx

where

D4 (x, x̃t ) = exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂l exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) ((xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)

                     2
                 − ∂ij κ(xk − ∂k κ) − ∂ik
                                        2
                                          κ(xj − ∂j κ) − ∂jk
                                                           2
                                                             κ(xi − ∂i κ) − ∂ijk
                                                                              3
                                                                                 κ)

             = (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)(xl − ∂l κ) + ∂l (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)
                      2
                   − ∂ij κ(xk − ∂k κ)(xl − ∂l κ) − ∂ijl
                                                    3
                                                        κ(xk − ∂k κ) + ∂ij
                                                                        2    2
                                                                           κ∂kl κ
                      2
                   − ∂ik κ(xj − ∂j κ)(xl − ∂l κ) − ∂ikl
                                                    3
                                                        κ(xj − ∂j κ) + ∂ik
                                                                        2    2
                                                                           κ∂jl κ
                      2
                   − ∂jk κ(xi − ∂i κ)(xl − ∂l κ) − ∂jkl
                                                    3
                                                        κ(xi − ∂i κ) + ∂jk
                                                                        2
                                                                           κ∂il2 κ
                      3
                   − ∂ijk κ(xl − ∂l κ) − ∂ijkl
                                          4
                                               κ                                                               (36)
and

   ∂l (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)
      = −∂il2 κ(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ) − ∂jl
                                         2
                                            κ(xi − ∂i κ)(xk − ∂k κ) − ∂kl
                                                                       2
                                                                          κ(xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ).
Using the first and second moment results in (33) and (34), we get
                  h                                                    i
                                  j
  EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (Xt−1 i
                         − µit )(Xt−1 − µjt )(Xt−1
                                               k
                                                   − µkt )(Xt−1
                                                            l
                                                                − µlt ) =
                                                       2      2         2      2
                                                     (∂ij κ)(∂kl κ) + (∂ik κ)(∂jl κ) + (∂il2 κ)(∂jk
                                                                                                 2        4
                                                                                                    κ) + ∂ijkl κ.
And the fourth moment result follows directly by applying (34) to each of the terms and taking the
expectation over Xt ∼ Qt . The rate follows from Assumption 5 (cf. Definition 2).


                                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.8 P ROOF OF L EMMA 9
The proof continues the idea of Lemma 8. The idea is to use the inductive relationship (provided in
the proof of Lemmas 8 and 10):

                 D5 (x, x̃t ) = exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂m exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) D4 (x, x̃t )
                                 = (xm − ∂m κ)D4 (x, x̃t ) + ∂m D4 (x, x̃t )

                    D6 (x, x̃t ) = exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂n exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) D5 (x, x̃t )
                                   = (xn − ∂n κ)D5 (x, x̃t ) + ∂n D5 (x, x̃t ).

Let Pℓk be the set that contains all distinct size-k partitions of [ℓ]. We use the definitions:

                 A       n                                                                   o
                      := {a1 , . . . , ak } : a1 , . . . , ak ∈ A, a1 , . . . , ak all differ , k ≤ |A|
                 k
                                                           k
           partk (A) := {((ai , aj ) : {i, j} ∈ p) : p ∈ P|A| }.

Recall the formula for D4 in (36), which can be abbreviated as (here |a| = 4):
                        Y                  X           Y                       X
         D4 (x, x̃t ) =     (xi − ∂i κ) −       ∂b2 κ       (xi − ∂i κ) +                 ∂b2 κ∂c2 κ
                        i∈a               b∈(a        i∈a\b               (b,c)∈part2 (a)
                                             2)
                             X
                                  3
                          −      ∂a\{i} κ(xi − ∂i κ) − ∂a4 κ.
                               i∈a

                                                                   x⊺ x̃t −κ
                                                           R
Also recall the definition of f (x) in Lemma 8 and that f (x)e    Q          Dp (x, x̃t )dx  = 0, through
                                                                              i         i
which we can find the expected p-th moments of EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t         i∈a   (X t−1 −  µ    )
                                                                                        t . For reference,
the first four moments are
   Z
       f (x) exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) (xi − ∂i κ)dx = 0
   Z
       f (x) exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)dx = ∂ij
                                                           2
                                                             κ = ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )
   Z
       f (x) exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)dx = ∂ijk 3
                                                                            κ = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 )
   Z
       f (x) exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)(xl − ∂l κ)dx
             2      2         2      2
         = (∂ij κ)(∂kl κ) + (∂ik κ)(∂jl κ) + (∂il2 κ)(∂jk
                                                       2        4
                                                          κ) + ∂ijkl κ = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )2 )

where we note that ∂ak κ = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )k ) for all k ≥ 3.
We can calculate D5 as (with |a| = 5):
       D5 (x, x̃t ) = (xa5 − ∂a5 κ)D4 (x, x̃t ) + ∂a5 D4 (x, x̃t )
                      Y                 X            Y                   X          Y
                    =    (xi − ∂i κ) −        ∂b2 κ       (xi − ∂i κ) −        3
                                                                              ∂a\b κ (xi − ∂i κ)
                      i∈a              b∈(a         i∈a\b               b∈(a        i∈b
                                           2)                              2)
                                 X
                        +                   ∂b2 κ∂c2 κ(xi − ∂i κ)
                                    i∈a
                             (b,c)∈part2 (a\{i})
                             X                                 X
                                    4
                         −         ∂a\{i} κ(xi − ∂i κ) +           ∂b2 κ∂a\b
                                                                         3
                                                                             κ − ∂a5 κ.
                             i∈a                               a
                                                           b∈( )
                                                               2


Therefore,
                                                                  
                                           Y
                                                      i
                   EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t                   (Xt−1 − µit )
                                        i∈a:|a|=5



                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                            X                         X                         X
                      =              ∂b2 κ∂a\b
                                           3
                                               κ+               3
                                                               ∂a\b κ∂b2 κ −            ∂b2 κ∂a\b
                                                                                              3
                                                                                                  κ + ∂a5 κ
                                a                         a                         a
                           b∈( )2                    b∈( )2                    b∈( )2
                            X
                      =              ∂b2 κ∂a\b
                                           3
                                               κ + ∂a5 κ = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ).
                                a
                           b∈( )2



Now we turn to calculate D6 (and let |a| = 6):
D6 (x, x̃t ) = (xa6 − ∂a6 κ)D5 (x, x̃t ) + ∂a6 D5 (x, x̃t )
   Y                   X            Y                   X              Y
=      (xi − ∂i κ) −         ∂b2 κ       (xi − ∂i κ) −          3
                                                               ∂a\b  κ (xi − ∂i κ)
   i∈a                b∈(a         i∈a\b               b∈(a            i∈b
                          2)                                3)
           X          Y                         X                     Y             X
                 4
     −          ∂a\b κ (xi − ∂i κ) +                       ∂c2 κ∂e2 κ (xi − ∂i κ) +     fn(κ)(xi − ∂i κ)
         b∈(a         i∈b                      b∈(a                   i∈b           i∈a
             2)                                    2)
                                                   (c,e)∈part2 (a\b)
                X                                   X                               X
      −                        ∂b2 κ∂c2 κ∂e2 κ +              ∂b2 κ∂a\b
                                                                    4
                                                                        κ+                      ∂b3 κ∂c3 κ − ∂a6 κ.
          (b,c,e)∈part2 (a)                        b∈(a
                                                      2)
                                                                              (b,c)∈part3 (a)


Here fn(κ) is a function of κ which does not depend on x. Note that fn does not affect the expected
value because EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Xt−1 − µt ] = 0. Therefore, we have
                                            
                          Y
                                  i
       EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t          (Xt−1  − µit )
                               i∈a:|a|=6
                                                                         
             X                         X                                          X
       =            ∂b2 κ                         ∂c2 κ∂e2 κ + ∂a\b
                                                                 4
                                                                     κ +                    3
                                                                                            ∂a\b κ∂b3 κ
               a            (c,e)∈part2 (a\b)                                           a
            b∈( )
               2                                                                 b∈( )  3
                    X                                X
                            4
              +            ∂a\b κ∂b2 κ −                          ∂b2 κ∂c2 κ∂e2 κ
                      a                                 a
                   b∈( )
                      2                            b∈( )2
                                              (c,e)∈part2 (a\b)
                           X                                   X                              X
              +                          ∂b2 κ∂c2 κ∂e2 κ −            ∂b2 κ∂a\b
                                                                            4
                                                                                κ−                        ∂b3 κ∂c3 κ + ∂a6 κ
                   (b,c,e)∈part2 (a)                          b∈(a
                                                                 2)
                                                                                        (b,c)∈part3 (a)
             X                                X                                X
       =            ∂b2 κ∂a\b
                          4
                              κ+                          ∂b3 κ∂c3 κ +                        ∂b2 κ∂c2 κ∂e2 κ + ∂a6 κ
            b∈(a
               2)
                                        (b,c)∈part3 (a)                  (b,c,e)∈part2 (a)
                    X
       =                            ∂b2 κ∂c2 κ∂e2 κ + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )5 ).
            (b,c,e)∈part2 (a)

The proof is now complete.
F.9 P ROOF OF L EMMA 10
We fix xt first and will take the expectation at the end. We first introduce some notations used in the
proof. We write x = xt−1 and κ = κ(x̃t ). Given a set of indices A, define its bipartition as
                                          bipart(A) := {(B, C) : A = B ⊔ C}
where B and C are both sets of indices (and therefore the order of indices within each of B and C does
not matter). Here ⊔ refers to the disjoint union of the two sets (which is only defined when the two sets
are disjoint). Next, given a set B, define allpart≥2 (B) as a set containing all partitions of B such that
there are at least 2 elements in each part of the partition. As an example, allpart≥2 ({1, 2, 3, 4}) =
{{{1, 2}, {3, 4}}, {{1, 3}, {2, 4}}, {{1, 4}, {2, 3}}, and {{1}, {2, 3, 4}} ∈   / allpart≥2 ({1, 2, 3, 4})
despite the fact that it is a valid partition. For each partition b ∈ allpart≥2 (B), define
                                                      Y
                                              ∂b κ :=    ∂a|ξ|ξ κ.
                                                                  ξ∈b


                                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here note that ξ is also a set, and ∂b κ is well defined since the order of indices to take partial
derivative with does not matter. Define
                   D0 (x, x̃t ) := 1

                   Dp (x, x̃t ) := exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂ap exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) Dp−1 (x, x̃t )

for all p ≥ 1. We again remind readers that all derivatives are w.r.t. x̃t instead of x = xt−1 .
By working out the derivative, a direct implication of the definition of Dp is a recursive relationship:
                        Dp (x, x̃t ) = (xap − ∂ap κ)Dp−1 (x, x̃t ) + ∂ap Dp−1 (x, x̃t ).
Also, if we unroll the recursion of Dp , we get

              Dp (x, x̃t ) = exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂ap exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) Dp−1 (x, x̃t )

                           = exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂ap exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ)

                              ∂ap−1 exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) Dp−2 (x, x̃t )

                           = exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂a2p ,ap−1 exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) Dp−2 (x, x̃t )

                           = exp (−x⊺ x̃t + κ) ∂app ,...,a1 exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ)

and thus
                                      Z                 Z
                   0 = ∂ap1 ,...,ap       qt−1|t dx =       f (x)∂ap1 ,...,ap exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) dx
                                                        Z
                                                    =       f (x) exp (x⊺ x̃t − κ) Dp (x, x̃t )dx                  (37)

where we recall the definition of f (x) back in (32).
In the following, we present the entire proof into two parts. In part 1, we inductively show that each
Dp (x, x̃t ) satisfies a particular polynomial form. In part 2, we inductively show that this polynomial
form results in the desired rates.
Part 1 of the proof of Lemma 10: The first step toward proving the desired results is to obtain the
form of Dp for all p ≥ 2. Now, we aim to show inductively that
                  p
                  Y                             X                 X                             Y
 Dp (x, x̃t ) =       (xai −∂ai κ)−                                           dp (b, C)(∂b κ)         (xac −∂ac κ) (38)
                  i=1                     (B,C)∈bipart([p]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                     c∈C


where dp (b, C) is a constant from combinatorics, which is possibly 0 and which only depends on p.
From Lemma 8, the bases cases have been established that (cf. (35) and (36))
   D2 (x, x̃t ) = (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ) − ∂ij
                                            2
                                               κ
   D3 (x, x̃t ) = (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)
          2
       − ∂ij κ(xk − ∂k κ) − ∂ik
                             2
                                κ(xj − ∂j κ) − ∂jk
                                                2
                                                   κ(xi − ∂i κ) − ∂ijk
                                                                   3
                                                                       κ
   D4 (x, x̃t ) = (xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)(xl − ∂l κ)
          2
       − ∂ij κ(xk − ∂k κ)(xl − ∂l κ) − ∂ik
                                        2
                                           κ(xj − ∂j κ)(xl − ∂l κ) − ∂jk
                                                                      2
                                                                         κ(xi − ∂i κ)(xl − ∂l κ)
       + ∂l ((xi − ∂i κ)(xj − ∂j κ)(xk − ∂k κ)) − ∂ijk
                                                   3
                                                       κ(xl − ∂l κ) − ∂ijl
                                                                       3
                                                                           (xk − ∂k κ)
             3
        − ∂ikl (xj − ∂j κ) − ∂jkl
                               3
                                  (xi − ∂i κ) + ∂ij
                                                 2    2
                                                    κ∂kl      2
                                                         κ + ∂ik   2
                                                                 κ∂jl      2
                                                                      κ + ∂jk κ∂il2 κ − ∂ijkl
                                                                                         4
                                                                                              κ.
                                                                                Qp
In particular,   each term of Dp (p = 2, 3, 4) is in the form of either i=1 (xai − ∂ai κ) or
                 ac
       Q
(∂b κ) c∈C (x − ∂ac κ), where |ξ| ≥ 2, ∀ξ ∈ b, and (⊔ξ∈b ξ) ⊔ C = [p]. Therefore, D2 , D3 , D4
all satisfy the hypothesis (38).


                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Turning to the inductive step, we suppose that Dk satisfies (38), i.e.,
                    k
                    Y                                      X                X                              Y
 Dk (x, x̃t ) =           (xai − ∂ai κ) −                                                dk (b, C)(∂b κ)         (xac − ∂ac κ).
                    i=1                              (B,C)∈bipart([k]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                     c∈C

Then, using the recursive relationship, we have
Dk+1 (x, x̃t )
= (xak+1 − ∂ak+1 κ)Dk (x, x̃t ) + ∂ak+1 Dk (x, x̃t )
    k+1
    Y                                       X                   X                           Y
=           (xai − ∂ai κ) −                                              dk (b, C)(∂b κ)          (xac − ∂ac κ)(xak+1 − ∂ak+1 κ)
    i=1                             (B,C)∈bipart([k]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                       c∈C
    |          {z         }         |                                              {z                                                    }
               T1
                                                                                   T2
                        k
                                                !                                                                                                 !
                        Y                                       X              X                                        Y
                                   ai                                                                                             ac
    − ∂ak+1         −         (x        − ∂ai κ) −                                         dk (b, C)(∂b κ) ∂ak+1             (x        − ∂ac κ)
                        i=1                            (B,C)∈bipart([k]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                               c∈C
        |                 {z                     }     |                                          {z                                              }
                          T3
                                                                                                  T4
                X                         X                                   Y ac
    −                                                 dk (b, C) ∂ak+1 (∂b κ)   (x − ∂ac κ)
        (B,C)∈bipart([k]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                                       c∈C
        |                                                  {z                                          }
                                                           T5
= T1 − T2 − T3 − T4 − T5
where we define each term as T1 , . . . , T5 . Now we discuss these terms separately:
                                            Qk+1
     1. T1 (and only T1 ) is in the form i=1 (xai − ∂ai κ).
     2. T2 is a summation of individual terms: (∂b κ) c∈C (xac − ∂ac κ)(xak+1 − ∂ak+1 κ). Here
                                                          Q
        b ∈ allpart≥2 (B) and (B, C) ∈ bipart([k]). Thus, by definition of bipart and allpart≥2 ,
        for each ξ ∈ b, |ξ| ≥ 2 and (⊔ξ∈b ξ) ⊔ C = [k]. Therefore, k + 1 ∈   / B ⊔ C and
                                 (⊔ξ∈b ξ) ⊔ C ⊔ {k + 1} = [k] ⊔ {k + 1} = [k + 1].
             This implies that each individual term of T2 is in the form of (∂b κ) c∈C2 (xc − ∂c κ) where
                                                                                  Q
             b ∈ allpart≥2 (B2 ), such that B2 := B and C2 := C ⊔ {k + 1}. Here C2 is well defined
             because k + 1 ∈ / C. Since (B2 , C2 ) ∈ bipart([k + 1]),
                                     X                X                          Y
                       T2 =                                      d2 (b, C)(∂b κ)   (xac − ∂ac κ)
                                        (B,C)∈bipart([k+1]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                       c∈C

             for some constant d2 (b, C).
        3. T3 is the derivative of product, which is a summation of individual terms:
                          Qd
           (∂a2j ,ak+1 κ) i=1 (xai −∂ai κ), j = 1, . . . , k. Therefore, for each j = 1, . . . , k, each term is
                            i̸=j Q
           of the form (∂b κ) c∈C3 (xac −∂ac κ) where b ∈ allpart≥2 (B3 ), such that B3 := {j, k+1}
           and C3 := [k] \ {j}. Since (B3 , C3 ) ∈ bipart([k + 1]),
                                   X                X                           Y
                        T3 =                                    d3 (b, C)(∂b κ)     (xac − ∂ac κ)
                                        (B,C)∈bipart([k+1]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                       c∈C

             for some constant d3 (b, C).

        4. T4 is a summation of individual terms: (∂b κ) ∂ak+1 c∈C (xac − ∂ac κ) where b ∈
                                                              Q
           allpart≥2 (B) and (B, C) ∈ bipart([k]). Now,
                                                 !
                                 Y                                      Y
                   (∂b κ) ∂ak+1     (x − ∂ac κ) = −(∂b κ)(∂a2j ,ak+1 κ)
                                      ac
                                                                          (xai − ∂ai κ)
                                               c∈C                                                  i∈C
                                                                                                    i̸=c


                                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                  Y
                                                                 = −(∂b4 κ)              (xai − ∂ai κ)
                                                                                  i∈C4

           where b4 := b ⊔ {k + 1, c} and C4 := C \ {c}. Here b4 is well defined because k + 1, c ∈
                                                                                                  / b.
           Define B4 := [k + 1] \ C4 , and we have b4 ∈ allpart≥2 (B4 ). Since (B4 , C4 ) is a valid
           partition of [k + 1], we have
                                   X             X                        Y
                      T4 =                                d4 (b, C)(∂b κ)     (xac − ∂ac κ)
                             (B,C)∈bipart([k+1]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                              c∈C

           for some constant d4 (b, C).
                                                                Q          ac
      5. T5 is a summation of individual terms: ∂ak+1 (∂b κ)        c∈C (x     − ∂ac κ), where b ∈
         allpart≥2 (B) and (B, C) ∈ bipart([k]). From definition of ∂b κ,
                                              
                                       Y            X                 Y             X
                ∂ak+1 (∂b κ) = ∂ak+1  ∂a|ξ|ξ κ =      ∂a|ξ|+1
                                                           ξ ,ak+1
                                                                   κ       ∂a|ζ|
                                                                              ζ
                                                                                 κ=     ∂bξ κ
                                               ξ∈b                  ξ∈b                      ζ∈b            ξ∈b
                                                                                             ζ̸=ξ

           where, for each ξ ∈ b, we have defined a new partition bξ such that k + 1 is added to the
           ξ in the partition b. Formally, define bξ := b \ ξ ⊔ {ξ ⊔ {k + 1}}, which is well defined
           because ξ ∈  / (b \ ξ) and k + 1 ∈/ B. Define B5 := B ⊔ {k + 1} and C5 := C, and note that
           (B5 , C5 ) is a valid partition of [k + 1]. Since |ζ| ≥ 2, ∀ζ ∈ b, we have |ζ ′ | ≥ 2, ∀ζ ′ ∈ bξ .
           Since b ∈ allpart≥2 (B), we have bξ ∈ allpart≥2 (B5 ) for all ξ ∈ b. Therefore, for any
           fixed C(= C5 )
                            X                                         X       X
                                     dk (b, C) ∂ak+1 (∂b κ) =                     dk (b, C)∂bξ κ
                      b∈allpart≥2 (B)                                     b∈allpart≥2 (B) ξ∈b
                                                                                  X
                                                                      =                           d5 (b5 , C)∂b5 κ
                                                                          b5 ∈allpart≥2 (B5 )

           for some constant d5 (b5 , C), and thus
                                  X                X                                          Y
                    T5 =                                                d5 (b, C)(∂b κ)             (xac − ∂ac κ).
                             (B,C)∈bipart([k+1]) b∈allpart≥2 (B)                              c∈C


Finally, letting
                                                                5
                                                                X
                                           dk+1 (b, C) :=             dj (b, C)
                                                                j=2

for each b ∈ allpart≥2 (B) and C such that (B, C) ∈ bipart([k + 1]), we have shown that if
Dk (x, x̃t ) is in the form of (38), Dk+1 (x, x̃t ) is also in this form. Thus, claim (38) is valid for all
p ≥ 2.
Part 2 of the proof of Lemma 10: First, we remind readers of the definition of κ(x̃t ) in (23). Also,
the partial derivatives within the expectation over Xt ∼ Qt do not affect the rate by Assumption 5.
Note that ∇κ = µt from direct differentiation. From (37) and (38), for fixed xt , we have
                   " p                #
                     Y
                           ai      ai
   EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t        (Xt−1 − µt )
                       i=1
                                                                                  
                                                             "                    #
                                                                 Y
                                                                     ac
                                                                         − µat c ) 
                                                                                  
    = Õ 
                    sup           ∂b κ(x̃t )EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t         (Xt−1           
               (B,C)∈bipart([p])                                c∈C
                b∈allpart≥2 (B)
                                                                !                        "                        #!
                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                   ac
    = Õ             sup                 sup          ∂b κ(x̃t ) EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t                   (Xt−1 − µat c )       .   (39)
             (B,C)∈bipart([p])      b∈allpart≥2 (B)                                       c∈C



                                                           38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We first consider the term supb∈allpart≥2 (B) ∂b κ(x̃t ). Given a partition b ∈ allpart≥2 (B), direct
differentiation yields
                     1 − αt      (1 − αt )2 2
         ∂a|ξ|ξ κ =           +             ∂aξ log qt (xt ) = Õ(1 − αt ), if |ξ| = 2 and ξ1 = ξ2
                       αt            αt
                     (1 − αt )|ξ| |ξ|
         ∂a|ξ|ξ κ =       |ξ|/2
                                   ∂ξ log qt (xt ) = Õ((1 − αt )|ξ| ), for all other ξ.
                        αt
                                 Q      |ξ|
Since by definition ∂b κ = ξ∈b ∂aξ κ and ⊔ξ∈b ξ = B, the slowest rate of ∂b κ (as a function of B)
is determined by the partition b containing the most number of equal pairs. The slowest rate is

                                  Õ (1 − αt )(|B|−1)/2 (1 − αt )3 = Õ (1 − αt )(|B|+5)/2

                                                                                               if |B| is odd
     sup          ∂b κ(x̃t ) =                 |B|/2

b∈allpart≥2 (B)                   Õ (1 − α t )                                                if |B| is even

To proceed, we will again use induction to find the overall rate. From Lemma 8, base cases have been
established that                   " 2                #
                                    Y
                                          ai      ai
                 EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t     (Xt−1 − µt ) = Õ (1 − αt ) , ∀a ∈ [d]2
                                      i=1
                                     " 3                    #
                                      Y
                                           ai
                                               − µat i )        = Õ (1 − αt )3 , ∀a ∈ [d]3

                 EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t       (Xt−1
                                      i=1
                                     " 4                    #
                                      Y
                                           ai
                                               − µat i )        = Õ (1 − αt )2 , ∀a ∈ [d]4 .

                 EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t       (Xt−1
                                      i=1
These rates satisfy (24) and (25) when p = 2, 3, 4. Now we turn to the inductive step. Suppose k ≥ 4
is even. For purpose of induction, suppose (24) and (25) hold for all p = 2, . . . , k. Then, following
(39), for p = k + 1 (odd number), we have
                                       "k+1              #
                                        Y
                                              ai      ai
                     EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t      (Xt−1 − µt )
                                            i=1


                      =O              sup           (1 − αt )(|B|+5)/2 (1 − αt )|C|/2
                               (B,C)∈bipart([k+1])
                                 |B| odd, |C| even
                                                                                         !
                           +          sup            (1 − αt )|B|/2 (1 − αt )(|C|+3)/2
                               (B,C)∈bipart([k+1])
                                 |B| even, |C| odd

                      = O (1 − αt )(k+1)/2+5/2 + (1 − αt )(k+1)/2+3/2

                      = O (1 − αt )(k+1)/2+3/2 .
Then, for p = k + 2 (even number), we have
                                    "k+2              #
                                     Y
                                           ai     ai
                  EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t      (Xt−1 − µt )
                                            i=1


                     =O              sup          (1 − αt )(|B|+5)/2 (1 − αt )(|C|+3)/2
                              (B,C)∈bipart([k+2])
                                 |B| odd, |C| odd
                                                                                    !
                          +          sup            (1 − αt )|B|/2 (1 − αt )|C|/2
                              (B,C)∈bipart([k+1])
                                |B| even, |C|even

                     = O (1 − αt )(k+2)/2+4 + (1 − αt )(k+2)/2

                     = O (1 − αt )(k+2)/2 .
These show the validity of the claims (24) and (25). The proof is now complete.


                                                       39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.10 P ROOF OF L EMMA 11
Before analyzing the rate of each moment, we need to guarantee the validity of exchanging the
limit (in the Taylor expansion) and the expectation operator. Intuitively, this is achievable under
Assumption 5, where the Taylor series is absolutely convergent in expectation due to its Gaussian-like
moments. Specifically, since log qt−1 is analytic, all its partial derivatives exist. Following from the
                      ′
Taylor expansion of ζt,t−1 in (20),

                         ′
   lim E Xt ∼Qt [ζt,t−1       ] − E Xt ∼Qt       T1 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt ) + T2′ (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )
   k→∞                ′
               Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t                         ′
                                             Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
              k
              X
          +         Tp (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )
              p=3

                               ′
   ≤ lim E         Xt ∼Qt     ζt,t−1 − T1 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt ) − T2′ (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )
         k→∞            ′
                 Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
              k
              X
          −         Tp (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )
              p=3
                                                                      
                                      ∞
                                      X
   ≤ lim E         Xt ∼Qt           |Tp (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )|
         k→∞            ′
                 Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t  p=k+1

   (i)                    ℓ
                          X
   ≤ lim lim inf                 E     Xt ∼Qt     |Tp (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )|
         k→∞ ℓ→∞                            ′
                                     Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                         p=k+1
   (ii)
    = 0.
Here (i) follows from Fatou’s lemma, and (ii) is because,
                                                          under Assumption 5 and Lemma 7, we
                                                   −p/2
have E Xt ∼Qt |Tp (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )| = Õ T        , and thus the infinite sum is convergent
          Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
for all (k, ℓ) such that 1 ≤ k < ℓ < ∞ since
                 ∞                                                           ∞
                                                                                       !
                 X                                                     dp    X 1
                    E Xt ∼Qt |Tp (log qt−1 , xt−1 , µt )| = Õ       · p/2                 < ∞.
                            ′
                 p=1 Xt−1 ∼Pt−1|t                              p=1
                                                                   p! T

The proof for E         Xt ∼Qt     is similar due to its Gaussian-like concentration of all centralized
                      Xt−1 ∼Qt−1|t
moments (see Lemma 10). Thus, we are able to exchange the infinite sum and the expectation under
        ′
either Pt−1|t × Qt or Qt−1,t .
Next, we put together the rates of the conditional moments. We use abbreviated notations as
Tp = Tp (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt ). To investigate the dominant term, we analyze the expected difference
of the first 8 moments in the Taylor expansion (20) separately. First, for any fixed xt ,
                                  EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [T1 ] = 0 = EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                                    ′     [T1 ] .

Also, for T2′ , note that for any random variable Z (regardless of its distribution) with EZ = 0 and
Cov(Z) = Σ, the mean of the quadratic form (with fixed matrix Ξ) is
                                       E[Z ⊺ ΞZ] = E[Tr (Z ⊺ ΞZ)] = Tr (ΞΣ) .
This implies that, for any fixed xt ,

                      1                                                   αt
EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
        ′     [T2′ ] = EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                               ′
                                                      ⊺    2
                                        (Xt−1 − µt ) ∇ log qt−1 (µt ) −        Bt (Xt−1 − µt )
                         2                                              1 − αt

                         1                            αt
                        = Tr    ∇2 log qt−1 (µt ) −        B t Σt
                         2                          1 − αt

                         1                            ⊺    2              αt
                        = EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (Xt−1 − µt ) ∇ log qt−1 (µt ) −        Bt (Xt−1 − µt )
                         2                                              1 − αt

                                                            40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     = EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [T2′ ].
Using Lemmas 7 and 8, the rate for T3 is

            EXt ∼Qt EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                            ′       [T3 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )]
                 = EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t [T3 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )]
                                d
                     (1 − αt )3 X                    3                       3
                 =         3/2
                                           EXt ∼Qt [∂ijk log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )].
                       3!αt      i,j,k=1

Using Lemmas 7 and 10, and when the partial derivatives satisfy Assumption 5, the rate for T5 , T7 ,
and Tp (p ≥ 8) can also be determined:

                EXt ∼Qt EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                  ′     [T5 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )]
                      = EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t [T5 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )]
                    = Õ((1 − αt )4 ),

                  EXt ∼Qt EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                  ′       [T7 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )]
                      = EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t [T7 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )]
                    = Õ((1 − αt )5 ),

                  EXt ∼Qt EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                                  ′       [Tp (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )]
                      = Õ((1 − αt )4 ), ∀p ≥ 8.

The remaining orders are T4 and T6 . The following proof will draw from the results in Lemmas 7
                                 i
to 9. Fix p ≥ 1. Write Zi = Xt−1     − µit and Aij = [At ]ij for i, j ∈ [d]. For T4 , let i, j, k, l ∈ [d] all
differ, and the difference (in expectation) of each term of T4 is
EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Zi4 ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                 ′   [Zi4 ]
                      2                                                  2
                            (1 − αt )3 2

           1 − αt                                                1 − αt
                                                                           (1 + Aii )2 + ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4

    =3                  +6         2   ∂ ii log q t (x t ) − 3
               αt               αt                                 αt
                        2
              1 − αt
                          (Aii )2 + ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4 ,

    = −3
                αt
EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Zi3 Zj ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                     ′   [Zi3 Zj ]
                                                    2
         (1 − αt )3 2

                                            1 − αt
                                                      Aij (1 + Aii ) + ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4

    =3               ∂ij log qt (xt ) − 3
             αt2                               αt
                        2
              1 − αt
                          Aij Aii + ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4 ,

    = −3
                 αt
EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Zi2 Zj2 ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                    ′    [Zi2 Zj2 ]
                    2                                                                     2
                          (1 − αt )3 2

         1 − αt                                              2                    1 − αt
                                                                                            (1 + Aii )(1 + Ajj )

    =                   +             ∂ii log q t (x t ) + ∂jj log qt (x t )  −
           αt                 αt2                                                   αt
       + ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4

                      2
            1 − αt
                          Aii Ajj + ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4 ,

    =−
               αt
EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Zi2 Zj Zk ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                       ′    [Zi2 Zj Zk ]
                                                  2
       (1 − αt )3 2

                                         1 − αt
                                                     (1 + Aii )Ajk + ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4

    =         2     ∂jk log qt (xt ) −
           αt                              αt
         (1 − αt )2 ii jk
                      A A + ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4 ,

    =−          2
              αt

                                                        41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             [Zi Zj Zk Zl ] = ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4 .

EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Zi Zj Zk Zl ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                       ′



Recall from (14) that At = (1 − αt )∇2 log qt (xt ) = ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt ) under Assumption 5. Hence,
many low-order terms above are cancelled, and we get

                                          [T4 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )] = ÕLp (Qt ) (1 − αt )4 .

          EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                   ′


Now we turn to T6 . Let i, j, k ∈ [d] all differ, and the difference (in expectation) of each lowest-order
term of T6 is
    EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Zi6 ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                   ′     [Zi6 ]
                           3                   3
                 1 − αt              1 − αt
        = 15                 − 15                (1 + Aii )3 + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ),
                    αt                 αt
    EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Zi4 Zj2 ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                        ′    [Zi4 Zj2 ]
                         3                 3
               1 − αt              1 − αt
        =3                   −3               (1 + Aii )2 (1 + Ajj ) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ),
                   αt                αt
    EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [Zi2 Zj2 Zk2 ] − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                            ′    [Zi2 Zj2 Zk2 ]
                        3                3
             1 − αt              1 − αt
        =                  −               (1 + Aii )(1 + Ajj )(1 + Akk ) + ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ).
               αt                  αt
Also, by Lemmas 7 and 9, the rest of the terms already satisfy ÕLp (Qt ) ((1−αt )4 ) under Assumption 5.
The low-order terms cancel in the same way as for T4 , and thus,

           EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                                      ′      [T6 (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )] = ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )4 ).

Therefore, the lowest order term above is T3 , whose order is ÕLp (Qt ) ((1 − αt )3 ). The proof is now
complete.
F.11 P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 3
The proof is very similar to Lemma 11 and (21), except with a perturbed covariance matrix. We
employ the notations Ãt and B̃t from Remark 3. Here we have that Ãt (Xt ) = At (Xt ) + Ξt (Xt ),
and thus, ∀r ≥ 1,
           B̃t (Xt ) = Bt (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 = At (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2


                     = (1 − αt )∇2 log qt (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 .


Compare with the proof of Lemma 11, the only difference is the expected difference of T2′ .  Since
Ãt (Xt ) = At (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 and B̃t (Xt ) = Bt (Xt ) + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 , the
expected differences of all higher order Tp ’s have the same rate as the non-perturbed case.
Now, for any fixed xt and r ≥ 1,
        EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                ′     [T2′ ]

          1                                                     αt
         =  EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t
                    ′       (Xt−1 − µt )⊺ ∇2 log qt−1 (µt ) −        B̃t (Xt−1 − µt )
          2                                                   1 − αt

          1                             αt
         = Tr     ∇2 log qt−1 (µt ) −        B̃t Σ̃t ,
          2                           1 − αt
and, from Lemma 8,
        EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t [T2′ ]

          1                            ⊺     2             αt
         = EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t (Xt−1 − µt ) ∇ log qt−1 (µt ) −        B̃t (Xt−1 − µt )
          2                                              1 − αt

          1                            αt
         = Tr    ∇2 log qt−1 (µt ) −        B̃t Σt .
          2                          1 − αt

                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus,
           EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t′     [T2′ (log qt−1 , Xt−1 , µt )]

            1           2                    αt
          = Tr       ∇ log qt−1 (µt ) −              B̃t     Σt − Σ̃t
            2                              1 − αt

              1 − αt            2                       αt
          =−          Tr     ∇ log qt−1 (µt ) −               B̃t Ξt
               2αt                                   1 − αt
              1 − αt
                      Tr ∇2 log qt−1 (µt ) − αt ∇2 log qt (Xt ) Ξt + ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )4 .

          =−
               2αt

Note that here the first term is in the order ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )3 under Assumption 5 since Ξt (Xt ) =

ÕLr (Qt ) (1 − αt )2 . Therefore, under the perturbed case,

                                                             ′
          EXt ∼Qt EXt−1 ∼Qt−1|t − EXt−1 ∼Pt−1|t    ′       [ζt,t−1 ]
                  1 − αt
                          EXt ∼Qt Tr ∇2 log qt−1 (µt (Xt )) − αt ∇2 log qt (Xt ) Ξt (Xt )

              =−
                   2αt
                               d
                (1 − αt )3 X                 3                       3
              +      3/2
                                   EXt ∼Qt [∂ijk log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )]
                 3!αt      i,j,k=1

               + Õ((1 − αt )4 ).
The final result can be achieved using (21). The proof is complete.
F.12 P ROOF OF L EMMA 12
From (1), the forward process at the first step is
                                           √       √
                                     x1 = α1 x0 + 1 − α1 w1
where w1 ∼ N (0, Id ) is independent of Q0 . Thus,
                               2                         √               √          2
   EX1 ∼Q1 ,X0 ∼Q0 ∥X1 − X0 ∥ = EW1 ∼N (0,Id ),X0 ∼Q0       1 − α1 W1 + ( αt − 1)X0
                                  (i)              √            2            √          2
                                  = EW1 ∼N (0,Id )   1 − α1 W1 + EX0 ∼Q0 ∥( αt − 1)X0 ∥
                                      (ii)            √
                                      ≤ (1 − α1 )d + ( α1 − 1)2 M2 d
                                      (iii)
                               ≤ (1 − α1 )(M2 + 1)d
where (i)
       √ follows from independence, (ii) follows from Assumption 1, and (iii) follows be-
cause ( z − 1)2 ≤ 1 − z for all z ∈ [0, 1]. The proof is complete since W2 (Q0 , Q1 )2 ≤
                          2
EX1 ∼Q1 ,X0 ∼Q0 ∥X1 − X0 ∥ by the definition of Wasserstein-2 distance.

G    P ROOF OF T HEOREMS 2 TO 4 AND 5
In this section, we instantiate Theorem 1 (along with Corollary 1) to provide upper bounds that have
explicit parameter dependency for a number of interesting distribution classes. In order to obtain an
upper bound that explicitly depends on system parameters, we need only to provide an explicit bound
on the reverse-step error, which is the main topic that we address in the following subsections.
G.1 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
We first introduce some relevant notations. Given that Q0 is Gaussian mixture, the p.d.f. of qt at each
time t ≥ 1 can be calculated as
                           Z                   N
                                               X
                  qt (x) =        qt|0 (x|x0 )   πn q0,n (x0 )dx0
                            x0 ∈Rd                 n=1
                           N
                           X          Z                                        N
                                                                               X
                       =         πn             qt|0 (x|x0 )q0,n (x0 )dx0 =:         πn qt,n (x).
                           n=1         x0 ∈Rd                                  n=1
Since the convolution of two Gaussian
                               √         density is still Gaussian, we have that qt,n is the p.d.f. of
N (µt,n , Σt,n ), where µt,n := ᾱt µ0,n and Σt,n := ᾱt Σ0,n + (1 − ᾱt )Id . Note that Σt,n has full
rank.


                                                         43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.1.1 C HECKING A SSUMPTION 4
We first verify Assumption 4 for Gaussian mixture Q0 for any αt that satisfies Definition 1. The
intuition is that its Gaussian-like tail (for all t ≥ 0) is sufficient to control all higher-order derivatives
of log qt .
In the following, Lemma 13 provides an upper bound on any order of partial derivative of a Gaussian
mixture density for any fixed xt , as long as each mixture component is well controlled. This
directly implies that the partial derivatives are also well controlled in expectation, and thus we verify
Assumption 4 for Gaussian mixture in Lemma 14.
Lemma
R          13. Let g(x|z) be the conditional Gaussian p.d.f. of N (µz , Σz ). Define q(x) :=
  g(x|z)dΠ(z), where Π(z) is a mixing distribution (and denote Z its support). Suppose b :=
supz∈Z ∥µz ∥ < ∞, and suppose the following conditions on Σz hold for all z ∈ Z:
        1. There exist u, U ∈ R such that u ≤ det(Σz ) ≤ U ;
        2. There exists V ∈ R such that Σ−1
                                         z  ≤V;
                                                                     −1
        3. There exists w ∈ R such that supz∈Z,i,j∈[d]2 [Σz 2 ]ij ≤ w.

Then,
                          (                                                                   )
                                          k                                      k
                            d2k max {w, 1} k k V (∥x∥2 +b2 )      d2k max {w, 1}
 ∂ak log q(x)    ≤ min C Bk     k
                                            U e 2            , Bk                  |polyk (x)| ,
                                 uk/2                                  uk/2
where Bk is the Bell number, C is some constant, and polyk (x) is some k-th order polynomial in x.

Proof. See Appendix H.1.
Lemma 14. When Q0 is Gaussian mixture (see Theorem 2), Assumption 4 is satisfied.

Proof. See Appendix H.2.
                         3
G.1.2 E XPRESSING ∂ijk       log qt
Now we continue from Theorem 1 to work for an explicit dependency on d. We first calculate the
second partial derivative of its log-p.d.f. as
            ∇2 log qt (x)
                                                                                        !
                1            X
                                               −1                       ⊺ −1       −1

            = 2     qt (x)       πn qt,n (x) Σt,n (x − µt,n )(x − µt,n ) Σt,n − Σt,n
             qt (x)           n
                                                  !                                  !⊺ !
                    X                                 X
                                   −1                                 −1
               −       πn qt,n (x)Σt,n (x − µt,n )        πn qt,n (x)Σt,n (x − µt,n )     .              (40)
                          n                                      n

Now write zt,n (x) := Σ−1                                 i       −1 ik
                           t,n (x − µt,n ). Note that ∂k zt,n = [Σt,n ] , and that ∂k qt,n (x) =
           k
qt,n (x)(−zt,n (x)). We can rewrite (40) as
                                                   N
                                       1          X
                                                                            j

                 2
                ∂ij log qt (x) =     2     qt (x)                   i
                                                       πn qt,n (x) zt,n (x)zt,n (x) − [Σ−1t,n ]
                                                                                                ij
                                    qt (x)        n=1
                                                  |                     {z                         }
                                                                        N1
                                                                  !                            !!
                                           X                          X               j
                                                           i
                                      −       πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)         πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)        .
                                             n                            n
                                         |                           {z                          }
                                                                     N2

To calculate the third partial derivative of its log-p.d.f., we need first to calculate the partial derivative
of N1 and N2. The derivative for N1 is given by
                         N
                         X
                                                    j
                    ∂k                      i
                               πn qt,n (x) zt,n (x)zt,n (x) − [Σ−1
                                                                t,n ]ij

                         n=1


                                                          44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           N
                           X
                                                                  j
                       =                        k
                                  πn qt,n (x)(−zt,n       i
                                                    (x)) zt,n (x)zt,n (x) − [Σ−1
                                                                              t,n ]
                                                                                   ij

                           n=1
                                  N
                                  X
                                                          ik j
                              +         πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1                            −1 jk i
                                                     t,n ] zt,n (x) + πn qt,n (x)[Σt,n ] zt,n (x),
                                  n=1

and the derivative for term N2 is given by
                     N                            N
                                                                                  !
                     X                            X                 j
                                       i
              ∂k           πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)          πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)
                     n=1                          n=1
                    N
                    X                                                              N
                                                                                   X                  j
              =                          k
                          πn qt,n (x) (−zt,n      i
                                             (x))zt,n (x) + [Σ−1
                                                              t,n ]
                                                                   ik
                                                                                          πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)
                   n=1                                                             n=1
                          N
                          X                            N
                                                       X
                                                                                    j
                      +                     i
                                πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)                        k
                                                            πn qt,n (x) (−zt,n (x))zt,n (x) + [Σ−1
                                                                                                t,n ]
                                                                                                     jk
                                                                                                          .
                          n=1                         n=1

Combining these, the derivative for the numerator is
∂k (qt (x)N1 − N2) = ∂k (qt (x))N1 + qt (x)∂k (N1) − ∂k (N2)
       XN                      N
                               X
                                                      j
 =−                    k
           πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)                i
                                 πn qt,n (x) zt,n (x)zt,n (x) − [Σ−1
                                                                  t,n ]
                                                                        ij

        n=1                          n=1
                      N
                      X
                                                           j
        + qt (x)                         k
                           πn qt,n (x)(−zt,n       i
                                             (x)) zt,n (x)zt,n (x) − [Σ−1
                                                                       t,n ]
                                                                            ij

                     n=1
                                                                                      !
                            ik j
        + πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1                            −1 jk i
                       t,n ] zt,n (x) + πn qt,n (x)[Σt,n ] zt,n (x)

            N
            X                                                             N
                                                                          X                   j
        −                        k
                  πn qt,n (x) (−zt,n      i
                                     (x))zt,n (x) + [Σ−1
                                                      t,n ]
                                                           ik
                                                                                  πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)
            n=1                                                             n=1
            N
            X                            N
                                         X
                                                                       j
        −                     i
                  πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)                         k
                                               πn qt,n (x) (−zt,n (x))zt,n (x) + [Σ−1
                                                                                   t,n ]
                                                                                        jk

            n=1                          n=1
              N
              X                                                       N
                                                                      X                           N
                                                                                                  X
                                 i       j       k                                      k                            i       j
= −qt (x)            πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n (x) −                  πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)          πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n (x)
              n=1                                                     n=1                         n=1
            N
            X                            N
                                         X                                            N
                                                                                      X                           N
                                                                                                                  X
                              j                            i       k                                    i                           j       k
        +         πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)          πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n (x) +                πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)         πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n (x)
            n=1                          n=1                                          n=1                         n=1
                   N
                   X                                            N
                                                                X                             N
                                                                                              X
        + qt (x)         πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1   ij k
                                      t,n ] zt,n (x) +                πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1
                                                                                   t,n ]
                                                                                        ij                       k
                                                                                                     πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)
                   n=1                                          n=1                           n=1
                   N
                   X                                            N
                                                                X                              N
                                                                                               X
                                           ik j                                                                  j
        + qt (x)         πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1
                                      t,n ] zt,n (x) −                πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1
                                                                                   t,n ]
                                                                                        ik
                                                                                                     πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)
                   n=1                                          n=1                            n=1
                   N
                   X                                            N
                                                                X                             N
                                                                                              X
        + qt (x)         πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1   jk i
                                      t,n ] zt,n (x) −
                                                                                  i
                                                                      πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)            πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1   jk
                                                                                                                  t,n ] .
                   n=1                                          n=1                           n=1

Since

  3                              qt (x)N1 − N2
 ∂ijk log qt (x) = ∂k
                                      qt2 (x)
                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                               !
                          1                                                                          X
                                                                                                                        k
                      = 3            ∂k (qt (x)N1 − N2)qt (x) + 2(qt (x)N1 − N2)                            πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)    ,
                       qt (x)                                                                        n=1


                                                                 45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we get
qt3 (x)∂ijk
        3
            log qt (x)
             N
             X                                                          N
                                                                        X                           N
                                                                                                    X
                                       j                                                                                      j
= −qt2 (x)                     i
                   πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n     k
                                           (x)zt,n (x) + qt (x)                           k
                                                                              πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)                     i
                                                                                                          πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n (x)
             n=1                                                        n=1                         n=1
                  N
                  X                           N
                                              X
                                    j                           i       k
      + qt (x)          πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)         πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n (x)
                  n=1                         n=1
                  N
                  X                           N
                                              X
                                    i                           j       k
      + qt (x)          πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)         πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)zt,n (x)
                  n=1                         n=1
                                        !                                 !     N
                                                                                                            !
             X                                 X                 j
                                                                                X
                               i                                                                  k
      −2           πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)               πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)              πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)
              n                                 n                               n=1
                  N
                  X                                               N
                                                                  X                            N
                                                                                               X
      + qt2 (x)         πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1   ij k
                                     t,n ] zt,n (x) − qt (x)            πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1
                                                                                     t,n ]
                                                                                          ij                     k
                                                                                                     πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)
                  n=1                                             n=1                          n=1
                  N
                  X                                               N
                                                                  X                            N
                                                                                               X
                                          ik j                                                                   j
      + qt2 (x)         πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1
                                     t,n ] zt,n (x) − qt (x)            πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1
                                                                                     t,n ]
                                                                                          ik
                                                                                                     πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)
                  n=1                                             n=1                          n=1
                  N
                  X                                               N
                                                                  X                            N
                                                                                               X
      + qt2 (x)         πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1   jk i
                                     t,n ] zt,n (x) − qt (x)
                                                                                    i
                                                                        πn qt,n (x)zt,n (x)          πn qt,n (x)[Σ−1   jk
                                                                                                                  t,n ] .
                  n=1                                             n=1                          n=1


Below, we write ξt (x, i) := maxn zt,n i
                                          (x) and Σ̄ to be a matrix such that Σ̄ij := maxn [Σ−1   ij
                                                                                             t,n ] .
                                                              PN
Also write ht,n (x) = πn qt,n (x)/qt (x). Note that for any x, n=1 ht,n (x) = 1. Therefore, we take
maxn within each summation above and get
       3
      ∂ijk log qt (x) ≤ 6ξt (x, i)ξt (x, j)ξt (x, k) + 2Σ̄ij ξt (x, k) + 2Σ̄ik ξt (x, j) + 2Σ̄jk ξt (x, i).

G.1.3 A SYMPTOTIC E QUIVALENCE OF µt (xt ) AND xt
Intuitively, µt (xt ) and xt are asymptotically close when 1 − αt is small, which will be useful for
later analysis. In this subsubsection, we will show that ξt−1 (µt , i) − ξt (xt , i) = Õ(1 − αt ).
Note that for each n and fixed xt (writing µt (xt ) = µt ),
              zt−1,n (µt ) − zt,n (xt )
                  = Σ−1                      −1
                     t−1,n (µt − µt−1,n ) − Σt,n (xt − µt,n )

                  = (Σ−1       −1                     −1
                      t−1,n − Σt,n )(µt − µt−1,n ) − Σt,n ((xt − µt,n ) − (µt − µt−1,n )).                              (41)
Here, since Σt−1,n is real symmetric, we can write the eigen-decomposition as Σt−1,n = U DU ⊺ ,
where U is an orthonormal matrix (having unit 2-norm) and D is a diagonal matrix (with all diagonal
elements positive). In the same notation, Σ−1t−1,n = U D    U , and Σ−1
                                                          −1 ⊺
                                                                        t,n = (αt Σt−1,n + (1 −
        −1                        −1 ⊺
αt )Id ) = U (αt D + (1 − αt )Id ) U . Since
                                                                           1            1
                   [D−1 ]ii − [(αt D + (1 − αt )Id )−1 ]ii =                ii
                                                                               −     ii
                                                                          D      αt D + (1 − αt )
                                                                           (1 − αt )( Dii + 1)
                                                                   ≤
                                                                         αt (Dii )2 + (1 − αt )Dii
                                                                   = Õ(1 − αt ),
the following holds:
                                            Σ−1       −1
                                             t−1,n − Σt,n = Õ(1 − αt ).
Denote [A]i∗ as the i-th row of a matrix A. Thus, following from (41), for any i ∈ [d],
                                                           (i)
                             [Σ−1     i∗   −1 i∗
                               t−1,n ] − [Σt,n ] ≤ Σ−1       −1
                                                    t−1,n − Σt,n = Õ(1 − αt ),                                         (42)


                                                             46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                √
                                            1 − αt i 1 − αt
                          µit − xit     =     √      xt − √    ∂i log qt (xt ) = Õ(1 − αt ),
                                                αt          αt
                                                               √
                                         µit,n − µit−1,n = (1 − αt )µit−1,n = Õ(1 − αt ),
where (i) follows from the definition of matrix 2-norm and from the fact that [Σ−1    i∗   −1
                                                                                 t,n ] = Σt,n 1i (1i
                                                                 −1
is the unit vector where the i-th element is 1, and recall that Σt,n is symmetric). This implies that
   i             i
 zt−1,n (µt ) − zt,n (xt ) = Õ(1 − αt ), ∀i. Thus,
                                                         i                  i
                      ξt−1 (µt , i) − ξt (xt , i) = max zt−1,n (µt ) − max zt,n (xt )
                                                            n                          n
                                                               i              i
                                                        ≤ max zt−1,n (µt ) − zt,n (xt ) = Õ(1 − αt ),                   (43)
                                                            n

where the last inequality follows because maxn |an |+maxn |bn | ≥ maxn (|an |+|bn |) ≥ maxn |an +
bn |.
Following from Theorem 1, we have
                                                        
           Xd
                 3                       3
EXt ∼Qt        ∂ijk log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )
           i,j,k=1
             "        d
                      X
≤ EXt ∼Qt                       6ξ(µt (Xt ), i)ξ(µt (Xt ), j)ξ(µt (Xt ), k) + 2Σ̄ij ξ(µt (Xt ), k) + 2Σ̄ik ξ(µt (Xt ), j)
                  i,j,k=1
                                                                                                                                #

       + 2Σ̄ ξ(µt (Xt ), i) 6ξ(Xt , i)ξ(Xt , j)ξ(Xt , k) + 2Σ̄ij ξ(Xt , k) + 2Σ̄ik ξ(Xt , j) + 2Σ̄jk ξ(Xt , i)
            jk


                                                                                                                  
                       d
(ii)                   X                                                                                         2
                                 ξ(Xt , i)ξ(Xt , j)ξ(Xt , k) + Σ̄ij ξ(Xt , k) + Σ̄ik ξ(Xt , j) + Σ̄jk ξ(Xt , i) 

 ≍ EXt ∼Qt 
                   i,j,k=1
                                                                                                                                   
                       d
                       X
≤ 2EXt ∼Qt                     ξ(Xt , i)2 ξ(Xt , j)2 ξ(Xt , k)2 + (Σ̄ij )2 ξ(Xt , k)2 + (Σ̄ik )2 ξ(Xt , j)2 + (Σ̄jk )2 ξ(Xt , i)2 
                      i,j,k=1
                                                                                                                         (44)
where (ii) follows from (43).
G.1.4 E XPLICIT PARAMETER D EPENDENCY
We are now ready for the explicit parameter dependency for Gaussian mixture Q0 . In the following,
we provide two different ways to upper-bound the terms in (44) depending on how N is compared to
d. The first approach can be applied when N < d. For the ξ(x, ·) (∀x ∈ Rd ) terms,
            d
            X                          d
                                       X                                            d X
                                                                                    X N
                      ξ(x, i)2 =             max([Σ−1   i∗           2
                                                   t,n ] (x − µt,n )) ≤                    ([Σ−1   i∗
                                                                                              t,n ] (x − µt,n ))
                                                                                                                 2
                                                 n
            i=1                        i=1                                          i=1 n=1
                                       N
                                       X                            2                         2                     2
                                 =               Σ−1
                                                  t,n (x − µt,n )       ≤ N max Σ−1
                                                                                 t,n              max ∥x − µt,n ∥
                                                                                n                  n
                                       n=1
                                 (i)
                                                                2
                                 ≲ N max ∥x − µt,n ∥ ,
                                             n

where (i) follows because of the following. Since Σt,n is a (full-rank) covariance matrix, all its
eigenvalues are positive. Let λn,min > 0 be the smallest eigenvalue of Σ0,n , and thus
                                                     1                          1
             max Σ−1
                  t,n 2 ≤                                             ≤                      < ∞.                        (45)
                  n                      ᾱt minn λn,min + (1 − ᾱt )   min{1, minn λn,min }
In particular, this bound does not depend on d or T . Also, for the Σ̄ terms,
          d                       d                                 d X
                                                                      N                            N
          X                       X
                                               −1 ij 2
                                                                    X                              X          2
                 (Σ̄ij )2 =              max([Σt,n ] ) ≤                    ([Σ−1   ij 2
                                                                               t,n ] ) =                 Σ−1
                                                                                                          t,n F ≲ N d,
                                             n
          i,j=1                  i,j=1                              i,j=1 n=1                      n=1


                                                                     47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where
√       the last inequality follows from (45) and the fact that for any matrix full-rank A, ∥A∥F ≤
  d ∥A∥2 . The second approach can be applied when N ≥ d, where we can bound the ξ(x, ·) (∀x ∈
Rd ) terms instead as
           d
           X                     d
                                 X
                 ξ(x, i)2 =            max([Σ−1   i∗
                                             t,n ] (x − µt,n ))
                                                               2
                                         n
           i=1                   i=1
                d
           (ii) X                                                                d
                                                2                   2
                                                                                 X                           2                     2
           ≤           max       [Σ−1
                                   t,n ]
                                        i∗
                                                    ∥x − µt,n ∥             ≤          max [Σ−1
                                                                                             t,n ]
                                                                                                  i∗
                                                                                                                 max ∥x − µt,n ∥
                        n                                                                  n                      n
                 i=1                                                             i=1
                 d
           (iii) X                                                          (iv)
                                         2                              2                                    2
           ≤           max Σ−1
                            t,n              max ∥x − µt,n ∥                ≲ d max ∥x − µt,n ∥ .
                        n                      n                                       n
                 i=1

Here (ii) follows from Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, (iii) follows from definition of matrix 2-norm
and the fact that [Σ−1   i∗  −1
                    t,n ] = Σt,n 1i (1i is the unit vector where the i-th element is 1), and (iv) follows
from (45). Also, for the second term, we can obtain an alternative upper bound as follows. Write
the eigen-decomposition as Σ0,n = Qn diag(λn,1 , . . . , λn,d )Q⊺n , where Qn here is an orthonormal
matrix (that does not depend on T ). Then,
                 Σ−1
                  t,n = Qn (ᾱt diag(λn,1 , . . . , λn,d ) + (1 − ᾱt )Id )
                                                                           −1 ⊺
                                                                             Qn
                       = Qn diag((ᾱt λn,1 + (1 − ᾱt ))−1 , . . . , (ᾱt λn,d + (1 − ᾱt ))−1 )Q⊺n ,
and thus
                                                         d
                                                         X
                   max [Σ−1
                         t,n ]
                              ij
                                 = max                       (ᾱt λn,k + (1 − ᾱt ))−1 Qik kj
                                                                                        n Qn
                   n∈[N ]                       n∈[N ]
                                                         k=1
                                             ≤ (min{1, min λn,min })−1                             max   (Qi∗ ⊺  j∗
                                                                                                           n ) (Qn )
                                                           n                            n∈[N ],i,j∈[d]
                                                                                                                  2
                                             ≤ (min{1, min λn,min })−1                         max       Qi∗
                                                                                                          n
                                                           n                            n∈[N ],i∈[d]

                                             = (min{1, min λn,min })−1 ,
                                                           n

where the last line follows because Qn is orthonormal for all n ∈ [N ]. Note that this is a uniform
bound that does not depend on N , T or d, which further implies that
                                                          d
                                                          X
                                                                   (Σ̄ij )2 ≲ d2 .
                                                         i,j=1

Combining the two cases, we get
                                   d
                                   X                                                                     2
                                             ξ(x, i)2 ≲ min{d, N } max ∥x − µt,n ∥ ,                                                   (46)
                                                                                   n
                                       i=1
                                       d
                                       X
                                               (Σ̄ij )2 ≲ d min{d, N }.                                                                (47)
                                       i,j=1

Therefore, using (46) and (47), we can continue from (44) and get
                                                           
              Xd
                     3                      3
  EXt ∼Qt         ∂ijk log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )
                 i,j,k=1
                                       h                     i
                                             6             6
                  ≲ min{d, N }3 EXt ∼Qt ∥Xt ∥ + max ∥µt,n ∥ + (d min{d, N })(d min{d, N }).
                                                                             n


Now, note that
                                                               6                               6
                                               max ∥µt,n ∥ ≤ max ∥µ0,n ∥ ≲ d3
                                                n                           n


                                                                        48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


since µ0,n < ∞ is a fixed vector. Also, the expected sixth power of the norm can be bounded as
                      √           √

            6                                  2 3            6            6          6
    E ∥Xt ∥ = E         ᾱt X0 + 1 − ᾱt W̄t         ≲ E ∥X0 ∥ + E W̄t ≲ E ∥X0 ∥ + d3 ,

and, when Q0 is a Gaussian mixture,
                   Z                     N
                                         X   Z
                          6                        6
                     ∥x0 ∥ q0 (x0 )dx0 =   πn ∥x0 ∥ q0,n (x0 )dx0 ≍ d3 .
                                                    n=1

Therefore, we finally obtain a bound on the reverse-step error with explicit system parameters:
              T
                                   "                       #
            X                           qt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )     d3 min{d, N }3 log3 T
                 EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t log ′                     ≲                        .
             t=1
                                        pt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )               T2

G.2 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
Throughout the proof of Theorem 3 we adopt the noise schedule αt defined in (10). We first
investigate some nice properties of the noise schedule in (10). Since c ≍ log(1/δ), we have
1 − αt ≲ log(1/δ) log T /T . Using a similar argument from (Li et al., 2024c, Equation (39)),
               1 − αt 1 − αt 1 − αt              log(1/δ) log T
                        ,      ,             ≲                  , ∀2 ≤ t ≤ T,                        (48)
               αt − ᾱt 1 − ᾱt 1 − ᾱt−1              T

                1 − ᾱt          ᾱt−1 (1 − αt )      1 − αt          log T
                          −1=                     ≤            = Õ           , ∀2 ≤ t ≤ T.
               1 − ᾱt−1            1 − ᾱt−1        1 − ᾱt−1          T
We note that Li et al. (2024c) does not highlight δ dependency in their results. Also, note that if T is
large,
                                                    T
                                          c log T log T
                                  δ 1+                  ≍ δec ≥ 1.
                                             T
Thus, with any fixed r ∈ (0, 1) such that t ≥ rT (≥ logT T ), we have
                                            (                  t )
                               c log T              c log T           c log T
                    1 − αt =           min δ 1 +                 ,1 =         .
                                  T                     T                T

As a result,
          T                                 ⌈(1−r)T ⌉
          Y                      c log T                                    c log T
 ᾱT ≤             αt =       1−                        ≍ exp ⌈(1 − r)T ⌉ −            = Õ(T −(1−r)c ).
                                    T                                          T
         t=⌊rT ⌋
                                                                                             (49)
Given any c > 2, we can always find some r such that (1 − r)c > 2. For example, this is satisfied
when r = (c −
              2)/4 if c ∈ (2, 4) and r = 1/4 otherwise. This shows that the αt in (10) satisfies
ᾱT = o T −2 if c > 2. Therefore, the αt in (10) satisfies Definition 1.
Since the parameter dependency is clear in the bound for the initialization and estimation errors
(Lemmas 3 and 4), it remains to provide a bound on the reverse-step error that depends explicitly on
the system parameters, which is the main topic below.
G.2.1 C HECKING A SSUMPTION 5
Instead of Assumption 4, we check the more general Assumption 5 below. In particular, we verify
Assumption 5 with the αt in (10). In the following, Lemma 15 is used to establish the first half
of Assumption 5. Next, the following Lemma 16 is used to establish the behavior of the expected
moments under the perturbed posterior Q0|t−1 (·|µt (Xt )) when Xt ∼ Qt . Both Lemmas 15 and 17
will be useful for establishing the second half of Assumption 5 with the αt in (10).
Lemma 15. For all t ≥ 1, ℓ ≥ 1, and a ∈ [d]p such that |a| = p ≥ 1,

                                                               ℓ      dpℓ/2
                                   EXt ∼Qt |∂ap log qt (Xt )| ≲                   .
                                                                   (1 − ᾱt )pℓ/2

                                                          49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. See Appendix H.3.
Lemma 16. For all t ≥ 2 and p ≥ 1, with the αt in (10),
                       √
      Z
                                  p
            ∥µt (xt ) − ᾱt−1 x0 ∥ dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (xt ))dQt (xt ) ≲ dp/2 (1 − ᾱt−1 )p/2 .
           x0 ,xt


Proof. See Appendix H.4.

Finally, the following Lemma 17 verifies the second half of Assumption 5 with the αt defined in (10).
Lemma 17. For all t ≥ 2, ℓ ≥ 1, and a ∈ [d] such that |a| = p ≥ 1, with the αt in (10),

                                                               ℓ            dpℓ/2
                           EXt ∼Qt |∂ap log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))| ≲                           .
                                                                        (1 − ᾱt−1 )pℓ/2
Combining this with Lemma 15, Assumption 5 holds.

Proof. See Appendix H.5.

Now, Assumption 5 is satisfied since 1−1ᾱt ≤ 1−α  1
                                                     1
                                                        = δ −1 for all t ≥ 1 if δ is constant. Thus,
if δ is a constant, Assumption 4 is already satisfied (as is Assumption 5). This is not necessary,
however, when δ = 1/poly(T ) is vanishing with T . Fortunately, in this case, from (48), we still get
  1−αt
1−ᾱt−1 = Õ(1 − αt ). Thus, Assumption 5 is still satisfied.

                       3
G.2.2     E XPRESSING ∂ijk log qt
We begin by investigating ∇2 log qt (t ≥ 2), for which we can derive the Hessian of log qt (x) as
                         R                                 !
 2                ∂        x0 ∈Rd
                                  ∇qt|0 (x|x0 )dQ0 (x0 )
∇ log qt (x) =             R
                  ∂x                q (x|x0 )dQ0 (x0 )
                            x0 ∈Rd t|0
                                                  R                                    R                                   ⊺
   qt (x) x0 ∈Rd ∇2 qt|0 (x|x0 )dQ0 (x0 ) − x0 ∈Rd ∇qt|0 (x|x0 )dQ0 (x0 )
          R
                                                                                         x0 ∈Rd ∇qt|0 (x|x 0 )dQ  0 (x 0 )
=
                                                            qt2 (x)
                                                           √                √
                               Z
            1
                                        qt|0 (x|x0 ) (x − ᾱt x0 )(x − ᾱt x0 )⊺ − (1 − ᾱt )Id dQ0 (x0 )

=             2 2       qt (x)
   (1 − ᾱt ) qt (x)             x0 ∈Rd
                                                                                                          ⊺
                                    √                                                  √
      Z                                                  Z
  −             qt|0 (x|x0 )(x − ᾱt x0 )dQ0 (x0 )                   qt|0 (x|x0 )(x − ᾱt x0 )dQ0 (x0 )
         x0 ∈Rd                                              x0 ∈Rd
                                                          √                 √

        1                 1
                                   EX0 ∼Q0|t (·|x) (x − ᾱt X0 )(x − ᾱt X0 )⊺

=−            Id +             2
      1 − ᾱt       (1 − ᾱt )
                               √                                    √

                                                                               ⊺
  − EX0 ∼Q0|t (·|x) x − ᾱt X0               EX0 ∼Q0|t (·|x) x − ᾱt X0             .                         (50)

For the third-order partial derivatives, we employ the notation
                                                    √
                                                x − ᾱt x0
                                           z :=            .
                                                  1 − ᾱt
Note that ∂k qt|0 (x|x0 ) = qt|0 (x|x0 )(−z k ). Then, we can write (50) as
                                       Z
    2                    1
   ∂ij log qt (x) =            q t (x)   qt|0 (x|x0 )z i z j dQ0 (x0 )
                      qt2 (x)
                                       |            {z              }
                                                    N1
                                       Z                           Z
                                                                                              1
                                    − qt|0 (x|x0 )z i dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 )z j dQ0 (x0 ) −         Id .
                                                                                            1 − ᾱt
                                       |                          {z                   }
                                                                   N2



                                                       50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that the last term is a constant. The derivative for term N1 is given by
                      Z
                    ∂k qt|0 (x|x0 )z i z j dQ0 (x0 )
                       Z
                     = qt|0 (x|x0 )(−z k )z i z j + 1(k = i)qt|0 (x|x0 )(1 − ᾱt )−1 z j

                            + 1(k = j)qt|0 (x|x0 )(1 − ᾱt )−1 z i dQ0 (x0 ),
and the derivative for term N2 is given by
     Z                          Z
                      i                        j
 ∂k      qt|0 (x|x0 )z dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 )z dQ0 (x0 )
    Z                                                            Z
                         k i                       −1
                                                        dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 )z j dQ0 (x0 )

  = qt|0 (x|x0 ) (−z )z + 1(k = i)(1 − ᾱt )
         Z                        Z
      + qt|0 (x|x0 )z i dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 ) (−z k )z j + 1(k = j)(1 − ᾱt )−1 dQ0 (x0 )


     Z                                                              Z
                         k i                                 −1
  =      qt|0 (x|x0 )(−z )z dQ0 (x0 ) + 1(k = i)(1 − ᾱt ) qt (x)        qt|0 (x|x0 )z j dQ0 (x0 )
         Z                         Z
                         i                              k j                                 −1
      + qt|0 (x|x0 )z dQ0 (x0 )        qt|0 (x|x0 )(−z )z dQ0 (x0 ) + 1(k = j)(1 − ᾱt ) qt (x) .

Combining these, the derivative for the numerator is given by
                       ∂k (qt (x)N1 − N2) = ∂k (qt (x))N1 + qt (x)∂k (N1) − ∂k (N2)
                                  Z
                        = −qt (x) qt|0 (x|x0 )z i z j z k dQ0 (x0 )
                                Z                          Z
                              − qt|0 (x|x0 )z dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 )z i z j dQ0 (x0 )
                                              k

                                Z                          Z
                              + qt|0 (x|x0 )z j dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 )z i z k dQ0 (x0 )
                                Z                          Z
                              + qt|0 (x|x0 )z i dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 )z j z k dQ0 (x0 ).

Thus,

         3                     qt (x)N1 − N2
        ∂ijk log qt (x) = ∂k
                                    qt2 (x)
                                                                         Z
               1
         = 3         ∂k (qt (x)N1 − N2)qt (x) + 2(qt (x)N1 − N2) qt|0 (x|x0 )z k dQ0 (x0 )
            qt (x)
                                Z
               1
         = 3          − qt2 (x) qt|0 (x|x0 )z i z j z k dQ0 (x0 )
            qt (x)
                              X            Z                           Z
              + qt (x)                       qt|0 (x|x0 )z a1 dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 )z a2 z a3 dQ0 (x0 )
                             a1 =i,j,k
                         a2 <a3 , a2 ,a3 ̸=a1
                   Z                                Z                              Z
                                        i                               j                         k
           − 2 qt|0 (x|x0 )z dQ0 (x0 ) qt|0 (x|x0 )z dQ0 (x0 )                         qt|0 (x|x0 )z dQ0 (x0 )
           Z
        = − z i z j z k dQ0|t (x0 |x)
                     X          Z                     Z
           +                        z a1 dQ0|t (x0 |x) z a2 z a3 dQ0|t (x0 |x)
                     a1 =i,j,k
                 a2 <a3 , a2 ,a3 ̸=a1
                   Z                        Z                       Z
              −2       z i dQ0|t (x0 |x)        z j dQ0|t (x0 |x)       z k dQ0|t (x0 |x)                         (51)


                                                            51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2.3 E XPLICIT PARAMETER D EPENDENCY
By Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, we have
                                                        
           Xd
                 3                       3
 EXt ∼Qt       ∂ijk log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )
              i,j,k=1
    v                                        v                               
    u                                            u
    u          d
               X                           2     u          d
                                                            X                 2
  ≤ tEXt ∼Qt       3 log q
                   ∂ijk                       × tEXt ∼Qt       3 log q (X ) .
                           t−1 (µt (Xt ))                       ∂ijk
    u                                            u
                                                                        t  t
                       i,j,k=1                                                      i,j,k=1

                                                                                                            (52)
We now analyze the two terms in (52) separately.
                                                                          √
We begin with the second term in (52). Recall that Z = Xt −1−ᾱᾱtt X0 is standard Gaussian under Q0,t .
                                                                      6
Also note that for a standard Gaussian random variable Z, E ∥Z∥ = d(d + 2)(d + 4) ≲ d3 . Now,
substituting (51) into the second term of (52), we get
  X d              Z                                2
         EXt ∼Qt       z i z j z k dQ0|t (x0 |Xt )
 i,j,k=1
                                  i √                                          √                  √
                                                                                     !2                   
                            d                  2                                                         2
       1                  X      Xt − ᾱt X0i                           Xtj − ᾱt X0j      Xtk − ᾱt X0k 
 ≤            EX ,X ∼Q
                                  √                                       √                  √
   (1 − ᾱt )3 0 t 0,t               1 − ᾱt                                 1 − ᾱt            1 − ᾱt
                        i,j,k=1
                                     √        6
        1                    Xt − ᾱt X0
 =              E X ,X ∼Q        √
    (1 − ᾱt )3 0 t 0,t            1 − ᾱt
        1             6
  =             E ∥Z∥
    (1 − ᾱt )3
       d3
  ≲             ,
    (1 − ᾱt )3
and
    Xd              Z                  Z                  2
                         i                 j k
         EXt ∼Qt        z dQ0|t (x0 |x) z z dQ0|t (x0 |x)
   i,j,k=1
                                                                                   
                       Z                    2   d  Z
                                                X                                 2
   = EXt ∼Qt              zdQ0|t (x0 |x)                   z j z k dQ0|t (x0 |x) 
                                                j,k=1
                                                                                                        2/3
                                                                                                       2 3/2
                                                !1/3              
                       Z                    6                         d  Z
                                                                      X
   ≤                       zdQ0|t (x0 |x)                                        z j z k dQ0|t (x0 |x)  
                                                                                                            
           EXt ∼Qt                                      EXt ∼Qt 
                                                                     j,k=1
                                 √          6
                           Xt − ᾱt X0
   ≤ EX0 ,Xt ∼Q0,t
                              1 − ᾱt
         1              6
   =             E ∥Z∥
     (1 − ᾱt )3
        d3
   ≲             ,
     (1 − ᾱt )3
and
           Xd               Z                    Z                   Z                     2
                   EXt ∼Qt    z i dQ0|t (x0 |Xt ) z j dQ0|t (x0 |Xt ) z k dQ0|t (x0 |Xt )
             i,j,k=1

                               d  Z       √                       2 !3
                              X     Xti − ᾱt xi0
             = EXt ∼Qt                            dQ0|t (x0 |Xt )
                              i=1
                                       1 − ᾱt


                                                             52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                  √                      6
                                             Xt − ᾱt x0
                                         Z
                   1
             =             EX ∼Q              √          dQ0|t (x0 |Xt )
               (1 − ᾱt )3 t t                  1 − ᾱt
                   1            6
             ≤             E ∥Z∥
               (1 − ᾱt )3
                  d3
             ≲             .
               (1 − ᾱt )3
Thus, the second term of (52) satisfies that
                                                               
                                     d
                                    X
                                             3
                                                              2                 d3
                       EXt ∼Qt             ∂ijk log qt (Xt )  ≲                        .
                                                                             (1 − ᾱt )3
                                         i,j,k=1

                                                                       √
                                                                µ (X )− ᾱ   X
Now we turn to the first term in (52). Note that Z = t t1−ᾱt−1t−1 0 . While Z is no longer standard
Gaussian under Q0,t , we can still achieve moment bounds using Lemma 16. Now, substituting (51)
into the first term of (52), we apply Lemma 16 and get
          X d             Z                                       2
                 EXt ∼Qt      z i z j z k dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt ))
          i,j,k=1
                                                                    √                  6
                          1                               µt (Xt ) − ᾱt−1 X0                      d3
                 ≤                EX ∼Q     (·|µ  (X   ))      √                           ≲                 ,
                     (1 − ᾱt−1 )3 0 0|t−1
                                        Xt ∼Qt
                                                t    t
                                                                 1 − ᾱt−1                     (1 − ᾱt−1 )3
and similarly,
 d
 X                    Z                              Z                                 2
                           i                              j k
          EXt ∼Qt         z dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt ))       z z dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt ))
i,j,k=1

        d3
      ≲           ,
    (1 − ᾱt−1 )3
 d
 X          Z                              Z                          Z                            2
   EXt ∼Qt       z i dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt )) z j dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt )) z k dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt ))
i,j,k=1

               d3
      ≲                  .
           (1 − ᾱt−1 )3
Thus, the first term of (52) satisfies that
                                                                   
                                  d
                                 X
                                          3
                                                                  2                d3
                    EXt ∼Qt             ∂ijk log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))  ≲                        .
                                                                               (1 − ᾱt−1 )3
                                   i,j,k=1

                                 log(1/δ) log T
Finally, since 1−α t    1−αt
               1−ᾱt , 1−ᾱt−1 ≲       T        , we arrive at
                                                                         
                              d
              3
                             X
                                   3                        3                 d3 log3 (1/δ) log3 T
    (1 − αt ) EXt ∼Qt           ∂ijk log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt ) ≲                      .
                                                                                       T3
                               i,j,k=1

Summation over t ≥ 2 gives us the desirable result.
G.3 T HEOREM 5 AND ITS P ROOF
Before we enter the proof of Theorem 4, we introduce an intermediate result which might have
independent interest. Previously, for regular samplers, linear dimensional dependency can be shown
when all Qt ’s (∀t ≥ 0) have Lipschitz score (Chen et al., 2023a;d). The following Theorem 5
provides an accelerated convergence guarantee when all Qt ’s (∀t ≥ 0) have Lipschitz Hessians.
Theorem 5 (Accelerated Sampler for All-Path Lipschitz Hessians). Suppose that ∇2 log qt (x), ∀t ≥
0 is 2-norm M -Lipschitz, i.e., ∃M > 0 such that
                                  ∇2 log qt (x) − ∇2 log qt (y) ≤ M ∥x − y∥                                      (53)


                                                          53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for all x, y ∈ Rd and t ≥ 0. Then, under Assumptions 1, 3 and 5, if the αt satisfies Definition 1, the
distribution Pb0′ from the accelerated sampler satisfies
                                       d2 M 2 log3 T                 log2 T 2
                      KL(Q0 ||Pb0′ ) ≲               + (log T )ε 2
                                                                   +       εH .
                                            T2                         T
G.3.1 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5
In order to continue from Theorem 1 (in particular, the reverse-step error in (26)), we need to introduce
some useful notations for the distribution class in (53). For a matrix A, define its vectorization as
                                                                2                2
vec(A) := [A11 , . . . , A1d , . . . , Ad1 , . . . , Add ]⊺ ∈ Rd . Define Kt ∈ Rd ×d to be the matrix that
reorganizes the third-order partial derivative tensor, i.e.,
                 [Kt (x)]mk := ∂ijk
                                3
                                    log qt (x), s.t. m = (i − 1)d + j, ∀i, j, k ∈ [d].
                                                                         2
With these notations, consider y = x + ξu where u ∈ Rd satisfies ∥u∥ = 1 and ξ ∈ R is some small
constant. Then,
              vec(∇2 log qt (y)) − vec(∇2 log qt (x)) = Kt (x∗ )(y − x) = ξKt (x∗ )u.
Here x∗ = γx + (1 − γ)y for some γ ∈ (0, 1). Also, we have
                        vec(∇2 log qt (y)) − vec(∇2 log qt (x))
                       = ∇2 log qt (y) − ∇2 log qt (x) F
                        √                                 √
                       ≤ d ∇2 log qt (y) − ∇2 log qt (x) ≤ dM ∥y − x∥
                                                                                          2
where the last inequality comes from (53). Thus, noting that y = x + ξu and that ∥u∥ = 1, we take
the limit of ξ to 0 and get
                                          √
                              ∥Kt (x)∥ ≤ dM, ∀x ∈ Rd , ∀t ≥ 0.                               (54)

We now derive an explicit upper bound on the reverse-step error. Using Cauchy-Schwartz inequality,
for any t ≥ 1 and xt ∈ Rd , we have
                       d
                       X
                                3                  3
                               ∂ijk log qt−1 (µt )∂ijk log qt (xt )
                     i,j,k=1
                        v                          v
                        u d                        u d
                        u X                        u X
                      ≤       3                  2
                            (∂ijk log qt−1 (µt )) t      3 log q (x ))2
                                                       (∂ijk    t t
                        t
                           i,j,k=1                            i,j,k=1

                      = ∥Kt−1 (µt )∥F × ∥Kt (xt )∥F
                         √                   √
                      ≤ ( d ∥Kt−1 (µt )∥) × ( d ∥Kt (xt )∥)
                      ≤ d2 M 2 .                                                                     (55)
Therefore, following from Theorem 1, we obtain
                   T
                                            qt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )     d2 M 2 log3 T
                  X
                      EXt−1 ,Xt ∼Qt−1,t log                      ≲               .
                  t=1
                                            pt−1|t (Xt−1 |Xt )          T2

G.4 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
Throughout the proof of Theorem 4 we adopt the noise schedule αt defined in (10) with δ =
       2  3                 2   3
1/(M 3 T 2 ) and c ≥ log(M 3 T 2 ). Note that such αt satisfies Definition 1 for all t ≥ 1, and thus
the bound on the estimation error still applies. Also, Assumption 5 is satisfied for t ≥ 2, as shown
in Appendix G.2.1. Thus, Theorem 3 can be applied and the reverse-step error at t ≥ 2 satisfies,
∀t = T, . . . , 2,
                                                                     
                        d
                        X
   (1 − αt )3 EXt ∼Qt        3
                             ∂ijk                     3
                                  log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))∂ijk log qt (Xt )
                        i,j,k=1



                                                       54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                d3 (log3 M + log3 T ) log3 T
                                                                         ≲                      . (56)
                                                                              T3
In order to determine the dimensional dependency of the reverse-step error, the key is thus to establish
a similar upper bound at t = 1.
Now, we provide a modified version of Theorem 1 which does not require q0 to be analytic (as in
Assumption 2) or to have regular partial derivatives (as in Assumption 5). We recall from (21) that
the reverse-step error at time t = 1 can be upper-bounded as
                             "                   #
                                  q0|1 (X0 |x1 )                 ′                  ′
                 EX0 ∼Q0|1 log ′                   ≤ EX0 ∼Q0|1 [ζ1,0 ] − EX0 ∼P0|1
                                                                               ′ [ζ
                                                                                    1,0 ].
                                  p0|1 (X0 |x1 )

Instead of the Taylor expansion in (20), we employ the following different expansion from Taylor’s
theorem. The only difference is that the expansion stops at the third-order term.
                 ′                      √
                ζ1,0 = (∇ log q0 (µ1 ) − α0 ∇ log q1 (x1 ))⊺ (x0 − µ1 )

                            1                                   α0
                         + (x0 − µ1 )⊺ ∇2 log q0 (µ1 ) −             Bt (x0 − µ1 )
                            2                                 1 − α0
                                      d
                                   1 X 3
                               +        ∂ijk log q0 (µ∗1 )(xi0 − µi1 )(xj0 − µj1 )(xk0 − µk1 ).         (57)
                                   3!
                                     i,j,k=1

Here µ∗1 (x1 , x0 ) := ςµ1 (x1 ) + (1 − ς)x0 for some ς ∈ [0, 1]. Note that µ∗1 is a function of both x1
and x0 .
A remarkable difference from the proof of Theorem 1 is that we do not require q0 to be analytic for
this expansion. Indeed, it only requires that the third-order partial derivative exists. With this new
expansion, we have the following lemma, which serves as a counterpart of Lemma 11.
Lemma 18. Suppose that q0 exists and ∇2 log q0 is 2-norm M -Lipschitz. Then, with the αt in (10),
we have

                                                          ′      (1 − α1 )3/2 4
                  EX0 ∼Q0 EX0 ∼Q0|1 − EX0 ∼P0|1    ′    [ζ1,0 ]≲       3/2
                                                                              d M.
                                                                    3!α1

Proof. See Appendix H.6.
                                                        2       3
Finally, with the chosen δ = 1 − α1 = 1/(M 3 T 2 ), the rate at the first step satisfies
                                      (1 − α1 )3/2 4      d4
                                            3/2
                                                  d  M ≲       = o(T −2 ).
                                         3!α1            T 9/4

As T becomes large, the rate of the total reverse-step error, which decays as Õ(T −2 ), is not affected.
The proof is now complete.

H    AUXILIARY P ROOFS OF T HEOREMS 2 TO 4
In this section, we provide the proofs for the lemmas in the proofs for Theorems 2 to 4.
H.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA 13
Fix k ≥ 1 and a ∈ [d]k .                    Recall that u ≤ det(Σz ) ≤ U ,               Σ−1
                                                                                          z       ≤ V , and
                   − 21   ij
supz∈Z,i,j∈[d]2 [Σz ]          ≤ w for all z ∈ Z. Also write ϕ(y) as the p.d.f. of the unit Gaus-
sian. We are interested in upper-bounding the absolute partial derivatives of log q(x) with a function
of x where                                   Z
                                     q(x) = g(x|z)dΠ(z),

where, using the change-of-variable formula,
                                                    1              1
                                                                   −

                                    g(x|z) =                1   ϕ Σz 2 (x − µz ) .                      (58)
                                               det(Σz )     2


                                                            55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We first identify an upper bound on the absolute partial derivatives of q(x). Now,
                                 Z
                             (i)
                    ∂ak q(x) =      ∂ak g(x|z)dΠ(z)
                             (ii)
                                                     Z
                                           1             k
                                                               1
                                                                −2

                              ≤                    1   ∂a  ϕ  Σ z  (x − µz )   dΠ(z)
                                  inf z∈Z det(Σz ) 2
where (i) follows from the dominated convergence theorem (see (31)), and (ii) follows from (58). To
obtain an upper bound on the k-th derivative of Gaussian density, we invoke the multivariate version
                                                                                        −1
of the Faá di Bruno’s formula (Constantine & Savits, 1996, Theorem 2.1). Since y = Σz 2 (x − µz )
                                                                                                                    −1
is linear in x, only the first-order partial derivative is non-zero and is equal to an entry in Σz 2 . Thus,
we have
                                                                   k
               1
               −
                                              X         (k)
                                                                   Y    ∂     −1             ′
        ∂ak ϕ Σz 2 (x − µz ) =                         ϕa′ (y)              [Σz 2 (x − µz )]as
                                                                   s=1
                                                                       ∂xas
                                            a′ ∈[d]k


                                                                   −1

                                                        (k)
                                              X                                            k
                                       ≤               ϕa′        Σz 2 (x − µz ) max {w, 1} , ∀a : |a| = k.
                                            a′ ∈[d]k

                     (k)
Here we define ϕa (y) := ∂ak ϕ(y). Since ϕ(y) is a Gaussian density which is infinitely differentiable
                                                                             (k)
and decays exponentially at the tail, its k-th order derivative satisfies ϕa (y) = polyk (y)ϕ(y) where
polyk (y) is a k-th order polynomial function in y1 , . . . , yd (and thus in x1 , . . . , xd by linearity). Also
note that, for any a ∈ [d]k ,

                                  lim       ϕ(k)
                                             a (y) =              lim |polyk (y)ϕ(y)| = 0.
                                 ∥y∥→∞                        ∥y∥→∞

                           (k)                                                 (k)            (k)
By the continuity of ϕa (y), there exists ȳa such that ϕa (y) ≤ ϕa (ȳa ) ≤ polyk (ȳa ) for all
y ∈ Rd . Now, for all x ∈ Rd ,
            Z                    1
                          1       −
 ∂ak q(x) ≤ det(Σz )− 2 ∂ak ϕ Σz 2 (x − µz ) dΠ(z)
                                                                   
                          Z
                                                       1
                                                                        1
                                      1              −                  −
                        k
                                          X
          ≤ max {w, 1}      det(Σz )− 2      polyk Σz 2 (x − µz )  ϕ Σz 2 (x − µz ) dΠ(z)
                                                        a∈[d]k
                                                                                                                         (59)
                 k                k
                d max {w, 1}
          ≤         √        |polyk (ȳa )| ϕ (ȳa ) .                                                                   (60)
                      u
We have thus obtained a constant upper bound on all partial derivatives of q(x) of order k.
Next, we convert the partial derivative bound into that for log q(x). We again invoke Faá di Bruno’s
formula Constantine & Savits (1996). Note that
                                                      k
                                                                        |b |
                                                    X Y                                X
                     ∂ak log q(x) = q(x)−k                          ∂bjj q(x) =:                  rb1 ,...,bk (x)        (61)
                                                  b1 ,...,bk j=1                     b1 ,...,bk

in which wePdefine each summation
                              P      term as r. Here {b1 , . . . , bk } is some (possibly empty) partition
of a, i.e., j bj = a and j |bj | = k (thus, at most k partitions). We order this partition such
that k ≥ |b1 | ≥ · · · ≥ |bk | ≥ 0. Note that the total number of partition can be upper-bounded
       Pk
by dk l=1 Bk,l (1, . . . , 1) = dk Bk , where Bk,l (·) and Bk are the Bell polynomials and the Bell
number, respectively.
We first showcase a simple yet useful upper bound. From (60), we get,
          k                      k
                 |b |                      |b |
          Y                      Y
                ∂bjj q(x) ≤             ∂bjj q(x)
          j=1                    j=1



                                                                   56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     k
                                                 P
                            (d max{w, 1}) j |bj |                 k
                                                                    Y
                          ≤                       max{max ϕ(y), 1}      poly|bj | (ȳbj )
                                min{u, 1}k/2           y
                                                                    j=1
                                                 P
                            (d max{w, 1}) j |bj |                                         k
                          ≤              k/2
                                                  max{max ϕ(y), 1}k max poly|bj | (ȳbj )
                                min{u, 1}              y             j
                                                              k
                                           dk max {w, 1}
                          ≤ Cbk1 ,...,bj
                                            min{u, 1}k/2
where, as noted above, ȳbj does not depend on x. Here Cb1 ,...,bj is some constant which depends
only on the partition {b1 , . . . , bj } and is independent of x. On the other hand, we can also obtain
a simple lower bound on q(x). Observe that q(x) is continuous and always positive. Recall that
b = supz∈Z ∥µz ∥. Thus,
              Z
      q(x) =       g(x|z)dΠ(z)
                Z
                                                  Z
                              1                            1             ⊺ −1
           ≥                                  1     exp − sup (x − µz ) Σz (x − µz ) dΠ(z)
              (2π)d/2 supz∈Z det(Σz ) 2 Z                  2 z∈Z
                                                  Z
                              1                            1        −1       2           2
           ≥                                  1     exp − sup Σz (∥x∥ + ∥µz ∥ ) dΠ(z)
              (2π)d/2 supz∈Z det(Σz ) 2 Z                  2 z∈Z
                                                  Z
                              1                            1        −1       2     2
           ≥                                  1     exp  −   sup  Σ z   (∥x∥   + b   )   dΠ(z)
              (2π)d/2 supz∈Z det(Σz ) 2 Z                  2 z∈Z

                    1                  V        2    2
           ≥              exp − (∥x∥ + b ) .
              (2π)d/2 U                 2
Therefore, if we set C := maxb1 ,...,bj Cb1 ,...,bj , we obtain
                                                                        k
                                                      d2k max {w, 1} k k V (∥x∥2 +b2 )
                       ∂ak log q(x) ≤ C k Bk                        U e 2              .            (62)
                                                       min{u, 1}k/2

The upper bound above, though it depends only on parameters u, U, V, w, has an exponential depen-
dency on x, which is not desirable. We next derive a more refined bound in x. For brevity of analysis,
we re-express r (defined in (61)) to avoid empty partitions:
                                               p
                                                      |b |
                                               Y
                 rb1 ,...,bk (x) = q(x)−p            ∂bjj q(x), s.t. |bp+1 | = · · · = |bk | = 0.
                                               j=1

                                                 −1/2
Now, by the boundedness of ∥µz ∥ and Σz         on Z, for each x, there exist (bounded) Σ̄bj and µ̄bj
such that, ∀z ∈ Z,
                               1                                     1
                               −                                      −
            X                                    X
                    poly|bj | Σz 2 (x − µz ) ≤            poly|bj | Σ̄bj2 (x − µ̄bj ) < ∞.
         b∈[d]| j |                            b∈[d]| j |
               b                                     b



Then, following from (59), we obtain
                                 p                                p
                                        |b |                             |b |
                                 Y                                Y
    |rb1 ,...,bk (x)| = q(x)−p         ∂bjj q(x) ≤ q(x)−p               ∂bjj q(x)
                                 j=1                              j=1
                       Pp
        (d max{w, 1})     j=1 |bj |
    ≤                         ×
                 up/2                                 1                1
                          1 P                         −                −
                det(Σz )− 2
              R
           p
                                    | bj |
                                           poly|bj | Σz 2 (x − µz ) ϕ Σz 2 (x − µz ) dΠ(z)
                             cj ∈[d]
          Y
                                                      1
                                                1     −
                                    det(Σz )− 2 ϕ Σz 2 (x − µz ) dΠ(z)
                                 R
          j=1

        (d max{w, 1})k
    ≤                  ×
         min{1, u}k/2

                                                             57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                              1                   R                    1
                 P                              −2                            − 12      −2
           p                     poly        Σ̄    (x − µ̄    )     det(Σ   )      ϕ  Σ z  (x − µ  )   dΠ(z)
                    cj ∈[d]| j |
           Y                b         |bj |     bj        b j             z                      z
                                                                1
                                                         1       −
                                              det(Σz )− 2 ϕ Σz 2 (x − µz ) dΠ(z)
                                            R
           j=1
                                 p
      (d max{w, 1})k Y                  X                      1
                                                                −

    =                                               poly|bj | Σ̄bj2 (x − µ̄bj )
       min{1, u}k/2 j=1
                                     cj ∈[d]| j |
                                              b



Note that for each j, the number of terms in the summation above is upper-bounded
                                                                    Qp              by d|bj | . Thus,
                                                                           |bj |
expanding the product of summations would result in no more than j=1 d           = dk terms. Also,
                                                                                                 −1
since polyk1 (y) · polyk2 (y) = polyk1 +k2 (y) , and since any Σ̄bj2 (x − µ̄bj ) is linear in x and
independent in z, each product term is a k-th order polynomial in x. Therefore, we obtain
                                              d2k max{w, 1}k
                        |rb1 ,...,bk (x)| ≤                                      max                 |polyk (x)|
                                               min{1, u}k/2
                                                                      cj ∈[d]| j | ,∀j=1,...,p
                                                                                b



and thus
                                           d2k max{w, 1}k
                 ∂ak log q(x) ≤ Bk                        max                          max                |polyk (x)| .   (63)
                                            min{1, u}k/2 b1 ,...,bk
                                                                               cj ∈[d]| j | ,∀j=1,...,p
                                                                                       b



We have thus identified an upper bound on ∂ak log q(x) which is polynomial in x. The proof is now
complete by combining (62) and (63).
H.2 P ROOF OF L EMMA 14
We first identify u, U, V, w for Σt,n such that they are independent of T and k for all t ≥ 1. Fix t ≥ 1.
We use the fact that Σt,n = ᾱt Σ0,n + (1 − ᾱt )Id . If we let λn,1 ≥ · · · ≥ λn,d > 0 as the eigenvalues
of Σ0,n (which do not depend on T ), the eigenvalues of Σt,n are {ᾱt λn,i + (1 − ᾱt )}di=1 . Therefore,
for any n = 1, . . . , N and t ≥ 1,
                         d
                         Y                                                     d
                                                                               Y
             (u :=)            min{min λn,i , 1} ≤ det(Σt,n ) ≤                      max{max λn,i , 1}(=: U ).
                                       n                                                         n
                         i=1                                                   i=1
                                                     1
Also, following from (45), we have V := min{1,min      n λn,d }
                                                                . Next, write the eigen-decomposition as
Σ0,n = Qn diag(λn,1 , . . . , λn,d )Q⊺n , where Qn here is an orthonormal matrix (that does not depend
on T ). Then, for any t ≥ 1,
                   −1                                                                       1
                 Σt,n2 = Qn (ᾱt diag(λn,1 , . . . , λn,d ) + (1 − ᾱt )Id )− 2 Q⊺n
                                                                      1                                         1
                        = Qn diag((ᾱt λn,1 + (1 − ᾱt ))− 2 , . . . , (ᾱt λn,d + (1 − ᾱt ))− 2 )Q⊺n
and thus, for all t ≥ 1,
                                     d
                        −1                                                1
                                     X
                     [Σt,n2 ]ij =          (ᾱt λn,k + (1 − ᾱt ))− 2 Qik kj
                                                                       n Qn
                                     k=1
                                                                                           d
                                                              − 12
                                                                                           X
                                ≤ (min{1, min λn,d })                         max                Qik kj
                                                                                                  n Qn =: w.
                                                    n                n∈[N ],i,j∈[d]
                                                                                           k=1

Since the identified u, U, V, w are all independent of T and k, by Lemma 13 we have obtained an
upper bound on ∂ak log q(x) for any fixed x which is independent of T . Thus,

  (1 − αt )k/2 EXt ∼Qt ∂ak log qt (Xt ) , (1 − αt )k/2 EXt ∼Qt ∂ak log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))


                                                                              k/2
                                                                                             1
                                                             = Õ (1 − αt )         = Õ           .
                                                                                           T k/2
Hence, we have shown Assumption 5.


                                                               58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.3       P ROOF OF L EMMA 15
Fix t ≥ 1. We will draw some notations introduced in Lemma 13. Specifically, we recall from (61)
that
                                                       p
                                                                      |b |
                                                     X Y
         ∂ap log qt (xt ) = qt (xt )−p                              ∂bjj qt (xt )
                                                   b1 ,...,bp j=1
                                                       p Z                                                     √
                                              −p
                                                     X Y                                                  xt − ᾱt x0
                                = qt (xt )                                 qt|0 (xt |x0 )poly|bj |                      dQ0 (x0 )
                                                                      x0                                     1 − ᾱt
                                                   b1 ,...,bp j=1
                                                                p Z                    √
                                       X              1        Y                  xt − ᾱt x0
                                =                            p        poly|bj |    √            dQ0|t (x0 |xt )                     (64)
                                     b1 ,...,bp
                                                  (1 − ᾱt ) 2 j=1 x0                 1 − ᾱt

in which we have defined polyk (y) as a k-th order polynomialP         function in y1 , P
                                                                                        . . . , yd . Recall that
here {b1 , . . . , bp } is some (possibly empty) partition of a, i.e., j bj = a and j |bj | = p.
Thus,
                                        ℓ
 EXt ∼Qt |∂ap log qt (Xt )|
                                                                                              √
                                                                                                                       
                                                             p Z                                                      ℓ
              1                   X                          Y                           Xt − ᾱt x0
  ≤                  pℓ   pℓ                 EXt ∼Qt                    poly|bj |        √            dQ0|t (x0 |Xt ) 
        (1 − ᾱt ) 2            b1 ,...,bp                j=1       x0                      1 − ᾱt
                                                                                                                             |bj |
                                     p                                                         √                         pℓ ! p
  (i)                                                                                     Xt − ᾱt x0
                                                                 Z
                1                  X Y                                                                                  | j|
                                                                                                                         b
  ≤                  pℓ    pℓ                        EXt ∼Qt             poly|bj |         √            dQ0|t (x0 |Xt )
         (1 − ᾱt ) 2           b1 ,...,bp j=1                      x0                       1 − ᾱt

                                                                                                                         ! | pj |
                                                                                                                             b
                                              p                                                   √               pℓ
  (ii)          1                    X        Y                                               Xt − ᾱt X0        |bj |
   ≤                  pℓ   pℓ                        EX0 ,Xt ∼Q0,t poly|bj |                   √
         (1 − ᾱt )   2
                                 b1 ,...,bp j=1
                                                                                                  1 − ᾱt

                                    p                                         pℓ
                                                                                   ! |bpj |
              1
                                                    E poly|bj | (Z) |bj |
                                  X Y
  =                  pℓ   pℓ
        (1 − ᾱt )   2
                                b1 ,...,bp j=1
                pℓ
            d   2
  ≲                  pℓ
        (1 − ᾱt ) 2
where Z ∼ N (0, Id ) is a standard Gaussian random variable (that does not depend on T here) and
any r-th order of polynomial of Z1 , . . . , Zd has finite expectation (that does not depend on T and
with at most dr/2 dimensional dependency). Here (i) holds by Hölder’s inequality, and (ii) holds by
Jensen’s inequality since pℓ/ |bj | ≥ 1 for all bj and ℓ ≥ 1. The proof is now complete.

H.4       P ROOF OF L EMMA 16
Fix t ≥ 2. We first introduce the following notations. Write µt = µt (xt ). Let Qµt be the distribution
of µt (Xt ) where Xt ∼ Qt , and let qµt be the corresponding p.d.f. (w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure). Let
Qµt ,x0 be the joint distribution of µt and x0 .
Now, we can re-write the integral as
                                    √
                Z
                                               p
                        ∥µt (xt ) − ᾱt−1 x0 ∥ dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (xt ))dQt (xt )
                 x0 ,xt
                                   √
                   Z
                                             p
                =         ∥µt − ᾱt−1 x0 ∥ dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt )dQµt (µt )
                                   x0 ,µt
                                                     √
                                 Z
                                                                     p    qµt (µt )
                           =                 ∥µt −       ᾱt−1 x0 ∥                 dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt )dQt−1 (µt )
                                   x0 ,µt                                qt−1 (µt )

                                                                             59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                       sZ
                                                  √                2p
                   ≤                 ∥µt −            ᾱt−1 x0 ∥        dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt )dQt−1 (µt )
                            x0 ,µt
                             sZ                                 2
                                                   qµt (µt )
                        ×                                           dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt )dQt−1 (µt )                    (65)
                                     x0 ,µt       qt−1 (µt )

where the last line follows from Cauchy-Schwartz inequality.
Now, for the first term of (65) we recovered the matched moment, and we have
               sZ
                                √         2p
                         ∥µt − ᾱt−1 x0 ∥ dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt )dQt−1 (µt )
                   x0 ,µt
                   sZ
                                                      √                 2p
               =                     ∥xt−1 −              ᾱt−1 x0 ∥         dQ0,t−1 (x0 , xt−1 )
                       x0 ,xt−1
                                          sZ                        √                   2p
                                      p                      xt−1 − ᾱt−1 x0
               = (1 − ᾱt−1 )         2                         √                            dQ0,t−1 (x0 , xt−1 )
                                              x0 ,xt−1            1 − ᾱt−1
                                          q
                                      p         2p   p              p
               = (1 − ᾱt−1 ) 2            E ∥Z∥ ≲ d 2 (1 − ᾱt−1 ) 2

where Z ∼ N (0, Id ) is a Gaussian random variable.
Now we upper bound the second term in (65), whose square is equal to
              Z                     2
                         qµt (µt )
                                      dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt )dQt−1 (µt )
               x0 ,µt   qt−1 (µt )
                 Z                      2
                           qµt (xt−1 )
              =                           qt−1 (xt−1 )dxt−1
                   xt−1   qt−1 (xt−1 )
                = 1 + χ2 (Qµt ||Qt−1 )
                (i)
                ≤ 1 + χ2 (Qµt ,x0 ||Qt−1,0 )
                                                      2                    !
                                   qµt |x0 (µt |x0 )
                    Z     Z
                =                                       qt−1|0 (µt |x0 )dµt dQ0 (x0 )
                     x0      µt    qt−1|0 (µt |x0 )
                                                                         −1    !
                                   (qt|0 (xt |x0 ))2
                    Z     Z
                                                             dµt (xt )
                =                                      det                  dxt dQ0 (x0 )
                     x0      xt qt−1|0 (µt (xt )|x0 )           dxt
                     s                                    2
                                        qt|0 (xt |x0 )
                (ii)
                        Z
                 ≤                                          dQt,0 (xt , x0 )×
                         x0 ,xt    qt−1|0 (µt (xt )|x0 )
                      sZ                            −2
                                         dµt (xt )
                                 det                    dQt,0 (xt , x0 )
                          x0 ,xt            dxt

where χ2 (P ||Q) is the chi-squared divergence between P and Q. Here (i) follows from the data
processing inequality for f-divergence, and (ii) again follows from Cauchy-Schwartz inequality. We
can calculate the determinant term above as
                         −2                                              −2
                    dµt                 1         1 − αt 2
              det             = det √ Id + √             ∇ log qt (xt )
                    dxt                  αt          αt
                                                                                    !−2
                                    1                       2

                              =      d  1 + (1 − αt )Tr(∇ log qt (xt )) + ϵT (xt )
                                   αt2
                                  d
                              ≤ αt2 1 − 2(1 − αt )Tr(∇2 log qt (xt )) + ϵT (xt )


                                                                    60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                    P∞
where we denote the residual terms as ϵT (xt ) := p=2 (1−αt )p I:|I|=p cI (i,j)∈I ∂ij    2
                                                                    P            Q
                                                                                           log qt (xt ),
where cI is some coefficient that does not depend on T . Since from Lemma 15,

                            2              ℓ             1
               EXt ∼Qt ∂ij log qt (Xt ) = Õ                      , ∀i, j ∈ [d], ∀ℓ ≥ 1,
                                                    (1 − ᾱt )ℓ

              1−αt          log T
and note that 1− ᾱt = Õ     T     with the αt in (10), we have that
                                        ∞
                                        X                       X                                  Y
           EXt ∼Qt |ϵT (Xt )| ≤               (1 − αt )p                        cI EXt ∼Qt                 2
                                                                                                          ∂ij log qt (Xt )
                                        p=2                 I:|I|=p                             (i,j)∈I
                                        ∞                                             Y                                                 p1
                                        X                       X                                                                 p
                                   ≤          (1 − αt )p                        cI                       2
                                                                                                EXt ∼Qt ∂ij log qt (Xt )
                                        p=2                 I:|I|=p                  (i,j)∈I
                                        ∞                               p

                                        X     (1 − αt )
                                   =          Õ
                                     p=2
                                              (1 − ᾱt )p
                                          (log T )2

                                   = Õ               ,
                                             T2
and thus                                           −2
                                            dµt                 d                    log T                        log T
                        EXt ∼Qt det                     = αt + Õ
                                                                2
                                                                                                   ≤ 1 + Õ                   .
                                            dxt                                        T                            T
Also, since
                                                                                          √        2

                                                           1                        ∥xt − ᾱt x0 ∥
                               2                        (1−ᾱt )d
                                                                  exp             −
            qt|0 (xt |x0 )                                                               1−ᾱt

                                   =                                                                        √         2

           qt−1|0 (µt |x0 )                 1                               ∥xt +(1−αt )∇ log qt (xt )− ᾱt x0 ∥
                                        (1−ᾱt−1 )d
                                                    exp          −                             αt −ᾱt
                              d
                                                   √


               1 − ᾱt−1                                1          12
       =                          exp       xt −       ᾱt x0−              ×
                1 − ᾱt                             αt − ᾱt    1 − ᾱt
                                                   √                                     2
                                                                                           !
                   2(1 − αt )∇ log qt (xt )⊺ (xt − ᾱt x0 ) + (1 − αt )2 ∥∇ log qt (xt )∥
             exp
                                                   αt − ᾱt
                          √       2
                                               !
       (iii)        xt − ᾱt x0      1 − αt
        ≤ exp         √                          ×
                        1 − ᾱt     αt − ᾱt
                                                   √                                     2
                                                                                           !
                   2(1 − αt )∇ log qt (xt )⊺ (xt − ᾱt x0 ) + (1 − αt )2 ∥∇ log qt (xt )∥
             exp
                                                   αt − ᾱt
                         √       2
                                              !
       (iv)         xt − ᾱt x0     1 − αt
        = exp         √                          ×
                        1 − ᾱt     αt − ᾱt
                                                      √                                     2
                                                                                              !!
                       (1 − αt )∇ log qt (xt )⊺ (xt − ᾱt x0 ) + (1 − αt )2 ∥∇ log qt (xt )∥
               1 + Õ
                                                      αt − ᾱt

where (iii) follows because 1−  ᾱt−1
                                      < 1, and (iv) follows because ez = 1 + Õ(z) when z → 0 and
                             1−ᾱt
because α1−α  t
                , 1−αt = Õ logT T with the αt in (10). Thus,
          t −ᾱt 1−ᾱt

                                                   2
                          qt|0 (Xt |X0 )

EXt ,X0 ∼Qt,0
                       qt−1|0 (µt (Xt )|X0 )
   v
   u                                   √                     2
                                                                             !
   u                              Xt − ᾱt X0                       1 − αt
 ≤ tEX ,X ∼Q
           t   0        t,0
                            exp 2  √                                          ×
                                      1 − ᾱt                       αt − ᾱt


                                                                            61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



v
u                      "                                       √                      2 ∥∇ log q (x )∥2
                                                                                                        #!
u
t1 + Õ EX ,X ∼Q         (1 − α t ) ∥∇   log qt (x t )∥ ∥x t −   ᾱt x0 ∥ + (1 −  αt )          t  t
           t  0    t,0
                                                              αt − ᾱt
    v
    u                               √           2
                                                             !
(v) u                       X t −     ᾱt X 0      1  −  αt                   log T
= tEXt ,X0 ∼Qt,0 exp 2        √                                × 1 + Õ
                                  1 − ᾱt         αt − ᾱt                      T

where (v) follows from Lemma 15 and Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, and
                                                              √         2
                                                                                   !
                                                       Xt − ᾱt X0        1 − αt
                         EXt ,X0 ∼Qt,0 exp 2              √
                                                            1 − ᾱt       αt − ᾱt
                                       Z
                                1             1−αt       2  1    2
                          =         d      e2 αt −ᾱt ∥z∥ − 2 ∥z∥ dz
                             (2π) 2 z
                                       Z
                                1             1      2
                          =         d      e− 2 ∥z∥ (1+Õ(log T /T )) dz
                             (2π) 2 z

                                         log T
                          = 1 + Õ                 .
                                           T
Therefore, we arrive at a bound for the second term in (65):
              sZ                       2
                           qµt (µt )                                                  log T
                                          dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt )dQt−1 (µt ) ≤ 1 + Õ               .
                 x0 ,µt   qt−1 (µt )                                                    T
and the lemma follows immediately.
H.5 P ROOF OF L EMMA 17
Fix t ≥ 2. From (64), we also have
                                            ℓ
EXt ∼Qt |∂ap log qt−1 (µt (Xt ))|
                                                                                            √
                                                                                                                                         
                                                      p Z                                                                             ℓ
           1                   X                      Y                            µt (Xt ) − ᾱt−1 x0
≤                  pℓ   pℓ                EXt ∼Qt                 poly|bj |           √                     dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt )) 
    (1 − ᾱt−1 )   2
                                                    j=1       x0                          1 − ᾱt−1
                             b1 ,...,bp

                                                                                                                                               ! | pj |
                                                                                                                                                   b
                                 p                                                           √                                            pℓ
                                                                                   µt (Xt ) − ᾱt−1 x0
                                                          Z
           1                   X Y                                                                                                    | bj |
≤                  pℓ   pℓ                      EXt ∼Qt            poly|bj |           √                     dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt ))
    (1 − ᾱt−1 )   2                                          x0                          1 − ᾱt−1
                             b1 ,...,bp j=1

                                                                                                                                               ! | pj |
                                                                                                                                                   b
                                 p                                                           √                pℓ
                                                               µt (Xt ) − ᾱt−1 x0 |bj |
                                                          Z
           1                   X Y
≤                  pℓ   pℓ                      EXt ∼Qt             √
                                                                   poly|bj |               dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt ))
  (1 − ᾱt−1 )     2                             x0                   1 − ᾱt−1
                     b1 ,...,bp j=1
                                                                        √
                                                             µt (Xt ) − ᾱt−1 x0
                                               Z
        1          ℓ
                       X
≤              pℓ p             max EXt ∼Qt         polypℓ       √                    dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt ))
  (1 − ᾱt−1 ) 2                j∈[p]           x0                  1 − ᾱt−1
                     b1 ,...,bp
                                                 √          pℓ
                                      µt (Xt ) − ᾱt−1 x0
                                Z
        1
≲              pℓ · EXt ∼Qt
                                          √                    dQ0|t−1 (x0 |µt (Xt ))
  (1 − ᾱt−1 ) 2                 x0          1 − ᾱt−1
           pℓ
         d2
≲                  pℓ
    (1 − ᾱt−1 ) 2
where the last line follows from Lemma         16. Now, together with Lemma 15, Assumption 5 is
                         1−αt           log T
established noting that 1− ᾱt−1 = Õ     T     = Õ(1 − αt ) for all t ≥ 2.

H.6 P ROOF OF L EMMA 18
                         ′
Recall the expansion of ζ1,0 in (57). As in the proof of Lemma 11, with the choice of µ1 and Σ1 , we
still have
                                                      ′ [T1 ] = EX ∼Q
                                                EX0 ∼P0|1                [T1 ],
                                                                  0  0|1


                                                                    62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     ′
                                                 ′ [T ] = EX ∼Q
                                           EX0 ∼P0|1 2      0  0|1
                                                                   [T2′ ].
                  Pd                                      j    j
Define T3′ := 3!1             3            ∗    i    i              k    k          ∗    ∗
                     i,j,k=1 ∂ijk log q0 (µ1 )(x0 − µ1 )(x0 − µ1 )(x0 − µ1 ). Here µ1 = µ1 (x1 , x0 ) is a
function of both x1 and x0 . A useful result from Lemma 15 is that, with the αt in (10), we have,
∀i, j, k ∈ [d] and ℓ ≥ 1,
                                                              (1 − α1 )ℓ dℓ
                                                                  ℓ
                        (1 − α1 )ℓ EX1 ∼Q1 ∂ij
                                            2
                                               log q1 (X1 ) ≲                = dℓ ,                    (66)
                                                               (1 − ᾱ1 )ℓ
                                                            2  (1 − α1 )3 d3
                        (1 − α1 )3 EX1 ∼Q1 ∂ijk
                                            3
                                                log q1 (X1 ) ≲                = d3 .                   (67)
                                                                 (1 − ᾱ1 )3

First, using Lemma 8, we have that
EX0 ,X1 ∼Q0,1 [T3′ ]
               d
    (1 − α1 )3 X
=          3/2
                                             3
                             EX0 ,X1 ∼Q0,1 [∂ijk log q0 (µ∗1 (X1 , X0 ))∂ijk
                                                                         3
                                                                             log q1 (X1 )]
        3!α1       i,j,k=1
             v                                                        v
             u                    d                                   u            d
  (1 − α1 )3 u                  X
                                         3            ∗             2
                                                                      u          X
                                                                                        3 log q (X ))2
≤      3/2
             t EX0 ,X1 ∼Q0,1
                                      (∂ ijk log q0 (µ1 (X1 , X0 )))  tEX ∼Q
                                                                         1   1
                                                                                      (∂ijk    1  1
    3!α1                      i,j,k=1                                          i,j,k=1
                v
                u                d
  (1 − α1 )3    u              X
                                        3 log q (X ))2 .
≤      3/2
             dM tEX ∼Q
                      1   1          (∂ijk       1    1
    3!α1                     i,j,k=1

Here in the last line we have used a similar technique in (55), which assumes that ∇2 log q0 is 2-norm
M -Lipschitz. Now, from (67) we have
                                                                (1 − α1 )3/2 4
                                      EX0 ,X1 ∼Q0,1 [T3′ ] ≲          3/2
                                                                            d M.
                                                                   3!α1

Also,
                 EX0 ∼P0|1
                       ′   [T3′ ]
                   X1 ∼Q1
                                                                                                  
                            d
                     1 X                                                   Y
                 =              EX0 ∼P0|1
                                        ′
                                              3
                                          ∂ijk   log q0 (µ∗1 (X1 , X0 ))         (X0c − µc1 (X1 ))
                     3!           X1 ∼Q1
                        i,j,k=1                                           c=i,j,k
                 (i) 1
                              s
                                                              6
                 ≤ dM EX0 ∼P0|1        ′  ∥X0 − µ1 (X1 )∥
                     3!          X1 ∼Q1
                              v
                              u d
                     1 2 u      X                                   6
                 ≤ d Mt             EX0 ∼P0|1
                                            ′     X0i − µ1 (X1 )i
                     3!         i=1    X1 ∼Q1
                               v
                               u d
                 (ii) 1 2      uX   1 − α1  3
                  =      d Mt         15               EX1 ∼Q1 (1 + (1 − α1 )∂ii    2 log q (X ))3
                                                                                            1   1
                      3!         i=1
                                              α 1

                 (iii) (1 − α )3/2
                              1
                  ≲          3/2
                                   d4 M
                          3!α1
where (i) holds with a similar technique in (55) assuming ∇2 log q0 is M -Lipschitz, (ii) holds by
Lemma 7, and (iii) holds by (66). The proof is now complete.


                                                           63
