Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O PTIMAL P ROTOCOLS FOR C ONTINUAL L EARNING
VIA S TATISTICAL P HYSICS AND C ONTROL T HEORY

    Francesco Mori1 , Stefano Sarao Mannelli2,3 , Francesca Mignacco4,5



                                              A BSTRACT

          Artificial neural networks often struggle with catastrophic forgetting when learn-
          ing multiple tasks sequentially, as training on new tasks degrades the performance
          on previously learned tasks. Recent theoretical work has addressed this issue
          by analysing learning curves in synthetic frameworks under predefined training
          protocols. However, these protocols relied on heuristics and lacked a solid the-
          oretical foundation assessing their optimality. In this paper, we fill this gap by
          combining exact equations for training dynamics, derived using statistical physics
          techniques, with optimal control methods. We apply this approach to teacher-
          student models for continual learning and multi-task problems, obtaining a theory
          for task-selection protocols maximising performance while minimising forgetting.
          Our theoretical analysis offers non-trivial yet interpretable strategies for mitigating
          catastrophic forgetting, shedding light on how optimal learning protocols modu-
          late established effects, such as the influence of task similarity on forgetting. Fi-
          nally, we validate our theoretical findings with experiments on real-world data.


1     I NTRODUCTION

Mastering a diverse range of problems is crucial for both artificial and biological systems. In the
context of training a neural network on a series of tasks—a.k.a. multi-task learning (Caruana, 1993;
1994b;a; 1997)—the ability to learn new tasks can be improved by leveraging knowledge from pre-
vious ones (Suddarth & Kergosien, 1990). However, this process can lead to catastrophic forgetting,
where learning new tasks degrades performance on older ones. This phenomenon has been observed
in both theoretical neuroscience (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990) and machine learning
(Srivastava et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014), and occurs when the network parameters encod-
ing older tasks are overwritten while training on a new task. Several mitigation strategies have been
proposed (French, 1999; Kemker et al., 2018), including semi-distributed representations (French,
1991; 1992), regularisation methods (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zenke et al., 2017; Li & Hoiem,
2017), dynamical architectures (Zhou et al., 2012; Rusu et al., 2016), and others (see e.g. Parisi
et al. (2019); De Lange et al. (2021) for thorough reviews). A common strategy, known as replay, is
to present the network with examples from the old tasks while training on the new one to minimise
forgetting (Shin et al., 2017; Draelos et al., 2017; Rolnick et al., 2019).
On the theoretical side, Baxter (2000) pioneered the research on continual learning by deriving PAC
bounds. More recently, further performance bounds have been obtained in the context of multi-task
learning, few-shot learning, domain adaptation, and hypothesis transfer learning (Wang et al., 2020;
Zhang & Yang, 2021; Zhang & Gao, 2022). However, these results focused on worst-case analysis,
offering bounds that may not reflect the typical performance of algorithms. In contrast, Dhifal-
lah & Lu (2021) began investigating the typical-case scenario, providing a precise characterisation
of transfer learning in simple neural network models. Gerace et al. (2022); Ingrosso et al. (2024)
extended this analysis to more complex architectures and generative models, allowing for a better
description of the relation between tasks. Finally, Lee et al. (2021; 2022) proposed a theoretical
1
  Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PU, United Kingdom
2
  Data Science and AI, Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology and University
of Gothenburg
3
  School of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, University of the Witwatersrand
4
  Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York, NY 10016, USA
5
  Joseph Henry Laboratories of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


framework for the study of the dynamics of continual learning with a focus on catastrophic forget-
ting. Their work provided a theoretical explanation for the surprising empirical results of Ramasesh
et al. (2020), which revealed a non-monotonic relation between forgetting and task similarity, where
maximal forgetting occurs at intermediate task similarity. Analogously, Shan et al. (2024) studied a
Gibbs formulation of continual learning in deep linear networks, and demonstrated how the interplay
between task similarity and network architecture influences forgetting and knowledge transfer.
Despite the significant interest in transfer learning and catastrophic forgetting, mitigation strategies
considered thus far were pre-defined heuristics, offering no guarantees of optimality. In contrast,
here we address the problem of identifying the optimal protocol to minimise forgetting. Specifically,
we focus on replay as a prototypical mitigation strategy. We use optimal control theory to determine
the optimal training protocol that maximises performance across different tasks.

Our contribution. In this work, we combine dimensionality-reduction techniques from statistical
physics (Saad & Solla, 1995a;b; Biehl & Schwarze, 1995) and Pontryagin’s maximum principle
from control theory (Feldbaum, 1955; Pontryagin, 1957; Kopp, 1962). This approach allows us to
derive optimal task-selection protocols for the training dynamics of a neural network in a continual
learning setting. Pontryagin’s principle works efficiently in low-dimensional deterministic systems.
Hence, applying it to neural networks requires the statistical physics approach (Engel, 2001), which
reduces the evolution of high-dimensional stochastic systems to a few key order parameters gov-
erned by ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (Saad & Solla, 1995a;b; Biehl & Schwarze, 1995).
Specifically, we consider the teacher-student framework of Lee et al. (2021)—a prototype continual
learning setting amenable to analytic characterisation. Our main contributions are:

       • We leverage the ODEs for the learning curves of online SGD to derive closed-form formu-
         lae for the optimal training protocols. In particular, we provide equations for the optimal
         task-selection protocol and the optimal learning rate schedule, as a function of the task
         similarity γ and the problem parameters. Our framework is broadly applicable beyond the
         specific context of continual learning, and we outline several potential extensions.
       • We evaluate our equations for a range of problem parameters and find highly structured
         protocols. Interestingly, we are nonetheless able to interpret these strategies a posteriori,
         formulating a criterion for “pseudo-optimal” task-selection. This strategy consists of an
         initial focus phase, where only the new task is presented to the network, followed by a
         revision phase, where old tasks are replayed.
       • We clarify the impact of task similarity on catastrophic forgetting. At variance with what
         previously observed (Ramasesh et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021; 2022), catastrophic forgetting
         is minimal at intermediate task similarity when learning with optimal task selection. We
         provide a mechanistic explanation of this phenomenon by disentangling dynamical effects
         at the level of first-layer and readout weights.
       • We demonstrate that the insights from our optimal strategies in synthetic settings transfer
         to real datasets. Specifically, we show the efficacy of our pseudo-optimal strategy on a con-
         tinual learning task using the Fashion-MNIST dataset. Here, the pseudo-optimal strategy
         effectively interpolates between simple heuristics depending on the problem’s parameters.

Further related works. Recent theoretical works on online dynamics in one-hidden-layer neural
networks have addressed various learning problems, including over-parameterisation (Goldt et al.,
2019), algorithmic analysis (Refinetti et al., 2021; Srinivasan et al., 2024), and learning strate-
gies (Lee et al., 2021; Saglietti et al., 2022; Sarao Mannelli et al., 2024). However, these studies
have not explored the problem from an optimal control perspective.
Early works addressed the optimality of hyperparameters in high-dimensional online learning for
committee machines via control theory. These studies focused on optimising the learning rate (Saad
& Rattray, 1997; Rattray & Saad, 1998; Schlösser et al., 1999), the regularisation (Saad & Rattray,
1998), and the learning rule (Rattray & Saad, 1997). However, to the best of our knowledge, the
problem of optimal task selection has not been explored yet. Carrasco-Davis et al. (2023) and Li
et al. (2024) applied optimal control to the dynamics of connectionist models of behaviour, but their
analysis was limited to low-dimensional and finite-dimensional settings. Urbani (2021) extended the
Bellman equation to high-dimensional mean-field dynamical systems, though without considering
learning processes.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                    K
                                                                                                                 x ⋅ wk
                                                                                                             (      N )
            Teacher                                                                ̂ =
                                                                          Student y(t)  v (t) g
                                                Task (1)                               ∑ k
                            x ⋅ w*(1)
                        (        N )
                                                                                                k=1
       y   (1)
                 = g*                   w*(1)                                     w
                                                                                        v (1)
                                                                                                            w
                                                                                                                  v (2)


                                                                   Loss
            Teacher
                                                                                                                          Catastrophic
                            x ⋅ w*(2)           Task (2)
                        (       N )
                                                                                                                           forgetting
       y   (2)
                 = g*
                                        w*(2)                                                                              of Task 1
      a)                                                       b)           Train on Task 1             Train on Task 2      training step
             ￼


Figure 1: Pictorial representation of the continual learning task in the teacher-student setting.
A “student” network is trained on i.i.d. inputs from two teacher networks, defining two different
tasks (panel a). The student has sufficient capacity to learn both tasks. However, sequential training
results in catastrophic forgetting, where the performance on a previously learned task significantly
deteriorates when a new task is introduced (panel b). Parameters: K = T = 2.


Several other works have combined ideas from machine learning and optimal control. Notably,
Han et al. (2019) interpreted deep learning as an optimal control problem on a dynamical system,
where the control variables correspond to the network parameters. Chen & Hazan (2024) formulated
meta-optimization as an optimal control problem, but their analysis did not involve dimensionality
reduction techniques nor did it address task selection.


2   M ODEL - BASED THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

We adopt a model-based approach to investigate the supervised learning of multiple tasks. Follow-
ing Lee et al. (2021; 2022), we consider a teacher-student framework (Gardner & Derrida, 1989).
A “student” neural network is trained on synthetic inputs x ∈ RN , drawn i.i.d. from a standard
Gaussian distribution, xi ∼ N (0, 1). The labels for each task t = 1, . . . , T are generated by single-
                                             (t) √                           (1)       (T )
layer “teacher” networks: y (t) = g∗ (x · w∗ / N ), where W∗ = (w∗ , . . . , w∗ )⊤ ∈ RT ×N
denote the corresponding teacher vectors, and g∗ the activation function. The student is a two-layer
                                                                                 ⊤
neural network with K hidden units, first-layer weights W = (w1 , . . . , wK ) ∈ RK×N , activation
                                            K
function g, and second-layer weights v ∈ R . It outputs the prediction:
                                                             K
                                                             X                 x · wk
                                           ŷ (x; W , v) =         vk g         √               .                                            (1)
                                                             k=1
                                                                                   N

Following a standard multi-headed approach to continual learning (Zenke et al., 2017; Farquhar
& Gal, 2018), we allow for task-dependent readout weights: V = (v (1) , . . . , v (T ) )⊤ ∈ RT ×K .
Specifically, the readout for task t is updated only when that task is presented. While the readout is
switched during training according to the task under consideration, the first-layer weights are shared
across tasks. A pictorial representation of this model is displayed in Fig. 1. Training is performed
via Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) on the squared loss of y (t) and ŷ (t) = ŷ(x; W , v (t) ). We
consider the online regime, where at each training step the algorithmic update is computed using a
new sample (x, y (t) ). The generalisation error of the student on task t is given by
                                                                        !                    !2 
                                                                 (t)
                        1 D  (t)          2 E 1               w  ∗   · x
   εt (W , V , W∗ ) :=       y − ŷ (t)      = Ex  g ∗         √          − ŷ(x; W , v (t) )  . (2)
                        2                       2                  N

The angular brackets ⟨·⟩ denote the expectation over the input distribution for a given set of teacher
and student weights. Crucially, the error depends on the input data only through the preactivations
                                                                                                           (t)
             x · wk                                                              (t)        x · w∗
        λk := √     , k = 1, . . . , K ,                     and                λ∗ :=        √     , t = 1, . . . , T.                       (3)
                 N                                                                              N


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eq. 3 defines jointly Gaussian variables with zero mean and second moments given by
                                             h         i w · w(t)
                                                   (t)         k     ∗
                                Mkt := Ex λk λ∗ =                      ,
                                                                 N
                                                           wk · wh
                                Qkh := Ex [λk λh ] =                 ,                               (4)
                                                              N
                                                                   ′
                                                          i w(t ) · w(t)
                                                (t) (t′ )
                                             h
                                                                 ∗     ∗
                                 Stt′ := Ex λ∗ λ∗           =            ,
                                                                     N
called overlaps in the statistical physics literature. Therefore, the dynamics of the generalisation er-
ror is entirely captured by the evolution of the student readouts V and the overlaps. As shown in Lee
et al. (2021; 2022), we can track the evolution of the generalisation error in the high-dimensional.
We leverage this description and optimal control theory to derive optimal training protocols for
multi-task learning. In particular, we optimise over task selection and learning rate.

Forward training dynamics. First, we derive equations governing the dynamics of the overlaps
and readouts under a given task-selection protocol. These equations fully determine the evolution
of the generalization error. For the remainder of the paper, we consider K = T to guarantee that
the student network has enough capacity to learn all tasks perfectly. Teacher vectors are normalised,
and the task similarity is tuned by a parameter γ, so that Stt′ = δt,t′ + γ(1 − δt,t′ ). For simplicity,
it is useful to encode all the relevant degrees of freedom—namely, the overlaps and the readout
weights—in the same vector. We use the shorthand notation Q = (vec(Q), vec(M ), vec(V ))⊤ ∈
     2
RK +2KT . As further discussed in Appendix A, in the limit of large input dimension N → ∞ with
K, T ∼ ON (1), the training dynamics is described by a set of ODEs
                             dQ(α)
                                     = fQ (Q(α), u(α))       with α ∈ (0, αF ] .                       (5)
                               dα
The parameter α denotes the effective training time—the ratio between training steps and input
dimension N . The vector u encodes the dynamical variables that we want to control optimally. In
particular, we study the optimal schedules for task-selection tc (α) and learning rate η(α). Here,
tc (α) ∈ {1 , . . . , T } indicates on which task the student is trained at time α. The specific form of
the functions fQ is derived in Appendix A. The initial condition Q(0) matches the initialisation of
the SGD algorithm. In particular, the initial first-layer weights and readout weights are drawn i.i.d.
from a normal distribution with variances of 10−3 and 10−2 , respectively. Notably, the trajectory
appears to be largely independent of the specific initialisation of the first-layer weights. For instance,
in Fig. 2, simulations and theory correspond to different initialisations, yet the curves show excellent
agreement. Let us stress that Eq. 5 is a low-dimensional deterministic equation that fully captures
the high-dimensional stochastic dynamics of SGD as N → ∞. This dimensionality reduction is
crucial to apply the optimal control techniques presented in the next section.

Optimal control framework and backward conjugate dynamics. Our first main contribution is
to derive training strategies that are optimal with respect to the generalisation performance at the
end of training and on all tasks. In practice, the goal of the optimisation process is to minimise a
linear combination of the generalisation errors on the different tasks at the final training time αF :
                               T
                               X                                            T
                                                                            X
                h(Q(αF )) =          ct εt (Q(αF ))       with ct ≥ 0 and         ct = 1 ,            (6)
                               t=1                                          t=1

where the coefficients ct identify the relative importance of different tasks and εt denotes the infinite-
dimensional limit of the average generalisation error on task t, as defined in Eq. 2. Crucially, we
have an analytic expression for εt , derived in Appendix A. In the remainder of the paper, we assume
equally important tasks ct = 1/T . As customary in optimal control theory (Pontryagin, 1957), we
adopt a variational approach to solve the problem. We define the cost functional
                                         Z αF
                                                        ⊤     dQ(α)
          F[Q, Q̂, u] = h (Q(αF )) +            dα Q̂(α) −             + fQ (Q(α), u(α)) ,             (7)
                                           0                     dα
where the conjugate order parameters Q̂ = (vec(Q̂), vec(M̂ ), vec(V̂ ))⊤ enforce the training dy-
namics in the training interval α ∈ [0, αF ]. Finding the optimal protocol amounts to minimising the


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          No replay                        Interleaved             Optimal



 protocol
   Task
                 Task 1               Task 2


     Loss


 a)
 ￼
              α = time step / input dimension   b)             α         c)           α

Figure 2: How to learn a new task without forgetting the old one? The student is trained on task
1 until convergence during the first phase (α ∈ [0, 1000]), then task 2 is introduced. During the
second phase (α ∈ (1000, 1025]), task 1 may be replayed to prevent forgetting. For better visibility,
we only display the regions α ∈ [0, 20] ∪ [990, 1025]. We compare three strategies: a) no replay, b)
interleaved replay, i.e., alternating between the two tasks, c) the optimal strategy derived in Sec. 2.
Crosses mark numerical simulations of a single trajectory at N = 20000, lines mark the solution of
Eq. 5. Colour bars represent the protocol tc . Parameters: γ = 0.3, K = T = 2, and η = 1.

cost functional F with respect to Q, Q̂, and u. We defer the details of this variational procedure to
Appendix A, and present only the main steps here. For a general introduction to the control methods
adopted here, see, e.g., Kirk (2004). The minimisation with respect to Q provides a set of equations
for the backward dynamics of the conjugate parameters
                    dQ̂(α)⊤
                           −   = Q̂(α)⊤ ∇Q fQ (Q(α), u(α))      with α ∈ [0, αF ).                   (8)
                       dα
The final condition for the dynamics is given by
                                                  XT
                            Q̂(αF ) = ∇Q h(QF ) =     ct ∇Q εt (Q(αF )) .                            (9)
                                                                   t=1
The optimal control curve u∗ (α) is obtained as the solution of the minimisation:
                                              n                      o
                           u∗ (α) = argmin Q̂(α)⊤ fQ (Q(α), u) ,                                    (10)
                                                     u∈U
where U is the set of allowed controls, that can be either continuous or discrete. For instance, for task
selection we take u(α) = tc (α) and U = {1 , 2 . . . , T }, where we use the notation tc (α) to indicate
the current task, i.e., the task on which the student is trained at time α. When optimising over
both task selection and learning rate schedule we take u = (tc , η) and U = {1 , 2 . . . , T } × R+ .
Crucially, the optimal control equations 5, 8, and 10 must be iterated until convergence, starting
from an initial guess on u, which can be for instance taken at random. Let us stress that the space U
of possible controls is high-dimensional and hence it is not feasible to explore it via greedy search
strategies.

3           R ESULTS AND APPLICATIONS
The theoretical framework of Sec. 2 is extremely flexible and can be applied to a variety of settings.
We will present a technical paper focused on the method in a specialised venue. In this section, we
focus on specific settings and investigate in detail the impact of optimal training protocols on both
synthetic and real tasks. First, we consider the synthetic teacher-student framework. We compute
optimal task-selection protocols, investigating their structure and interplay with task similarity and
learning rate schedule. Then, we transfer the insights gained from the interpretation of the optimal
strategies in synthetic settings to applications on real datasets.

3.1         E XPERIMENTS ON SYNTHETIC DATA

We formulate the problem of continual learning as follows. During a first training phase, the student
learns perfectly task t = 1. Then, the goal is to learn a new task t = 2 without forgetting the


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             γ = 0.1                 γ = 0.3


                                                 protocol
                                                   Task
                                                    Loss
                                                      b)     γ = 0.6       c)        γ = 0.9


                                                  protocol
                                                    Task
                                                      Loss
                                    γ
        a)                                            d)                   e)
                                                               α                       α

Figure 3: The impact of task similarity on continual learning. a) Average loss on both tasks at the
end of the second training phase as a function of the task similarity γ under the replay setting from
Fig. 2. Different lines correspond to different strategies: no replay (purple crosses), optimal replay
(red dots), interleaved (blue squares), pseudo-optimal replay (cyan dashed line). b-e) Optimal replay
strategies for different values of γ = 0.1, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9. Colour bars represent the protocol tc (α).


previous one. A given time window of duration αF is assigned for the second training phase. In
particular, we investigate the role of replay—i.e., presenting samples from task 1 during the second
training phase—and the structure of the optimal replay strategy.
We use the equations derived in Sec. 2 to study optimal replay during the second phase of training.
To this end, we take the task-selection variable as our control u(α) = tc (α) ∈ {1, 2}, while we set
tc = 1 during the first training phase. The result of the optimisation in Eq. 10 strikes the balance
between training on the new task and replaying the old task. We do not enforce any constraints
on the number of samples from task 1 to use in the second phase. Therefore, our method provides
both the optimal fraction of replayed samples and the optimal task ordering, depending on the time
window αF . Fig. 2 compares the learning dynamics of three different strategies, depicting the loss
on task 1 (full orange line), task 2 (dashed green line), and their average (dotted black line) as a
function of the training time α. Numerical simulations—marked
                                                           √     by cross symbols—are in excellent
agreement with our theory. Deviations are smaller than 1/ N , compatible with finite-size effects.
The student is trained exclusively on task 1 until α = 1000, when the task is perfectly learned with
loss ∼ 10−6 . Then, the student is trained on a combination of new and old tasks for a training time
of duration αF = 25. A colour bar above each plot illustrates the associated task-selection strategy
tc (α). Panel a) shows training without replay, where only task 2 is presented in the second phase.
We observe catastrophic forgetting of task 1. Panel b) shows a heuristic “interleaved” strategy, where
training alternates one sample from the new task to one sample from the old one. As observed in
Lee et al. (2022), the interleaved strategy already provides a performance gain, demonstrating the
relevance of replay to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. Panel c) of Fig. 2 shows the loss dynamics for
the optimal replay strategy. Notably, the optimal strategy exhibits a complex structure and displays a
clear performance improvement over the other two strategies. In particular, we find that the optimal
task-selection strategy always presents an initial phase where training is performed only on the new
task. This behaviour is observed consistently across a range of task similarities.


The impact of task similarity. To understand the structure of the optimal strategy, we examine its
performance in relation to task similarity γ. Fig. 3a) depicts the average loss at the end of training as
a function of γ. For the no-replay strategy, we reproduce the findings from previous works (Lee et al.,
2021; 2022): the highest error occurs at intermediate task similarity. Lee et al. (2022) explained this
non-monotonicity as a trade-off between node re-use and node activation. Specifically, for small γ,
there is minimal interference between tasks. One hidden neuron predominantly aligns with the new
task, while the other neuron retains the knowledge of the old task, leading to task specialisation. At
large γ, features from task 1 are reused for task 2, avoiding forgetting. However, at intermediate γ,
interference is maximal: both neurons quickly align with task 2, and task 1 is forgotten. Remarkably,


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fig. 3a) shows that replay reverses this trend, with the minimal error occurring at intermediate γ. To
explain this nontrivial behaviour, we must first understand the optimal replay protocol.

Interpretation of the optimal replay structure. The optimal replay dynamics is illustrated in
panels b-e) of Fig. 3 and displays a highly structured protocol. We can interpret this structure a
posteriori: an initial focus phase without replay is followed by a revision phase involving interleaved
replay. The transition between these two phases corresponds approximately to the point at which the
loss on the new task matches the loss on the old one. To investigate the significance of this structure,
we also test an interleaved strategy, plotted in Fig. 3a). In this case, the task ordering in the second
training phase is fully randomised while maintaining the same overall replay fraction of the optimal
strategy. This protocol has a performance gap compared to the optimal one, showing the importance
of a properly structured replay scheme. Additionally, we test a “pseudo-optimal” variant, where the
focus phase is retained, but the revision phase is randomised. This variant performs comparably
to the optimal strategy, suggesting that while the specific order of the revision phase is largely
unimportant, it is key to precede it with a training phase on the new task.
We can now attempt to understand the inverted non-monotonic behaviour of the average loss as a
function of γ under the optimal protocol. First, as shown in Fig. 8 of Appendix C, the optimal
protocol achieves a good level of node specialisation across all values of γ. Thus, replay prevents
the task interference that typically causes performance deterioration at intermediate γ. The non-
monotonic behaviour of the optimal curve in Fig. 3a) arises from a different origin, involving two
opposing effects related to the first-layer weights and the readout. The initial decrease of the loss
with γ is quite intuitive, as only minimal knowledge can be transferred from task 1 to task 2 when
γ is small. Consequently, the focus phase on task 2 must be longer for smaller γ, leaving less time
to revise task 1, thereby reducing performance. On the other hand, the performance decrease ob-
served in Fig. 3a) for γ > 0.3 is more subtle and is related to the readout layer. Once the two
hidden neurons have specialised—each aligning with one of the teacher vectors—we expect the
                                                                                                   (1)
readout weights corresponding to the incorrect teacher to be suppressed. Specifically, if w1 = w∗
               (2)                                                                        (1)  (1)
and w2 = w∗ , the learning dynamics should drive the readout weights v (1) = (v1 , v2 )⊤
                (2) (2)
and v (2) = (v1 , v2 )⊤ towards v (1) = (1, 0)⊤ and v (2) = (0, 1)⊤ to achieve full recovery of
the teacher networks. As shown in Fig. 8 of Appendix C, the time required to suppress the off-
                    (1)        (2)
diagonal weights v2 and v1 increases as γ → 1. This is intuitive, as higher task similarity γ
reduces the distinction between tasks, slowing the suppression of the off-diagonal weights. In Ap-
pendix B, we derive analytically the convergence timescale αconv of the readout layer, showing that
   protocol


                                                                                     3π
     Task


                                                                αconv =                           ,      (11)
                                                                           η(π − 6 arcsin (γ/2))
                                                           where η is the learning rate. This timescale is a
                                                           monotonically increasing function    of γ and di-
                                         Task 1                                           √
                                                           verges as γ → 1 with αconv ≈ 3π/(2η(1 − γ)).
   Learning rate η


                                         Task 2            This result explains the performance decrease of
                                                           the optimal strategy as γ → 1. In summary, the
                                                           performance decrease for γ → 0 is due to the
                                                           first-layer weights, while for γ → 1 it is related
                                                           to the readout weights.

                                                           Optimal learning rate schedules. While the
                     α = time step / input dimension       above results are obtained with a constant learn-
    ￼                     ￼
                                                           ing rate, annealing schedules are widely used in
                                                           machine learning. Thus, it is relevant to study
Figure 4: Joint optimisation of task-selection             the optimal interplay between replay and learn-
and learning-rate. Optimal learning rate as a              ing rate. Optimal learning rate dynamics have
function of training time α for the same parame-           been studied with a similar approach in Saad &
ters as Fig. 2. There is a single optimal learning         Rattray (1997). We jointly optimise the task-
rate curve, but for visibility purposes we show it         selection protocol together with the learning rate
as a solid orange line when training on task 1 and         to investigate its impact on continual learning.
a dashed green line on task 2. The task-selection          Fig. 4 shows the optimal learning rate schedule
protocol tc (α) is illustrated in the colour bar.          for task similarity γ = 0.3 in the second training


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  γ = 0.1                      γ = 0.3


                                                   protocol
                                                     Task
                                                    Loss
                                                    b)                               c)
                                                                  γ = 0.6                     γ = 0.9


                                                   protocol
                                                     Task
                                                    Loss
           a)                                       d) α = time step / input dimension e)           α
       ￼


Figure 5: The impact of task similarity on multi-task learning. a) Average loss as a function of
task similarity γ at the end of training (αF = 10). Different lines correspond to different strategies:
sequential (purple crosses), optimal (red dots), and randomly interleaved with 50% samples from
each task (blue squares). b-e) Optimal replay strategy for different values of γ = 0.1, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9.
Parameters: K = T = 2 and η = 10.


phase of duration αF = 25. Similarly as for constant learning rate (panel c) of Fig. 3), optimal
task-selection is characterised by an initial focus phase. Notably, this phase coincides with a strong
annealing of the learning rate to achieve optimal performance. Intuitively, when learning the new
task, the learning rate starts high and is gradually decreased over time. Interestingly, while enter-
ing the revision phase, the optimal learning rate schedule exhibits a highly nontrivial structure (see
Fig. 4). Indeed, although the optimal learning rate curve is unique, we find that effectively it can
be seen as two different curves, associated to the respective tasks. In practice, the optimal learning
rate curve “jumps” between these two curves according to the task selected at a given training time.
performance. Fig. 9 of Appendix C shows that the joint optimization of learning rate and task selec-
tion outperforms all other protocols, including exponential and power-law learning rate schedules
combined with interleaved replay.

Multi-task learning from scratch. We also consider a multi-task setting (see Fig. 5) where both
tasks must be learned from scratch within a fixed number of steps, corresponding to a total training
time αF . We first consider sequential learning, i.e., training only on task 1 for α < αF /2, then
only on task 2, or vice versa. As shown in Fig. 5a) sequential learning leads to catastrophic forget-
ting, with the worst performance observed at intermediate task similarity. In contrast, a randomly
interleaved strategy, where examples from both tasks are presented in equal proportion but in ran-
dom order, shows significant improvement. This approach can exploit task similarity, leading to a
monotonic decrease in average loss as γ increases. The optimal strategy, displayed in Fig. 5b-e)
for various values of γ, follows a structured interleaved protocol that further enhances performance.
Contrary to the continual learning framework, the optimal structure gives only marginal gain over the
plain interleaved strategy. This observation aligns with our pseudo-optimal strategy, which suggests
employing interleaved replay once performance on both tasks becomes comparable.

3.2   E XPERIMENTS ON REAL DATA

We consider the experimental framework established in Ramasesh et al. (2020); Lee et al. (2022)
for the study of task similarity in relation to catastrophic forgetting. We use the Fashion-MNIST
dataset (Xiao et al., 2017) to generate upstream and downstream tasks. The upstream dataset—
D1 = {x x(1)       (1)
          i , yi }i —consists in a pair of classes from the standard dataset. The downstream dataset
is generated by a linear interpolation of the upstream dataset with a second auxiliary dataset—
D̃ = {x̃
       xi , ỹi }i —containing a new pair of classes,
                           (2)   (2)         (1)                          (1)
                  D2 = {x
                        xi , yi }i = {γx
                                       xi          + (1 − γ)x̃
                                                            xi , γyi            + (1 − γ)ỹi }i ,        (12)


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the parameter γ controls the task similarity. We then train a standard two-layer feedforward
ReLU neural network on the two datasets using online SGD on a squared error loss. We consider a
dynamical multi-head architecture (Zhou et al., 2012; Rusu et al., 2016) where the readout weights
are changed switching from one task to another, but the hidden layer is shared. During training, we
apply the three strategies discussed in the previous sections: a no-replay strategy, a strategy with
interleaved replay, and a “pseudo-optimal” strategy. Recall that the latter is inspired by the optimal
protocol derived in the previous section. It consists of an initial phase of training exclusively on the
new task until performance on both tasks becomes comparable, followed by a phase of interleaved
replay. Crucially, this protocol can be easily implemented in practice, as it only requires an estimate
of the generalisation error on the two tasks, which can be obtained in real-world settings.

                                   No Replay                       Interleaved                    Pseudo-Optimal                  Average loss
             10 1
                                                task 1                                                                                 No Replay
                                                task 2                                                                                 Interleaved
                                                                                                                                       Pseudo-Optimal

             10 2
    Loss


                                                                                                                                    [1e-3]
                                                                                                                                    2.0
                                                                                                                                    1.7
             10 3                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                             15k 20k
                           0        10000         20000     0         10000      20000   0            10000        20000     0       10000        20000
                                     Step                              Step                            Step                           Step


Figure 6: Training dynamics. Training curves on the modified fashion MNIST task at similarity
γ = 0.5. The network is trained for 10.000 steps on the first task before switching to the second task
and being trained for additional 10.000 steps. The results are obtained from 100 realisations of the
problem. The first three panels show the test loss on task 1 (solid orange), task 2 (dashed green), and
their average (dotted black) for three training strategies, from left to right: no-replay, interleaved,
and pseudo-optimal. The rightmost panel shows the average loss over the entire training.

Fig. 6 shows the training loss under the different training protocols for γ = 0.5. While the no-replay
strategy appears to be successful for small downstream datasets (i.e., a few training steps in the
online framework) in the longer run it leads to strong forgetting and high average loss. This behavior
is intuitive: for small datasets, the initial loss on the new task is high, leading to a substantial decrease
in loss early on, which temporarily outweighs the decline in performance on the previous task. The
interleaved is beneficial in the long run but largely slows down learning of the new task. Overall, the
pseudo-optimal protocol identified in Sec. 3.1 shows a better performance over the entire trajectory.

                                500 samples               1000 samples           2000 samples                 4000 samples           8000 samples
                                                                                                                                        No Replay
                    10 2                                                                                                                Interleaved
                                                                                                                                        Pseudo-Optimal
     Average loss


                    10 3
                               0.25 0.50 0.75             0.25 0.50 0.75         0.25 0.50 0.75            0.25 0.50 0.75           0.25 0.50 0.75



Figure 7: Average loss comparison. The figure focuses on the average loss and shows the final
loss achieved by the three strategies as we increase the size of task 2 (from left to right: 500, 1.000,
2.000, 4.000, and 8.000 samples) while task 1 has always 10.000 samples. Individual panels show
the performance of the three strategies as we span the value of γ form 0.05 to 0.95.

This result is not limited to the specific value of γ. Fig. 7 shows the average final loss as a function
of γ. From left to right, different panels correspond to an increasing number of available samples
for the downstream task, comparable to αF in the theoretical model. For small downstream tasks,
the no-replay strategy is optimal, as shown in the second and third panels. As the size of the down-
stream task increases, the interleaved strategy approaches optimal performance while the no-replay
becomes suboptimal. The pseudo-optimal strategy combines the advantages of both approaches, in-


                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


terpolating between no-replay and interleaved strategies to automatically adapt to the computational
budget. This results in the best overall performance across regimes. We confirm this observation
with additional experiments on CIFAR10 in Appendix C.2. Notably, despite the differences be-
tween the synthetic and real settings—such as data structure—the pseudo-optimal strategy remains
effective on real-world data, demonstrating its robustness and broad applicability.

4   D ISCUSSION
Conclusion. In this work, we introduce a systematic approach for identifying and interpreting opti-
mal task-selection strategies in synthetic learning settings. We consider a teacher-student scenario as
a prototypical continual learning problem to achieve analytic understanding of supervised multi-task
learning. We incorporate prior results on exact ODEs for high-dimensional online SGD dynamics
into a control-theory framework that allows us to derive exact equations for the optimal protocols.
Our theory reveals that optimal task-selection protocols are typically highly structured—alternating
between focused learning and interleaved replay phases—and display a nontrivial interplay with
task similarity. We also identify highly structured optimal learning rate schedules that synchronise
with optimal task-selection to enhance overall performance. Finally, leveraging insights from the
synthetic setting, we extract a pseudo-optimal strategy applicable to real tasks.

Limitations and Perspectives. This work takes a first step toward understanding the theory behind
optimal training protocols for neural networks. In the following, we discuss current limitations and
outline promising directions for future research. First, Pontryagin’s maximum principle provides
a necessary condition for optimality but does not guarantee a global optimum. Nevertheless, the
strategies derived from this approach in the settings under consideration perform significantly better
than previously proposed heuristics. Additionally, Pontryagin’s principle does not easily extend to
stochastic problems. This limitation is overcome in the high-dimensional limit where concentration
results provide deterministic dynamical equations. For simplicity, we focus on i.i.d. Gaussian inputs,
but our analysis can be extended to more structured data models (Goldt et al., 2020; Loureiro et al.,
2021; Adomaityte et al., 2023) to study how input distribution affects task selection. In particular,
we do not model the relative task difficulty—an important extension that naturally connects to the
theory of curriculum learning (Weinshall & Amir, 2020; Saglietti et al., 2022; Cornacchia & Mossel,
2023; Abbe et al., 2023). Furthermore, it would be interesting to go beyond the study of online
dynamics to understand the impact of memorisation in batch learning settings (Sagawa et al., 2020).
Existing results in the spurious correlations (Ye et al., 2021) and fairness (Ganesh et al., 2023)
literature suggest a strong dependence of the classifier’s bias on the presentation order in batch
learning. Our method can be applied to mean-field models—like (Mannelli et al., 2024; Jain et al.,
2024)—to theoretically investigate this phenomenon. An interesting extension of our work involves
applying recently-developed statistical physics methods to the study of deeper networks and more
complex learning architectures (Bordelon & Pehlevan, 2022b;a; Rende et al., 2024; Tiberi et al.,
2024). Another interesting direction concerns finding optimal protocols for shaping, where task
order significantly impacts both animal learning and neural networks (Skinner, 1938; Tong et al.,
2023; Lee et al., 2024).

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

The code to reproduce the numerical experiments is available in the supplementary material.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank Rodrigo Carrasco-Davis, Sebastian Goldt, and Andrew Saxe for useful feedback. This
work was supported by a Leverhulme Trust International Professorship grant [number LIP-2020-
014], the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems, and Software Program (WASP), and by the Simons
Foundation (Award Number: 1141576).

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Elisabetta Cornacchia, and Aryo Lotfi. Provable advantage of curriculum learning
  on parity targets with mixed inputs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:

                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  24291–24321, 2023.
Urte Adomaityte, Gabriele Sicuro, and Pierpaolo Vivo. Classification of superstatistical features in
  high dimensions. In 2023 Conference on Neural Information Procecessing Systems, 2023.
Jonathan Baxter. A model of inductive bias learning. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 12:
  149–198, 2000.
John Bechhoefer. Control theory for physicists. Cambridge University Press, 2021.
Michael Biehl and Holm Schwarze. Learning by on-line gradient descent. Journal of Physics A:
 Mathematical and general, 28(3):643, 1995.
Blake Bordelon and Cengiz Pehlevan. The influence of learning rule on representation dynamics in
  wide neural networks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022a.
Blake Bordelon and Cengiz Pehlevan. Self-consistent dynamical field theory of kernel evolution
  in wide neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:32240–32256,
  2022b.
Rodrigo Carrasco-Davis, Javier Ması́s, and Andrew M Saxe. Meta-learning strategies through value
  maximization in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19919, 2023.
R Caruana. Multitask learning: A knowledge-based source of inductive bias. In Proceedings of the
  Tenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 41–48. Citeseer, 1993.
Rich Caruana. Learning many related tasks at the same time with backpropagation. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 7, 1994a.
Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28:41–75, 1997.
Richard A Caruana. Multitask connectionist learning. In Proceedings of the 1993 connectionist
  models summer school, pp. 372–379. Psychology Press, 1994b.
Xinyi Chen and Elad Hazan. Online control for meta-optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-
  parameterized models using optimal transport. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 31, 2018.
Elisabetta Cornacchia and Elchanan Mossel. A mathematical model for curriculum learning for
  parities. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6402–6423. PMLR, 2023.
Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, Aleš Leonardis, Gregory
 Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification
 tasks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(7):3366–3385, 2021.
Oussama Dhifallah and Yue M Lu. Phase transitions in transfer learning for high-dimensional per-
  ceptrons. Entropy, 23(4):400, 2021.
Timothy J Draelos, Nadine E Miner, Christopher C Lamb, Jonathan A Cox, Craig M Vineyard,
  Kristofor D Carlson, William M Severa, Conrad D James, and James B Aimone. Neurogenesis
  deep learning: Extending deep networks to accommodate new classes. In 2017 international joint
  conference on neural networks (IJCNN), pp. 526–533. IEEE, 2017.
Andreas Engel. Statistical mechanics of learning. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Sebastian Farquhar and Yarin Gal. Towards robust evaluations of continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.09733, 2018.
AA Feldbaum. On the synthesis of optimal systems with the aid of phase space. Avtomatika i
 Telemehanika, 16(2):129–149, 1955.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robert M French. Using semi-distributed representations to overcome catastrophic forgetting in
  connectionist networks. In Proceedings of the 13th annual cognitive science society conference,
  volume 1, pp. 173–178, 1991.
Robert M French. Semi-distributed representations and catastrophic forgetting in connectionist net-
  works. Connection Science, 4(3-4):365–377, 1992.
Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences,
  3(4):128–135, 1999.
Prakhar Ganesh, Hongyan Chang, Martin Strobel, and Reza Shokri. On the impact of machine
  learning randomness on group fairness. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 1789–1800, 2023.
Elizabeth Gardner and Bernard Derrida. Three unfinished works on the optimal storage capacity of
  networks. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 22(12):1983, 1989.
Federica Gerace, Luca Saglietti, Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Andrew Saxe, and Lenka Zdeborová.
  Probing transfer learning with a model of synthetic correlated datasets. Machine Learning: Sci-
  ence and Technology, 3(1):015030, 2022.
Sebastian Goldt, Madhu Advani, Andrew M Saxe, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Dy-
  namics of stochastic gradient descent for two-layer neural networks in the teacher-student setup.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Sebastian Goldt, Marc Mézard, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Modeling the influence of
  data structure on learning in neural networks: The hidden manifold model. Physical Review X,
  10(4):041044, 2020.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Xia Da, Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An empiri-
  cal investigation of catastrophic forgeting in gradient-based neural networks. In Yoshua Bengio
  and Yann LeCun (eds.), 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014,
  Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings, 2014.
Jiequn Han, Qianxiao Li, et al. A mean-field optimal control formulation of deep learning. Research
   in the Mathematical Sciences, 6(1):1–41, 2019.
Alessandro Ingrosso, Rosalba Pacelli, Pietro Rotondo, and Federica Gerace. Statistical mechan-
  ics of transfer learning in fully-connected networks in the proportional limit. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.07168, 2024.
Anchit Jain, Rozhin Nobahari, Aristide Baratin, and Stefano Sarao Mannelli. Bias in motion: Theo-
  retical insights into the dynamics of bias in sgd training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18296, 2024.
Ronald Kemker, Marc McClure, Angelina Abitino, Tyler Hayes, and Christopher Kanan. Measuring
  catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Donald E Kirk. Optimal control theory: an introduction. Courier Corporation, 2004.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Richard E Kopp. Pontryagin maximum principle. In Mathematics in Science and Engineering,
  volume 5, pp. 255–279. Elsevier, 1962.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Toronto, ON, Canada, 2009.
Jin Hwa Lee, Stefano Sarao Mannelli, and Andrew Saxe. Why do animals need shaping? a theory
   of task composition and curriculum learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18361, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sebastian Lee, Sebastian Goldt, and Andrew Saxe. Continual learning in the teacher-student setup:
  Impact of task similarity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6109–6119.
  PMLR, 2021.
Sebastian Lee, Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Claudia Clopath, Sebastian Goldt, and Andrew Saxe.
  Maslow’s hammer in catastrophic forgetting: Node re-use vs. node activation. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12455–12477. PMLR, 2022.
Yujun Li, Rodrigo Carrasco-Davis, Younes Strittmatter, Stefano Sarao Mannelli, and Sebastian Mus-
  slick. A meta-learning framework for rationalizing cognitive fatigue in neural systems. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, volume 46, 2024.
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
  and machine intelligence, 40(12):2935–2947, 2017.
Bruno Loureiro, Cedric Gerbelot, Hugo Cui, Sebastian Goldt, Florent Krzakala, Marc Mezard, and
  Lenka Zdeborová. Learning curves of generic features maps for realistic datasets with a teacher-
  student model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18137–18151, 2021.
Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Federica Gerace, Negar Rostamzadeh, and Luca Saglietti. Bias-inducing
  geometries: exactly solvable data model with fairness implications. In ICML 2024 Workshop on
  Geometry-grounded Representation Learning and Generative Modeling, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=oupizzpMpY.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989.
Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-
  layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):E7665–E7671,
  2018.
German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual
  lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural networks, 113:54–71, 2019.
LS Pontryagin. Some mathematical problems arising in connection with the theory of optimal au-
  tomatic control systems. In Proc. Conf. on Basic Problems in Automatic Control and Regulation,
  1957.
Vinay V Ramasesh, Ethan Dyer, and Maithra Raghu. Anatomy of catastrophic forgetting: Hidden
  representations and task semantics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07400, 2020.
Roger Ratcliff. Connectionist models of recognition memory: constraints imposed by learning and
  forgetting functions. Psychological review, 97(2):285, 1990.
Magnus Rattray and David Saad. Globally optimal on-line learning rules for multi-layer neural
 networks. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 30(22):L771, 1997.
Magnus Rattray and David Saad. Analysis of on-line training with optimal learning rates. Physical
 Review E, 58(5):6379, 1998.
Maria Refinetti, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Ruben Ohana, and Sebastian Goldt. Align, then memorise:
 the dynamics of learning with feedback alignment. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 8925–8935. PMLR, 2021.
Riccardo Rende, Federica Gerace, Alessandro Laio, and Sebastian Goldt. Mapping of attention
  mechanisms to a generalized potts model. Physical Review Research, 6(2):023057, 2024.
David Rolnick, Arun Ahuja, Jonathan Schwarz, Timothy Lillicrap, and Gregory Wayne. Experience
  replay for continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Grant Rotskoff and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Trainability and accuracy of artificial neural networks:
  An interacting particle system approach. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 75
  (9):1889–1935, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrei A. Rusu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick,
  Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. CoRR,
  abs/1606.04671, 2016.
David Saad and Magnus Rattray. Globally optimal parameters for on-line learning in multilayer
  neural networks. Physical review letters, 79(13):2578, 1997.
David Saad and Magnus Rattray. Learning with regularizers in multilayer neural networks. Physical
  Review E, 57(2):2170, 1998.
David Saad and Sara Solla. Dynamics of on-line gradient descent learning for multilayer neural
  networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 8, 1995a.
David Saad and Sara A Solla. On-line learning in soft committee machines. Physical Review E, 52
  (4):4225, 1995b.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 2020.
Luca Saglietti, Stefano Mannelli, and Andrew Saxe. An analytical theory of curriculum learning in
  teacher-student networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21113–21127,
  2022.
Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Yaraslau Ivashynka, Andrew M Saxe, Luca Saglietti, et al. Tilting the
  odds at the lottery: the interplay of overparameterisation and curricula in neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
E Schlösser, D Saad, and M Biehl. Optimization of on-line principal component analysis. Journal
  of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 32(22):4061, 1999.
Haozhe Shan, Qianyi Li, and Haim Sompolinsky. Order parameters and phase transitions of contin-
  ual learning in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10315, 2024.
Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
  replay. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Burrhus Frederic Skinner. The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis. BF Skinner
  Foundation, 1938.
Ravi Francesco Srinivasan, Francesca Mignacco, Martino Sorbaro, Maria Refinetti, Avi Cooper,
  Gabriel Kreiman, and Giorgia Dellaferrera. Forward learning with top-down feedback: Empirical
  and analytical characterization. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=My7lkRNnL9.
Rupesh K Srivastava, Jonathan Masci, Sohrob Kazerounian, Faustino Gomez, and Jürgen Schmid-
  huber. Compete to compute. Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Steven C Suddarth and YL Kergosien. Rule-injection hints as a means of improving network perfor-
  mance and learning time. In European association for signal processing workshop, pp. 120–129.
  Springer, 1990.
Lorenzo Tiberi, Francesca Mignacco, Kazuki Irie, and Haim Sompolinsky. Dissecting the in-
  terplay of attention paths in a statistical mechanics theory of transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.15926, 2024.
William L Tong, Anisha Iyer, Venkatesh N Murthy, and Gautam Reddy. Adaptive algorithms for
 shaping behavior. bioRxiv, 2023.
Pierfrancesco Urbani. Disordered high-dimensional optimal control. Journal of Physics A: Mathe-
  matical and Theoretical, 54(32):324001, 2021.
Rodrigo Veiga, Ludovic Stephan, Bruno Loureiro, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Phase
  diagram of stochastic gradient descent in high-dimensional two-layer neural networks. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23244–23255, 2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T Kwok, and Lionel M Ni. Generalizing from a few examples:
  A survey on few-shot learning. ACM computing surveys (csur), 53(3):1–34, 2020.
Daphna Weinshall and Dan Amir. Theory of curriculum learning, with convex loss functions. Jour-
  nal of Machine Learning Research, 21(222):1–19, 2020.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan, and Wei-Lun Chao. Procrustean training for imbalanced deep learning.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 92–102, 2021.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3987–3995. PMLR, 2017.
Lei Zhang and Xinbo Gao. Transfer adaptation learning: A decade survey. IEEE Transactions on
  Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2022.
Yu Zhang and Qiang Yang. A survey on multi-task learning. IEEE transactions on knowledge and
  data engineering, 34(12):5586–5609, 2021.
Guanyu Zhou, Kihyuk Sohn, and Honglak Lee. Online incremental feature learning with denoising
  autoencoders. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 1453–1461. PMLR, 2012.


A    D ETAILS ON THE THEORETICAL DERIVATIONS
In this appendix, we provide detailed derivations of the equations in Sec. 2 of the main text. In the
interest of completeness, we also report the derivation of the ODEs describing online SGD dynamics
and the generalisation error as a function of the order parameters, first derived in (Lee et al., 2021).
We remind that inputs are N −dimensional vectors x ∈ RN with independent identically distributed
(i.i.d.) standard Gaussian entries xi ∼ N (0, 1), while the labels are generated by single-layer teacher
                            (t) √
networks: y (t) = g∗ (x · w∗ / N ), t = 1, . . . , T , with a different teacher for each task. The student
is a one-hidden layer network that outputs the prediction:
                                               K
                                              X    (t)    x · wk
                                     ŷ (t) =     vk g     √         .                                (13)
                                              k=1
                                                              N
In the main text, we focus on the case K = T , where the student has, in principle, the capacity to
perfectly solve the problem and represent all teachers. Specifically, there exists a configuration of
the student’s parameters that achieves perfect recovery. This configuration corresponds to aligning
each of the student’s hidden neurons with a specific teacher/task. Explicitly, this configuration is
                   (k)      (t)
given by wk = w∗ and vk = δk,t , where δk,t denotes the Kronecker delta. However, our theory
remains valid for arbitrary K and T .
We focus on the online (on one-pass) setting, so that at each training step the student network is
presented with a fresh example xµ , µ = 1, . . . , P , and P/N ∼ ON (1). The weights of the student
are updated through gradient descent on 12 (ŷ (t) − y (t) )2 following the task-selection protocol tc :
                                                      (t )µ          xµ
                        wkµ+1 = wkµ − η µ ∆(tc )µ vk c g ′ (λµk ) √ ,
                                                                      N
                                             µ
                       (t)µ+1     (t)µ     η
                      vk      = vk −           ∆(t)µ g(λµk )δt,tc ,                                   (14)
                                           N
                                                      K
                                                     X (t)                   (t)µ
                        ∆(t)µ := ŷ (t)µ − y (t)µ =       vk g(λµk ) − g∗ (λ∗ ) ,
                                                     k=1
where η µ denotes the (possibly time-dependent) learning rate and we have rescaled it by N in
the dynamics of the readout weights for future convenience. We have defined the preactivations,
a.k.a. local fields,
                                                                                 (t)
                               xµ · wkµ                        (t)µ        x µ · w∗
                      λµk :=    √       ,                     λ∗      :=      √     .                (15)
                                   N                                             N


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notice that, due to the online-learning setup, at each training step the input x is independent of the
weights. Therefore, due to the Gaussianity of the inputs, the local fields are also jointly Gaussian
with zero mean and second moments given by the overlaps:
                                           h        i w · w(t)
                                                (t)         k     ∗
                               Mkt := Ex λk λ∗ =                    ,
                                                              N
                                                        wk · wh
                               Qkh := Ex [λk λh ] =               ,                              (16)
                                                           N
                                                                ′
                                                       i w(t ) · w(t)
                                             (t) (t′ )
                                           h
                                                              ∗     ∗
                               Stt′ := Ex λ∗ λ∗          =             .
                                                                  N

A.1   G ENERALISATION ERROR AS A FUNCTION OF THE ORDER PARAMETERS

We can write the generalisation error (Eq. 2 of the main text) as an average over the local fields:
                               1 X (t) (t)                            1      h
                                                                                    (t)
                                                                                        i
           εt (W , V , W∗ ) =         vk vh Eλ,λ∗ [g(λk )g(λh )] + Eλ,λ∗ g∗ (λ∗ )2
                               2                                      2
                                  k,h
                                 X (t)           h              i                                 (17)
                                                            (t)
                              −       vk Eλ,λ∗ g(λk )g∗ (λ∗ ) .
                                    k
where the expectation is computed over the multivariate Gaussian distribution

                                    1                 1
                P (λ, λ∗ ) = p               exp − (λ, λ∗ )⊤ C −1 (λ, λ∗ ) ,
                                (2π)K+T |C|           2
                                                                                                  (18)
                                  Q    M
                         C=                   .
                                M⊤ S
From now on, we adopt the unified notation
                                I2 (β, ρ) := Eλ,λ∗ [gβ (λβ )gρ (λρ )] ,                           (19)
                                                                                       ′
where β, ρ can refer both to the indices of the student weights k, h or the tasks t, t . We can then
rewrite the generalisation error as
                                  1 X (t) (t)            1           X (t)
              εt (W , V , W∗ ) =       vk vh I2 (k, h) + I2 (t, t) −      vk I2 (k, t) .        (20)
                                  2                      2
                                    k,h                                   k
                                                                          √
In all the results presented in Sec. 3, we consider g(z) = g∗ (z) = erf z/ 2 . In this case, there is
an analytic expression for the integral I2 (Saad & Solla, 1995a):
                                          2                 qβρ
                              I2 (β, ρ) = arcsin p            p         ,                       (21)
                                          π           1 + qββ 1 + qρρ
and we use the symbol q to denote generically an overlap from Eq. 16, according to the choice of
indices β, ρ, e.g., qkh = Qkh , qkt = Mkt , and qttc = Sttc . In this special case, the generalisation
error can be written explicitly as a function of the overlaps
                          1 X (t) (t)                     Qkh             1           Stt
      εt (W , V , W∗ ) =           vk vh arcsin √            √         + arcsin
                          π                         1 + Q kk   1 + Qhh   π          1 + Stt
                              k,h
                                                                                                  (22)
                             2 X (t)                    Mkt
                          −          vk arcsin √           √         .
                             π                    1 + Qkk 1 + Stt
                                  k


A.2   O RDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS FOR THE FORWARD TRAINING DYNAMICS

Given that the generalisation error depends only on the overlaps, in order to characterise the learning
curves we need to compute the equations of motion for the overlaps from the SGD dynamics of the
weights given in Eq. 14. The order parameter Stt′ associated to the teachers is constant in time. We
                                                                               (t)
obtain an ODE for Mkt by multiplying both sides of the first of Eq. 14 by w∗ and dividing by N :
                              (t)           (t)
                    wkµ+1 · w∗  w µ · w∗    ηµ        (t )µ          (t)µ
                               − k       = − ∆(tc )µ vk c g ′ (λµk )λ∗ ,                          (23)
                        N           N       N


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we stress the difference between tc , the task selected for training at step µ, and t, the task
for which we compute the overlap. We define a “training time” α = µ/N and take the infinite-
dimensional limit N → ∞. The parameter α becomes continuous and Mkt concentrates to the
solution of the following ODE:
                       dMkt        (t )
                                               h
                                                              (t)
                                                                  i
                             = −ηvk c Eλ,λ∗ ∆(tc ) g ′ (λk )λ∗ := fM ,kt ,                       (24)
                         dα
where the expectation is computed over the distribution in Eq. 18. The ODE for Qkh is obtained
similarly from Eq. 14:
     wkµ+1 · whµ+1     wµ · whµ         ηµ       (t )µ                η µ (tc )µ (tc )µ ′ µ µ
                    − k           = − ∆(tc )µ vk c g ′ (λµk )λµh −       ∆      vh g (λh )λk
            N             N              N                            N                                          (25)
                                                       2
                                                           (t )µ (t )µ                x·x
                                    + (η µ )2 ∆(tc )µ vk c vh c g ′ (λµk )g ′ (λµh )       .
                                                                                       N
In the infinite-dimensional limit, we find
              dQkh         (t )
                                        h              i
                                                                (t )
                                                                          h                i
                    = −ηvk c Eλ,λ∗ ∆(tc ) g ′ (λµk )λµh − ηvh c Eλ,λ∗ ∆(tc ) g ′ (λµh )λµk                       (26)
                dα
                                                       2
                          2 (tc ) (tc )         (tc )     ′        ′
                       + η vk vh Eλ,λ∗ ∆                 g (λk )g (λh ) := fQ,kh .                               (27)

Finally, taking the infinite dimensional limit of the second Eq. 14, we find the ODE for the readout:
                               (t)
                             dvk               h           i
                                   = −η Eλ,λ∗ ∆(t) g(λk ) δt,tc := fV ,tk .                      (28)
                              dα
It is useful to write this system of ODEs in a more compact form. With the shorthand notation
                                    ⊤                                      ⊤
Q = (vec(Q), vec(M ), vec(V )) , fQ = (vec(fQ ), vec(fM ), vec(fV )) , we can write
                    dQ(α)
                              = fQ (Q(α), u(α)) ,                      α ∈ (0, αF ] .                (29)
                       dα
The initial condition for Q(0) is chosen to reproduce the random initialisation of the SGD algo-
rithm. In particular, the initial first-layer weights and readout weights are drawn i.i.d. from a normal
distribution with variances of 10−3 and 10−2 , respectively. A thorough analysis of the validity of
this ODE description is provided in Veiga et al. (2022), where the authors study the crossover be-
tween narrow and infinitely wide networks, clarifying the connection with the so-called mean-field
or hydrodynamic regime (Mei et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022).
It is useful to write explicit expressions for the integrals involved in fQ (Lee et al., 2021). First,
expanding the terms in ∆(t) , we can write
                                  "K                                   #
                            (tc )
                                   X
                                       (tc )
              fQ,kh = −ηvk            vn I3 (n, k, h) − I3 (tc , k, h)
                                    n=1
                                 "K                                               #
                            (t )
                                  X
                      − ηvh   c
                                          vn(tc ) I3 (n, h, k) − I3 (tc , h, k)
                                    n=1
                                          "   K
                                                                                                             ,   (30)
                             (t ) (t )
                                              X
                      + η 2 vk c vh c                 vn(tc ) vm
                                                               (tc )
                                                                     I4 (n, m, k, h) + I4 (tc , tc , k, h)
                                            n,m=1
                              K
                                                             #
                              X
                         −2         vn(tc ) I4 (n, tc , k, h)
                              n=1

                                              K
                                       (t )                                   (t )
                                              X
                     fM ,kt = −ηvk c                vn(tc ) I3 (n, k, t) + ηvk c I3 (tc , k, t) ,                (31)
                                              n=1
                                       "      K
                                                                                      #
                                              X
                         fV ,tk = η −               vn(tc ) I2 (k, n) + I2 (k, tc )       δt,tc .                (32)
                                              n=1



                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Similarly as in Eq. 19, we adopt the unified notation for the integrals
                         I3 (β, ρ, ζ) := Eλ,λ∗ λβ gρ′ (λρ )g(λζ ) ,

                                                                                                        (33)
                      I4 (β, ρ, ζ, τ ) := Eλ,λ∗ gβ (λβ )gρ (λρ )gζ′ (λζ )gτ′ (λτ ) ,


where β, ρ, ζ, τ can refer both to the indices
                                         √     of the student weights k, h, n, m or the tasks t, tc . In
the special case g(z) = g∗ (z) = erf(z/ 2), the integrals have explicit expressions as a function of
the overlaps
                                                2qρζ (1 + qββ ) − 2qβρ qβζ
                                  I3 (β, ρ, ζ) =       √                   ,
                                                     π Λ3 (1 + qββ )
                                                                                                        (34)
                                                   4              Λ0
                              I4 (β, ρ, ζ, τ ) = 2 √ arcsin √            ,
                                                π Λ4              Λ1 Λ2
the symbol q denotes generically an overlap from Eq. 16, and
      Λ0 = Λ4 qβρ − qβτ qρτ (1 + qζζ ) − qβζ qρζ (1 + qτ τ ) + qζτ qβζ qρτ + qζτ qρζ qβτ ,
                            2                2
      Λ1 = Λ4 (1 + qββ ) − qβτ (1 + qζζ ) − qβζ (1 + qτ τ ) + 2qζτ qβζ qβτ ,
                            2                2
      Λ2 = Λ4 (1 + qρρ ) − qρτ (1 + qζζ ) − qρζ (1 + qτ τ ) + 2qζτ qρζ qρτ ,                            (35)
                                     2
      Λ3 = (1 + qββ )(1 + qρρ ) − qβρ   ,
                                     2
      Λ4 = (1 + qζζ ) (1 + qτ τ ) − qζτ .

A.3    I NFORMAL DERIVATION OF P ONTRYAGIN MAXIMUM PRINCIPLE

Let us consider the augmented cost functional
                                     Z αF
                                                   ⊤   dQ(α)
          F[Q, Q̂, u] = h (Q(αF )) +       dα Q̂(α) −        + fQ (Q(α), u(α)) ,                        (36)
                                       0                dα
where the conjugate variables Q̂(α) act as Lagrange multipliers, enforcing the dynamics at time α.
Setting to zero variations with respect to Q̂(α) results in the forward dynamics
                          δF[Q, Q̂, u]             dQ(α)
                                            =0⇒          = fQ (Q(α), u(α)) .                            (37)
                              δ Q̂(α)               dα
Integrating by parts, we find
                                    Z αF                                   Z αF             ⊤
                                                                                       dQ̂(α)
   F[Q, Q̂, u] = h (Q(αF )) +              dα Q̂(α)⊤ fQ (Q(α), u(α)) +            dα          Q(α)      (38)
                                     0                                      0            dα
                − Q̂(αF )Q(αF ) + Q̂(0)Q(0) .
Setting to zero variations with respect to Q(α) for 0 < α < αF , we find the backward dynamics
                             dQ̂(α)⊤
                              −       = Q̂(α)⊤ ∇Q fQ (Q(α), u(α)) ,                                     (39)
                                dα
while for α = αF we get the final condition
                                           Q̂(αF ) = ∇Q h(Q(αF )) .                                     (40)
Note that we do not consider variations with respect to Q(0) as this quantity is fixed by the initial
condition Q(0) = Q0 . Finally, minimizing the cost functional with respect to the control u, we get
the optimality condition in Eq. 10 of the main text.

A.4    O PTIMAL CONTROL FRAMEWORK

To determine the optimal control, we iterate Eqs. 5, 8, and 10 of the main text until convergence
(Bechhoefer, 2021). Let us consider first the case where the control is the current task tc (α), such
that tc (α) = t if the network is trained on task t ∈ {1 , . . . , T } at training time α. For simplicity, we


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


focus on the case T = 2, but the following discussion is easily generalised to any T . In particular,
since here u(α) = tc (α) the evolution equation 5 can be written as
                          dQ(α)
                                  = fQ (Q(α), tc (α)) ,                      Q(0) = Q0 .                          (41)
                            dα
Similarly, the backward dynamics reads
                                     dQ̂(α)⊤
                                 −           = Q̂(α)⊤ ∇Q fQ (Q(α), tc (α)) ,                                      (42)
                                       dα
with final condition
                                              1                 1
                             Q̂(αF ) =          ∇Q ε1 (Q(αF )) + ∇Q ε2 (Q(αF )) .                                 (43)
                                              2                 2
The optimality equation 10 yields
                                           n                              o
                           t∗c (α) = argmin Q̂(α)⊤ fQ (Q(α), tc (α) = tc ) .                                      (44)
                                        tc ∈{1,2}

Therefore, we find the explicit formula for the optimal task protocol
                  (
                    1       if Q̂(α)⊤ [fQ (Q(α), tc (α) = 2) − fQ (Q(α), tc (α) = 1)] > 0
        t∗c (α) =                                                                                                 (45)
                    2       otherwise.

Then, we start from a guess for the control variable tc (α). We integrate Eq. 41 forward, obtaining
the trajectory Q(α) for α ∈ (0, αF ). Then, we integrate the backward equation 42, starting from the
final condition 43, obtaining the trajectory Q̂(α) for α ∈ (0, αF ). Then, the control variable can be
updated using Eq. 45 and used in the next iteration of the algorithm. These equations 41, 42, and 45
are iterated until convergence.
We next consider the joint optimisation of the learning rate schedule η(α) and the task protocol
tc (α). The optimality condition 10 can be written as
                                          n                                           o
           (t∗c (α), η(α)) = argmin        Q̂(α)⊤ fQ (Q(α), (tc (α), η(α)) = (tc , η)) .    (46)
                                 tc ∈{1,2},η∈R+

Crucially, the function Q̂⊤ fQ (Q, (tc , η)) turns out to be quadratic in η. Explicitly,

                                           Q̂⊤ fQ (Q, (tc , η)) = aη 2 + bη ,                                     (47)
where
                   K
                                               "    K
                                 (t ) (t )
                   X                                X
              a=           Q̂kh vk c vh c                  vn(tc ) vm
                                                                    (tc )
                                                                          I4 (n, m, k, h) + I4 (tc , tc , k, h)   (48)
                   k,h=1                           n,m=1
                                K
                                                                #
                                X
                           −2         vn(tc ) I4 (n, tc , k, h) ,
                                n=1

and
                                K
                                              (           "K                                         #
                                                   (t )
                                X                          X
                    b=−                Q̂kh       vk c          vn(tc ) I3 (n, k, h) − I3 (tc , k, h)             (49)
                             k,h=1                        n=1
                                 "K                                               #)
                          (t )
                                  X
                       + vh c              vn(tc ) I3 (n, h, k) − I3 (tc , h, k)
                                     n=1
                           K X
                             T
                                              "        K
                                                                                                          #
                                                (t )                                 (t )
                           X                           X
                       −              M̂kt     vk c          vn(tc ) I3 (n, k, t) − vk c I3 (tc , k, t)
                           k=1 t=1                     n=1
                     K
                               " K                                 #
                         (tc )
                     X            X
                   +   v̂k      −   vn(tc ) I2 (k, n) + I2 (k, tc ) .
                       k=1               n=1



                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Performing the minimization over η first, we obtain
                                                              b
                                         η ∗ (α, tc ) = −       .                                 (50)
                                                             2a
The minimisation over tc yields
              (
      ∗        1 if Q̂(α)⊤ [fQ (Q(α), (1, η ∗ (α, 1))) − fQ (Q(α), (2, η ∗ (α, 2)))] > 0
     tc (α) =                                                                                     (51)
               2 otherwise.
and hence
                                       η ∗ (α) = η ∗ (α, t∗c (α)) .                            (52)
Interestingly, we observe that the learning rate schedule has a different functional form depending
on the current task tc . This can be seen in Fig. 4 where the learning rate switches between two
different schedules depending on the current task tc .

B     R EADOUT LAYER CONVERGENCE PROPERTIES
In this appendix, we examine the asymptotic behaviour of the readout layer weights during the
late stages of training. In particular, we are interested in the convergence rate as a function of
the task similarity γ. As in the main text, we consider the case K = T = 2. From the overlap
             in Fig. 8 for γ > 0.3, we observe that the cosine similarity quickly approaches unity,
trajectories √
i.e., |Mkt |/ Qkk ≈ δkt , which corresponds to perfect feature recovery. Therefore, the decrease
in performance for γ > 0.3 seen in Fig. 3 must be attributed to the dynamics of the second layer.
Indeed, in Fig. 8, we observe a slowdown in the readout dynamics as γ → 1.
                                                                      (1)           (2)
Assuming perfect convergence of the feature layer to w1 = w∗ and w2 = w∗ , we consider the
dynamics of the readout layer while training on task t = 1. We expect the corresponding readout
                                                              (1) (1)
layer to converge to the specialised configuration v (1) = (v1 , v2 ) = (1, 0)⊤ and we would like
to compute the convergence rate as a function of γ. The dynamics of the readout layer reads
                            (1)
                          dv1          1       (1)     2         γ
                                                                      (1)
                                = η (1 − v1 ) − arcsin               v2     ,               (53)
                           dα          3               π         2
                            (1)
                          dv2          2         γ
                                                            (1)    1 (1)
                                =η       arcsin       (1 − v1 ) − v2        ,
                           dα          π           2               3
which can be rewritten as
                                                   !                        !
                                             (1)                      (1)
                                 d    1 − v1                1 − v1
                                         (1)           = ηA    (1)              ,                 (54)
                                dα      v2                    v2
where
                                              −1/3           a
                                       A=                         ,                               (55)
                                               a            −1/3
and a = 2 arcsin (γ/2) /π. Note that a < 1/3 for 0 < γ < 1, hence A is negative definite, implying
convergence to v (1) = (1, 0)⊤ . The rate of convergence is determined by the smallest eigenvalue
(in absolute value): a − 1/3. The associated convergence timescale is therefore
                                                      3π
                                  αconv =                          ,                              (56)
                                             η(π − 6 arcsin (γ/2))
as anticipated in Eq. 11 of the main text.

C     S UPPLEMENTARY FIGURES
C.1     A DDITIONAL RESULTS IN THE SYNTHETIC FRAMEWORK

Fig. 8 describes the dynamics of the optimal replay strategy for different values of task similarity in
the same setting as Fig. 3 of the main text. In particular, the upper panel displays the evolution of


                                                       20
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            γ = 0.1                 γ = 0.3           γ = 0.6                 γ = 0.9

     | vk(t) |
| Mkt |
          Qkk


 ￼
                  α = time step / input dimension      α                  α                       α


 Figure 8: Overlap dynamics with optimal replay. We plot the absolute value of the task-dependent
                    (t)                                                    √
 readout weights |vk | (upper panel) and the cosine similarity |Mkt |/ Qkk as a function of the
 training time α. Different columns refer to different choices of task similarity γ = 0.1, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9.

                                                      (t)
 the magnitude of √the readout weights |vk |, while the lower panel shows the trajectory of the cosine
 similarity |Mkt |/ Qkk .
 Fig. 9 compares the values of the loss at the end of training, averaged on both tasks, for different
 task-selection strategies. In particular, it highlights the performance gap between the four replay
 strategies at constant learning rate considered in the main text (no-replay, interleaved, optimal and
 pseudo-optimal) and the strategy that simultaneously optimise over task-selection and learning rate.
 Additionally, we consider exponential and power law learning rate schedules, in combination with
 interleaved replay protocol. For each value of task similarity γ, we optimize over the schedule
 parameters via grid search. We still find a performance gap with respect to the optimal strategy,
 which highlights the relevance of the joint optimization of training protocols.
 Fig. 10 illustrates a continual learning setting with T = 3 tasks. The student is a two-layer neural
 networks with K = 3 hidden units, and a different readout is trained for each task. In the initial
 training phase, the student is trained on task 1 up to time α = 1000, when the loss reaches ∼ 10−6 .
 In the second phase, the student must learn tasks 2 and 3 without forgetting task 1. Panel a) shows
 the losses of the optimal strategy as a function of time for the three tasks and their average, during
 the second training phase. The optimal strategy is represented by a colour bar in the upper panel.
 It consists in an initial phase where only the new tasks 2 and 3 are presented to the network, and a
 second phase where task 1 is replayed. Despite its complicated structure, it shares some similarities
 with the pseudo-optimal strategy described in the main text. Specifically, task 1 is replayed only
 when its loss is comparable to the losses on the other two tasks. Panel b) shows the average loss as
 a function of time, comparing different task-selection protocols. In particular, we consider

                 • interleaved protocols, where two or all three tasks are alternated during training;
                 • sequential protocols, where tasks are presented in distinct blocks without being replayed;
                 • a shuffled protocol, that preserves the relative fraction of samples from each tasks obtained
                   from the optimal strategy but presents them in a randomised order.

 The final performance of the optimal strategy surpasses all the aforementioned approaches. Notably,
 as the number of tasks grows, the number of possible heuristic strategies expands significantly, mak-
 ing it difficult to identify effective solutions through intuition alone. This highlights the importance
 of a theoretical framework for systematically determining the optimal strategy.

 C.2            A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON REAL DATASET

 We run additional experiments on real data using the simulation setup detailed in Sec. 3.2. We
 consider the CIFAR10 dataset Krizhevsky et al. (2009) and create two classification tasks taking as
 task 1 the classes with odd labels and the others as task 2. Fig. 11 shows the results of the training
 curve for the two tasks according to the three strategies and the final figure compares the average


                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Adopting an optimal learning rate schedule leads to major perfomance improvement.
Average loss on both tasks at the end of the second training phase as a function of task similarity γ
under the same setting and parameters as Fig. 3 of the main text. The top four lines correspond to
different strategies at constant learning rate η = 1: no replay (purple crosses), optimal (red dots),
interleaved (blue squares), pseudo-optimal (cyan dashed line). The bottom three curves correspond
to different annealing schemes for the learning rate. Up-facing orange triangles correspond to inter-
leaved replay with power law annealing η(α) = η0 (1 − α/αf )β , while down-facing green triangles
indicate exponential annealing η(α) = η0 exp(−α/α0 ). For both annealing schedules, the scalar
parameters η0 , β, and α0 are optimized by grid search for each value of γ. Finally, the brown plus
signs correspond to jointly optimal replay and learning rate schedules (see Fig. 4).
   protocol
     Task


                T3               T2   T1


 a)                                            b)

Figure 10: Optimal replay schedule for T = 3 tasks. The student network has k = 3 hidden units.
In the initial phase, α = [0, 1000] the network is trained on task 1 until convergence (loss is 10−6 ).
In the second phase α = [1000, 1025], we determine the optimal replay strategy. In both phases
the learning rate is constant η = 1. The tasks are chosen such that the overlaps are S1,2 = 0.5,
S2,3 = 0.5, and S1,3 = 0. Panel a) shows the optimal task protocol and the evolution of the loss
over the three tasks. The result is a complicated replay strategy, though it shares some similarities
with the pseudo-optimal strategy described in the main text. Specifically, task 1 is replayed only
when its loss is comparable to the losses on the other two tasks. Panel b) compares the optimal
strategy with different heuristics, all at η = 1. “Interleaved (1 − 2 − 3)” is an interleaved strategy
containing all tasks in equal proportion. “Interleaved (2 − 3)” is an interleaved strategy containing
tasks (2 − 3) in equal proportion. “Shuffled” contains the same task proportions as in the optimal
strategy, but in random order (showing that the structure of the optimal replay strategy matters).
“Sequential (2 − 3)” corresponds to the sequential strategy with t = 2 in the first half and t = 3 in
the second. Similarly for “Sequential (3 − 2)”. “Sequential (3 − 2 − 1)” has t = 3 in the first third
of the replay sequence, then t = 2 in the second third and t = 1 in the last third.



loss throughout the training steps. Notice that the observation reported in the controlled Fashion
MNIST experiment are still valid in this scenario.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      No Replay                                          Interleaved               Pseudo-Optimal                 Average loss
          10 1                    task 1                                                                                             No Replay
                                  task 2                                                                                             Interleaved
Loss   9 × 10 2                                                                                                                      Pseudo-Optimal

       8 × 10 2                                                                                                                     [1e-2]
                                                                                                                                     7.0
                                                                                                                                     6.9
       7 × 10 2
                                                                                                                                     6.8
                                                                                                                            15k   20k
                  0    10000        20000                            0     10000       20000   0       10000        20000    0       10000       20000
                        Step                                                Step                        Step                          Step


Figure 11: Continual learning on CIFAR10. Training curves of No-Replay, Interleaved, and
Pseudo-Optimal learning strategies (from left to right) on CIFAR10. The two tasks are obtained
partitioning the dataset according to the parity of the labels and training using online stochastic gra-
dient descent. The final panel (rightmost) shows the average loss for the three strategies. The inset
zooms on the final stage of learning.


As already observed in the main text, the performance of the Pseudo-Optimal learning strategies
appears to interpolate between No-Replay and Interleaved. In Fig. 12 we highlight the differences
between Pseudo-Optimal and the alternative strategies. We see a up to 3% improvement in perfor-
mance during learning. Contrarily to the main text, we observe also a region where Pseudo-Optimal
appears sub-performing with respect to the Interleaved strategies, however this is limited to a less
than 0.5% decrease in loss.

                                                                                Interleaved - Pseudo-Optimal
                                                                 3              No Replay - Pseudo-Optimal
                                           Loss difference [%]


                                                                 2

                                                                 1

                                                                 0

                                                             10000 12000 14000 16000 18000 20000
                                                                             Step

Figure 12: Learning difference on CIFAR10. This figure complement Fig. 11, highlighting the
differences between the strategies.


                                                                                       23
