Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CLDY B: T OWARDS DYNAMIC B ENCHMARKING FOR
C ONTINUAL L EARNING WITH P RE - TRAINED M ODELS
 Shengzhuang Chen1 , Yikai Liao2 , Xiaoxiao Sun2,3 , Kede Ma1,∗ , Ying Wei4,∗
 1
   City University of Hong Kong 2 Nanyang Technological University
 3
   Australian National University 4 Zhejiang University
 shengzhuang.chen@my.cityu.edu.hk
 kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk
 ying.wei@zju.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT

             The advent of the foundation model era has sparked significant research interest in
             leveraging pre-trained representations for continual learning (CL), yielding a se-
             ries of top-performing CL methods on standard evaluation benchmarks. Nonethe-
             less, there are growing concerns regarding potential data contamination during
             the pre-training stage. Furthermore, standard evaluation benchmarks, which are
             typically static, fail to capture the complexities of real-world CL scenarios, result-
             ing in saturated performance. To address these issues, we describe CL on dynamic
             benchmarks (CLDyB), a general computational framework based on Markov deci-
             sion processes for evaluating CL methods reliably. CLDyB dynamically identifies
             inherently difficult and algorithm-dependent tasks for the given CL methods, and
             determines challenging task orders using Monte Carlo tree search. Leveraging
             CLDyB, we first conduct a joint evaluation of multiple state-of-the-art CL meth-
             ods, leading to a set of commonly challenging and generalizable task sequences
             where existing CL methods tend to perform poorly. We then conduct separate
             evaluations of individual CL methods using CLDyB, discovering their respective
             strengths and weaknesses. The source code and generated task sequences are pub-
             licly accessible at https://github.com/szc12153/CLDyB.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The field of machine learning is undergoing a paradigm shift driven by the emergence of foundation
models—large-scale neural networks pre-trained on massive datasets—that demonstrate remarkable
adaptability across a wide range of downstream tasks. Within this transformative landscape, contin-
ual learning (CL), a computational methodology for incrementally updating models while retaining
prior knowledge (Ring, 1997), faces both unprecedented opportunities and critical challenges. Op-
portunities arise from the synergistic relationship between CL and foundation models. On one hand,
foundation models stand to gain from CL techniques by continually adapting to evolving data dis-
tributions without catastrophic forgetting. On the other hand, CL methods can leverage the general-
purpose and robust representations embedded within foundation models as powerful initializations,
potentially accelerating convergence and improving performance on sequential tasks. Challenges,
however, primarily stem from the inadequacy of conventional CL benchmarks (Rebuffi et al., 2016;
Hendrycks et al., 2020) in providing reliable evaluations of CL methods with foundation models due
to two critical limitations.
The first is data contamination. The exponential growth in the volume of pre-training data for
foundational models elevates the risk of prior exposure to downstream CL tasks. This has pre-
cipitated performance saturation in current benchmarks, diminishing their utility of comparing CL
methods through marginal performance gains. More fundamentally, this overlap in data distributions
calls into question whether recent progress in CL stems from genuine algorithmic developments or
merely reflects the exploitation of more advanced foundation models (Janson et al., 2022; Galashov
et al., 2023). The second is performance saturation. Current benchmarks are inherently static,
    ∗
        Corresponding authors.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which assume that tasks are randomly sampled from fixed datasets and presented in an unstructured,
sequential order. This is a clear oversimplification of real-world CL scenarios, which involve dy-
namic and evolving task sequences that are significantly more varied and challenging. Consequently,
CL methods may overfit these simplified benchmarks while failing to generalize in more complex
and practically demanding environments.
In light of the pressing demand for reliable evaluation protocols, we introduce CL on dynamic
benchmarks (CLDyB), a computational benchmarking framework designed to accelerate algorith-
mic progress in CL with foundation models. Specifically, we formulate dynamic benchmarking
for CL as an infinite-state Markov decision process (MDP, Puterman, 1994), where the sequential
task selection and model adaptation are optimized over a potentially unbounded time horizon. The
state at time step t encapsulates the consolidated model parameters after incremental training on all
observed tasks up to t. This parameter vector serves as a compact representation of the model’s
current knowledge retention (i.e., stability) and its adaptability to new tasks (i.e., plasticity). The
action corresponds to selecting a task from a combinatorially large pool of candidate tasks, followed
by stochastic optimization of model parameters on the selection task. The reward is defined as the
immediate, quantitative measure of how challenging the selected task is given the current state.
Due to the infinite state space, the vast action space, and the high computational cost of reward
evaluation, finding an exact solution to this MDP (for instance, via dynamic programming) is com-
putationally intractable. To address this, the proposed CLDyB first reduces the action space using
greedy task sampling and clustering. This yields a much smaller feasible set of diverse and difficult
tasks that are more likely to challenge the original foundation model (as a way of mitigating data
contamination) and the continually updated models at each time step. Second, it employs Monte
Carlo tree search (MCTS, Coulom, 2006) with a truncated lookahead to identify the (sub)optimal
task at each time step.
We instantiate CLDyB for class-incremental learning in visual recognition (Zhou et al., 2024b)—
one of the most prominent challenges in CL research. We first apply CLDyB jointly to a group
of representative CL methods, generating a standardized set of challenging and generalizable task
sequences that yield reliable and indicative evaluation results. We then perform multi-dimensional
assessment of individual CL methods using CLDyB, assessing critical dimensions such as classifi-
cation accuracy, robustness to task sequence variations, and memory efficiency. This allows us to
inspect distinct performance characteristics and vulnerabilities of different CL methods.
In summary, our principal contributions include
    • CLDyB: A general computational benchmarking framework designed to inform reliable
      progress in CL, especially with pre-trained models;
    • Standardized CL benchmark: CLDyB establishes a set of challenging and generalizable task
      sequences for both current and future CL methods;
    • Multi-dimensional assessment: CLDyB enables comprehensive assessment of individual CL
      methods across multiple dimensions.


2     P RELIMINARIES

Class-incremental learning aims to build a generic classifier capable of recognizing an expanding
set of classes by incrementally integrating new knowledge while maintaining performance on pre-
viously learned tasks (Zhou et al., 2024b). More formally, a CL algorithm CL(·) incrementally
trains a parameterized classifier f on a sequence of N classification tasks, collectively denoted as
                                                                                         (j) (j) |Tt |
T<N +1 := {T1 , T2 , . . . , TN }. Each task Tt contains |Tt | (image, label) pairs {xt , yt }j=1      , di-
vided into training, validation, and test subsets. Note that all tasks have disjoint sets of class labels.
At time step t, the classifier is updated according to ft = CL(ft−1 , Tt ), where f0 denotes the pre-
trained foundation model. A fundamental constraint in CL is that data from past or future tasks
remain inaccessible while training on the current task. This presents a central challenge: Training
f to incrementally recognize new classes (i.e., high plasticity), while mitigating the catastrophic
forgetting of previously learned classes (i.e., high stability). To quantify the plasticity and forgetting
of ft , we employ two standard metrics: Average learning accuracy (ALA, Riemer et al. 2018) and

                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the average forgetting measure (AFM, Chaudhry et al., 2018):
                                                t
                                             1X
                     ALA (ft , T<t+1 ) =        Acc (fk , Tk ) ,                                      (1)
                                             t
                                              k=1
                                                     t−1
                                              1 X
                     AFM (ft , T<t+1 ) =          Acc (fk , Tk ) − Acc (ft , Tk ) .                   (2)
                                             t−1
                                                    k=1

Acc(f, T ) represents the empirical classification accuracy of classifier f on the test split of task T .
Assuming there are M CL methods, each associated with its respective parameterized classifier at
                                                  (i) M
time step t, denoted as {CL(i) }M
                                i=1 and Ft := {ft }i=1 , we compute the ALA and AFM scores by
                                                                      1
                                                                         PM             (i)
further averaging over these M models, i.e., ALA(Ft , T<t+1 ) = M          i=1 ALA(ft , T<t+1 ) and
                      1
                        P  M           (i)
AFM(Ft , T<t+1 ) = M       i=1 AFM(ft , T<t+1 ).



3     P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK : CLDY B

In this section, we first give the general problem formulation of dynamic benchmarking for CL, and
then introduce the proposed CLDyB as a specific instance.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Our core idea is to sequentially construct algorithm-dependent task sequences that consistently chal-
lenge current CL methods. Mathematically, this sequential task construction can be formulated as
an infinite-state MDP (S, A, R), with a potentially unbounded time horizon (i.e., the task length
is unknown or N → ∞). At time step t, the observable state comprises the set of M CL mod-
els Ft−1 ∈ S, each having been sequentially trained on a common sequence of selected tasks up
to time step t. We assume a policy µt : S 7→ A that maps the current state to an action, which
involves selecting a specific task Tt from a feasible set of tasks (i.e., the action space At ). After
that, a probabilistic state transition is induced from Ft−1 to Ft through the stochastic optimiza-
                                                                            (i)           (i)
tion of Ft−1 using their respective CL methods on the selected task: ft = CL(i) (ft−1 , Tt ), for
i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }. This transition incurs an immediate reward:

                      R (Ft , T<t+1 ) = AFM (Ft , T<t+1 ) − ALA (Ft , T<t+1 ) ,                       (3)

which encourages forgetting while inhibiting plasticity, thereby facilitating the identification of chal-
lenging tasks to mitigate data contamination (Yeom et al., 2017). Consequently, our objective trans-
lates to finding the optimal policies π ⋆ = {µ⋆t (Ft−1 )}N
                                                         t=1 , that maximize the cumulative rewards:

                                                    N
                                                    X
                         π ⋆ = arg max lim                αt−1 R(Ft−1 , µt (Ft−1 )),                  (4)
                                    π    N →∞
                                                    t=1
                                         |                      {z                }
                                                              Jπ (F0 )

                                                    (i)
where α ∈ (0, 1] is a discount factor, F0 = {f0 }M
                                                 i=1 , and Jπ (F0 ) is the initial state value function.

Solving Problem (4) to obtain an exact solution presents two primary computational challenges.
First, the solver shall efficiently navigate the vast and discrete set of feasible tasks (i.e., At ) at
each time step, which grows combinatorially with problem complexity (e.g., the total number of
classes). Second, the solver shall accurately and efficiently evaluate the value function (i.e., Jπ (F0 ))
to facilitate challenging task identification. Nevertheless, the complexity of this evaluation can vary
significantly based on the chosen continual learning (CL) method and task properties, such as the
number of classes per task. Moreover, the computation may become intractable due to the infinite
state space and potentially unbounded time horizon. In the subsequent subsections, we describe our
proposed solution, CLDyB, which effectively addresses these challenges through two key strategies:
1) Greedy task sampling and clustering to construct a much smaller candidate task set, and 2) MCTS
to identify the (sub)optimal task. Fig. 1 illustrates the system diagram of CLDyB.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   Candidate task set construction
                    Greedy task sampling                                                                                     Functional task clustering

                                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                              1                   Sample the 1st
                              2                   class uniformly Candidate task 𝒯𝑡                                                                   𝑘-means
                              3
                                                                  ={ 6, 2, 7, …
                                                                                              {
   Compute pairwise
                              4
                              5                                                                   Repeat to sample           …                        clustering
                              6                   Sample subsequent 𝐾 − 1                          multiple tasks
   class potentials Ψ         7
                                                  classes greedily w.r.t Eqn. (5)
                    Pairwise class potential
                          Ψ(𝐶𝑢 , 𝐶𝑣 )                                                                      Reduced action space 𝒜ሚ 𝑡                        Clustered action space 𝒜ҧ 𝑡

                                                                      Optimal task identification
           ℱ𝑡−2                                     ℱ𝑡−2                                                     ℱ𝑡−2                                                  ℱ𝑡−2
                  𝒯𝑡−1                                     𝒯𝑡−1                                                     𝒯𝑡−1                                                  𝒯𝑡−1

                    ℱ𝑡−1                                      ℱ𝑡−1                                                    ℱ𝑡−1                                                     ℱ𝑡−1
                                                                                                                                 (1)
                                                                           R(ℱ𝑡−1 , 𝒯෨𝑡
                                                                                        (1)
                                                                                              )                               𝒯෨𝑡                                        (3)        (2) ෨ (1)
                         𝒯𝑡                                                                                                                                           𝒯෨𝑡        𝒯෨𝑡    𝒯𝑡
                                                                              (1)                                                      (1)
           0.1       0.7          0.4                                        ℱ𝑡                                                     ℱ𝑡
                                                                                                                                                (1)
                                                                                  …                                           (1)            𝒯෨𝑡+1
                                                                                                                           𝒯෨𝑡+2
                                                                             …                                                       …
                                                                                                                                         (1)
                                                             (1)     (1)                                                              𝒯෨𝑡+𝐿
                                                        R(ℱ𝑡+𝐿−1 , 𝒯෨𝑡+𝐿 )                                                               (1)
                                                                                  (1)                                                ℱ𝑡+𝐿
                                                                              ℱ𝑡+𝐿

                       (2)                   Backpropagation: Sum                                       Rollout simulation:                              Expansion: Perform
  Selection: Select 𝒯෨𝑡 as
                                              over immediate and 𝐿-                                  Train ℱ𝑡−1 iteratively on                         actions from 𝒜ҧ 𝑡 to obtain
  the task 𝒯𝑡 at time step 𝑡                 step lookahead rewards                                  this rollout task sequence                            potential next state

                                        Potential states and actions                                                                            Selected states and actions


Figure 1: System diagram of the proposed CLDyB for dynamically constructing task sequences that
challenge current CL methods. At time step t, CLDyB first performs candidate task set construc-
tion by greedy task sampling (see Eqn. (5)) and functional task clustering. This results in a reduced
and clustered action space Āt , facilitating task evaluation. It then performs optimal task identifi-
cation by maximizing the estimated current state value function (see Eqn. (7)) using MCTS, which
consists of four steps: 1) Expansion, 2) rollout simulation, 3) backpropagation, and 4) selection.
The pseudocode for CLDyB can be found in Algorithm 3 of the Appendix.


3.2    C ANDIDATE TASK S ET C ONSTRUCTION

Given a data pool Dt of Ct classes for class-incremental learning at time step t, we define a task T̃t
as a subset of images containing K classes, where K  < Ct . Consequently, the number of possible
tasks in At is given by the binomial coefficient CKt , which grows rapidly as Ct increases. This
makes an exhaustive search over At infeasible, as each task evaluation often necessitates a full cycle
of continual model training, significantly increasing the overall computational cost.
Greedy task sampling. To construct a more compact candidate task set Ãt , we propose a greedy
task sampling strategy that leverages the intuition that task difficulty in multi-class classification is
inversely correlated to the separability of class pairs in feature space (He et al., 2020). Specifically,
we define the sampling probability over a task T̃t to be proportional to the product of its pairwise
class potential functions:
                                                                                                                             M
                                  Y                                                                                  1 X
                                                                                                                                     (i)  (i)

       p(T̃t ) ∝                              Ψ(Cu , Cv ), where Ψ(Cu , Cv ) =                                             s CosSim ut , vt      .                                              (5)
                                                                                                                     M i=1
                     u,v∈{1,...,K}

Here, Cu and Cv represent the subsets of images belonging to classes u and v, respectively. The
              (i)      (i)
prototypes ut and vt are computed by the mean feature representations of these subsets using
  (i)
ft−1 . CosSim(·, ·) computes the cosine similarity between two feature representations, and s(·) is
a linear rescaling function that maps the M similarity scores to the range [0, 1], where the maxi-
mum value is set to 1 and the minimum to 0. This additional rescaling ensures that the computed
pairwise potentials are well-suited for probability computation (i.e., preventing negative values). By
assigning higher sampling probabilities to tasks with larger products of pairwise potentials, we prior-
itize challenging tasks, for which the classifiers Ft−1 struggle to discriminate between the included
classes in their respective feature spaces. This will force Ft−1 to focus on refining their feature


                                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


representations for more difficult cases, thereby improving their capacity to handle more complex
class relationships.
Drawing inspiration from (Kohli et al., 2013), we introduce a greedy sampler that sequentially se-
lects K classes to form a task T̃t . Initially, to ensure task diversity, the first class is uniformly
sampled from all feasible classes in the data pool Dt . Subsequently, during the k-th iteration, the
class u⋆k is chosen to maximize the product of pairwise potentials with respect to the previously
                           ⋆
selected k − 1 classes in Vk−1 :
                                       Y
                       u⋆k = arg max          Ψ(Cu , Cv ), for k ∈ {2, . . . , K},                  (6)
                                   u
                                              ⋆
                                           v∈Vk−1

and we incorporate u⋆k into Vk−1⋆
                                    to form Vk⋆ . This greedy sampling iterates until K distinct classes
are identified. The entire procedure is further repeated multiple times to generate the candidate task
set Ãt . A detailed description of our sampler is provided in Algorithm 1.
Functional task clustering. The sampled tasks in Ãt are likely to exhibit a skewed distribution with
respect to their enabled functional skills of classifiers. This is because the M classifiers naturally
form distinct clusters based on their functional skills. Consequently, uniform task sampling from
Ãt disproportionately encourages selecting tasks from the cluster characterized by the dominant
functional skills, thereby limiting exposure to tasks that would challenge classifiers in diverse ways.
To enhance task diversity in functional space and promote more efficient task evaluation, we propose
additionally clustering tasks in Ãt based on their induced functional skills, followed by ancestral
sampling to populate a further condensed candidate task set Āt .
Specifically, for each task, we compute an M -dimensional feature vector by evaluating the aver-
age negative log-likelihood of predictions made by M k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) classifiers with
feature representations from Ft−1 . We partition tasks into functionally coherent clusters using the
k-means algorithm, operating on the derived task representations. The final condensed candidate
task set Āt is populated through ancestral sampling: First uniformly selecting a cluster and then ran-
domly sampling a task from the chosen cluster. A detailed description is provided in Algorithm 2.

3.3   O PTIMAL TASK I DENTIFICATION

Despite substantial action space reduction via greedy task sampling and clustering, optimizing the
initial state value function defined in Eqn. (4) remains computationally challenging. This difficulty
arises from the combinatorial complexity of task ordering and the long-term interdependencies be-
tween task selection and model adaptation. To address these, we employ MCTS (Coulom, 2006), a
widely adopted approach for online sequential decision-making (Puterman, 1994), particularly well-
suited to our CL setup. Specifically, MCTS approximates the current state value Jπ (Ft ) within a
search tree, comprising four steps. 1) Rollout simulation: Recursive tree growing via MC simula-
tions until a predefined computational budget is exhausted; 2) Backpropagation: Update values and
visit counts for all nodes in the visited path; 3) Selection: Choose the task Tt that leads to the state
with the maximum estimated immediate value; 4) Expansion: Train all classifiers continually on the
selected task Tt and transit from the current state Ft−1 to the next state Ft .
Unfortunately, in open-ended CL environments, MC simulations are resource-intensive due to 1) the
necessity of (N − t)-step rollouts to evaluate the value function Jπ (Ft ), involving continual model
training across tasks at all these steps, and 2) the indefinite task length N . We propose approximating
the value function using a truncated horizon approach, leading to
                                                        L−1
                                                        X
          Jπ (CL(Ft−1 , Tt )) ≈ max R(Ft−1 , T̃t ) +          R(CL(Ft−1+k , T̃t+k ), T̃t+k+1 ),     (7)
                                T̃t ∈Āt
                                                        k=0

where µt = Tt ∈ π represents the optimized policy at time step t. The terms T̃t+k , for
k ∈ {1, . . . , L} are sampled uniformly from their respective feasible action spaces, and are ex-
cluded from the set of optimization variables (i.e., they are not included in the arg max operation).
The hyperparameter L controls the trade-off between computational tractability and approximation
fidelity. For simplicity, we set L = 1 and defer the adoption of advanced value function approxima-
tion methods, such as value network learning (Silver et al., 2016), to future research.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4       R ELATED W ORK

Class-incremental learning. Recent advances in CL with foundation models reveal two key ad-
vantages: inherent resistance to catastrophic forgetting and strong generalization to downstream
tasks (Ostapenko et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), rendering it a rapidly evolving research fron-
tier. A prominent technical direction is to integrate CL methods with parameter-efficient fine-tuning
strategies, yielding representative methods like orthogonal projection (Liang & Li, 2024; Qiao et al.,
2024), model expansion (Wang et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a), and model en-
sembling (Gao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024a). Alternatively, representation-based methods focus
on maintaining stable feature representations within foundation models. This is often achieved by
freezing the backbone after the initial task learning (Zhou et al., 2023a) or employing low learning
rates (Zhang et al., 2023). Non-parametric classifiers are then progressively constructed, which can
be enhanced by random projections (McDonnell et al., 2023) or the inclusion of intermediate repre-
sentations (Ahrens et al., 2023). A more detailed discussion of conventional CL methods is deferred
to Appendix B.1.
Dynamic benchmarking. The rapid advancement of foundation models, particularly large language
models (LLMs), has necessitated a re-evaluation of traditional static benchmarks, often inadequate
in providing reliable assessment due to issues like data contamination (Shi et al., 2023; Zhou et al.,
2023b) and oversimplification of real-world testing scenarios (Kiela et al., 2021; McIntosh et al.,
2024). Dynabench (Kiela et al., 2021) and DynaBoard (Ma et al., 2021) propose to continuously
evolve test sets with crowd-sourced human labels to enable more accurate LLM evaluations. Recog-
nizing the substantial costs involved in human labeling, recent efforts have been made to automate
the process of dynamic test set generation, leveraging directed acyclic graphs (Zhu et al., 2023)
and multiple agents (Wang et al., 2024). Additionally, dynamic programming has been used for
test set selection, enhancing the scalability of evaluating a large number of models at ten thousand
scales (Prabhu et al., 2024). The proposed CLDyB represents one of the initial endeavors to establish
dynamic benchmarking protocols for CL methods, particularly those with foundation models.


5       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we first present the experimental setups, and then evaluate nine state-of-the-art CL
methods both jointly and separately using CLDyB, followed by insightful analysis.

5.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

Data pool. To build the playground for CLDyB, we assemble a total of 26 datasets, consisting of
2, 505, 185 images across 2, 403 categories. These datasets are categorized into two main groups:
photographic image datasets for the main experiments and AI-generated image datasets for addi-
tional analysis. The included classes cover a broad spectrum of domains, levels of granularity,
cultural contexts, and time periods. Details are provided in Appendix A.
CL methods. We select a total of nine CL methods for evaluation based on two main criteria: 1)
Competitive performance that prioritizes recently published methods, achieving state-of-the-art re-
sults on static CL benchmarks, and 2) sufficient representativeness that ensures the selected methods
encompass a wide range of design philosophies.
Implementation details. All experiments adhere to the standard class-incremental learning pro-
tocols, with results evaluated using three widely adopted metrics: 1) Average accuracy (Acc), 2)
average retention1 (AR, Chaudhry et al. 2018), and 3) ALA (Riemer et al., 2018). Higher values in-
dicate better CL performance but also suggest that the benchmark presents a lower level of difficulty
for CL methods being evaluated. During training, hyper-parameters for each method are selected
using the validation sets of the first three tasks, following Chaudhry et al. (2018). Each task in the
CLDyB sequences is a 20-category classification problem (i.e., K = 20) with a sequence length
of ten (i.e., N = 10). All CL methods employ ViT-Base-Sup21K (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) as the
foundation model. All main experiments are repeated across three random runs, and mean results are
reported. To ensure a fair comparison of task selection strategies, the first task is randomly chosen
    1
        Equivalent to the negation of AFM in Eqn. (2).


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Final average accuracy (%) of CL methods on various benchmarks. “‡” indicates results di-
rectly copied from the respective papers, while “∗” highlights statistically significant results. AFEC
and CLSER are excluded from comparison here due to differences in backbone architectures.

             Method                                    CIFAR-100‡       ImageNet-R‡            CLDyB (Ours)              Held-out
             ER (Rolnick et al., 2018)                     67.9             55.1                   54.8                   79.9
             DualPrompt (Wang et al., 2022)                86.5             68.1                   41.9                   70.8
             LAE (Gao et al., 2023)                        85.6             72.7                   48.1                   71.1
             HiDe-Prompt (Wang et al., 2023a)              92.6             75.1                   62.5                   84.9
             SLCA (Zhang et al., 2023)                     91.5             77.0                   56.2                   80.3
             RanPAC (McDonnell et al., 2023)               92.2             78.1                   56.9                   81.0
             PGP (Qiao et al., 2024)                       86.9             69.3                   44.0                   68.7
             SRCC (per column & held-out)                 0.643            0.643                  0.964∗                  N/A
             KRCC (per column & held-out)                 0.429            0.429                  0.905∗                  N/A

and fixed, maintaining consistent initial conditions. Additional details on the selected CL methods
can be found in Appendix B.2.

5.2          M AIN R ESULTS

CLDyB identifies commonly challenging task sequences. We first conduct a joint evaluation of
five CL methods, i.e., AFEC (Wang et al., 2021), CLSER (Arani et al., 2022), HiDe-Prompt (Wang
et al., 2023a), RanPAC (McDonnell et al., 2023), and PGP (Qiao et al., 2024) using CLDyB, while
reserving the remaining four CL methods, i.e., ER (Rolnick et al., 2018), DualPrompt (Wang et al.,
2022), LAE (Gao et al., 2023), and SLCA (Zhang et al., 2023), for independent testing. The results,
presented in Figs. 2 and 8, demonstrate that the CLDyB sequences pose significant challenges not
only for the five CL methods subjected to CLDyB but also for the four CL methods that were not
exposed to it. Notably, compared to random task sequences drawn from the data pool, performance
on the CLDyB sequences results in a 26% reduction in Final Acc and a 9% reduction in Final AR
across the evaluated methods, as shown in Fig 6. These cross-validation results underscore the
generalizability of the CLDyB sequences, manifesting themselves as a strong CL benchmark.

             ER       AFEC        CLSER        DualPrompt       LAE             HiDe-Prompt               SLCA       RanPAC         PGP
      0.90                                     0.00                                            0.90
      0.80                                                                                     0.85
                                               -0.10
                                                                                         ALA


      0.70                                                                                     0.80
Acc


                                          AR


      0.60                                                                                     0.75
                                               -0.20
      0.50                                                                                     0.70
      0.40                                                                                     0.65
             0    2      4    6       8                0    2       4       6       8                 0          2   4        6     8
                                                                Time step

Figure 2: Joint evaluation of the five CL methods (represented by solid lines) using CLDyB with
generalization to the other four CL methods (represented by dashed lines).

We present some qualitative visualizations of the CLDyB sequences in Figs. 14 and 18, illustrating
that the chosen tasks, originated from various datasets, form sequences in which similar tasks are
interspersed with dissimilar ones. We believe this pattern closely resembles real-world CL scenarios
with inherent task diversity.
CLDyB sequences produce reliable evaluation results. We compare the performance of CL
methods across two static CL benchmarks (Krizhevsky, 2009; Hendrycks et al., 2020), CLDyB
sequences, and a held-out set—the latter comprising randomly ordered tasks derived from datasets
that are excluded from all prior benchmarks. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (SRCC) and
Kendall’s rank correlation coefficient (KRCC) are used to assess alignment between each bench-
mark and the held-out set. From the results in Table 1, we find that the CLDyB sequences achieve
the highest correlations, offering a more accurate performance reflection in unseen CL scenarios
compared to static benchmarks. Such strong alignments also highlight that CLDyB holds great
promise to bridge algorithmic advancements in CL research to real-world applications.
CLDyB enables multi-dimensional assessment of individual CL methods. By applying CLDyB
separately to each CL method, we seek to measure its worst-case performance, as formalized


                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in Eqn. (4). Accordingly, we define the Robustness of a CL method as the average Final
Acc across multiple CLDyB sequences paired with that method. Additionally, we record the
Memory Efficiency2 in MB, alongside the three standard metrics introduced in Sec. 5.1.
From the results in Fig. 3, we have several interest-                               Final AR                                        Final Acc
ing observations. First, methods incorporating replay                  ER
                                                                       CLSER
mechanisms, such as CLSER (Arani et al., 2022), HiDe-                  HiDe-Prompt
                                                                                                   -9                          58

                                                                       SLCA
Prompt (Wang et al., 2023a), SLCA (Zhang et al.,                                                        -18               49

2023), and RanPAC (McDonnell et al., 2023), gener-                                                             -28   40

ally exhibit greater resistance to forgetting, resulting in        Memory            -326   -657        -988              12        20    28
                                                                   Efficiency                                                                   Rank
higher Final Acc. On the downside, these methods
                                                                                                               62    41
tend to be less memory efficient. Second, exemplar-
                                                                                                        70                47
replay methods, specifically ER (Rolnick et al., 2018)                 RanPAC
                                                                       PGP
and CLSER, demonstrate significantly better model plas-                DualPrompt
                                                                                                   78                          54


ticity, whereas parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods                AFEC
                                                                       LAE
like HiDe-Prompt and LAE (Gao et al., 2023) show                                     Final ALA                            Robustness
limited Final ALA, indicating weaker forward transfer
capabilities—an aspect often neglected in current CL re-           Figure 3: Multi-dimensional assess-
search. Third, more advanced methods typically outper-             ment of CL methods using CLDyB,
form their predecessors in terms of performance, but they          with higher values on the axes rep-
are not always more robust (e.g., PGP versus DualPrompt            resenting better performance.     The
and CLSER versus ER). Last, we highlight that while                comparison highlights their respective
the simple ER does not achieve satisfactory Final Acc              strengths and weaknesses, especially
and AR, it remains competitive in terms of Final ALA,              how they handle the trade-offs across
Robustness, and Memory Efficiency, making it an overall            different dimensions.
top-ranked CL method.

5.3      F URTHER A NALYSIS

CLDyB identifies individually challenging task sequences. In Fig. 4, we visualize the CLDyB
sequences for each individual CL method by examining: (a) The Acc trajectories on the commonly
challenging CLDyB sequences, and (b) the feature similarity between the selected two tasks, i.e., the
average cosine similarity between all possible pairs of image features. This similarity is computed
for every task pair within each CLDyB sequence, giving rise to a 2D task-to-task similarity matrix.
Each matrix is then flattened into a vector, forming rows of the dendrogram in Fig. 4(b). The cluster-
ing patterns in the dendrograms indicate common characteristics shared by certain CL methods. For
example, both ER and CLSER rely on exemplar replay, while SLCA and HiDe-Prompt use classifier
calibration.
A closer inspection of Fig. 4(b) reveals that the individually challenging CLDyB sequences offer
crucial insights into the limitations of different CL methods. Specifically, LAE and AFEC show
increased sensitivity to task sequences with significant distribution shifts, as CLDyB tends to select
dissimilar tasks for both methods. We hypothesize that this vulnerability may stem from the use of
moving average weight ensembles in LAE and parameter regularization in AFEC, both of which are
less effective in handling large model updates required for certain CL settings. In contrast, CLSER
and ER are more susceptible to sequences of similar tasks, which is consistent with prior theoretical
findings, indicating a correlation between task similarity and forgetting (Lee et al., 2021).
Data pool of CLDyB is expandable over time with AI-generated image data. The data pool of
CLDyB is not intended to remain static. We illustrate this concept by showing how CLDyB can
offer valuable feedback for selecting new datasets, enabling the data pool to expand dynamically
over time. This continuous evolution helps mitigate the performance saturation issue commonly
seen in static benchmarks.
We initially employ CLDyB to evaluate CL methods over three tasks. Based on the analysis of the
tree-search history, we observe that tasks related to animals consistently yield higher rewards com-
pared to other tasks with different object categories. This suggests that these animal-related tasks
may present particular challenges for the selected CL methods. In response, we employ genera-
tive diffusion models, in particular SDXL (Podell et al., 2024), to efficiently expand the data pool,
   2
       Equivalent to the negative memory storage (detailed in Appendix B.3).


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            0.9
         AFEC                                                                                   LAE                                                       0.9
         LAE                                                0.8                                 AFEC                                                      0.8
         PGP                                                                                    PGP                                                       0.7
                                                            0.7


                                                                                                                                                            Task similarity
         SLCA                                                                                   SLCA


                                                              Task accuracy
                                                                                                                                                          0.6
         DualPrompt                                         0.6                                 HiDe-Prompt
                                                                                                                                                          0.5
         CLSER                                              0.5                                 CLSER
                                                                                                                                                          0.4
         ER                                                                                     ER
                                                            0.4                                                                                           0.3
         HiDe-Prompt                                                                            RanPAC
                                                                                                                                                          0.2
         RanPAC                                             0.3                                 DualPrompt

                               (a)                                                                                             (b)

Figure 4: Dendrograms of CL methods. (a) Acc trajectories on the commonly challenging CLDyB
sequences. (b) Stack of flattened versions of the 2D task-to-task similarity matrices obtained on
individually challenging CLDyB sequences. The task similarity values are normalized by s(·) in
Eqn. (5) to the range [0, 1] for improved visualization. Both dendrograms exhibit noticeable consis-
tency in their hierarchical structures, reflecting commonality in CL methods.


adding generated images of novel animal categories. In Fig. 5, we compare the performance of the
CL methods on upcoming tasks selected by CLDyB using both the original and the augmented data
pools.
We find that the AI-generated classes are indeed frequently selected, indicating their prominence in
the CLDyB sequences (see Fig. 21). This leads to a noticeable drop in Final AA and AR, which
verifies the added difficulty of the augmented data pool relative to the original, and confirms that
our data pool is readily expandable to resolve performance saturation. Additionally, the tasks de-
picted in Fig. 21 demonstrate variations in image styles, such as shifts from photographic images to
sketches and paintings, pointing out potential difficulty faced by current CL methods in adapting to
stylistic changes over time. In particular, rehearsal-free methods like AFEC (Wang et al., 2021) and
PGP (Qiao et al., 2024) exhibit more substantial performance degradations when encountering task
sequences with style transitions.

                  AFEC Original        CLSER Original                         HiDe-Prompt Original                  RanPAC Original          PGP Original
                  AFEC Augmented       CLSER Augmented                        HiDe-Prompt Augmented                 RanPAC Augmented         PGP Augmented
      1.00                                       0.00                                                               1.00
                                                -0.10
      0.80                                                                                                          0.90
                                                -0.20
                                                                                                              ALA
Acc


                                           AR


                                                -0.30                                                               0.80
      0.60                                      -0.40
                                                -0.50                                                               0.70
              0       2   4        6   8                0          2                4       6          8                   0         2   4    6       8
                                                                                Time step

Figure 5: Performance comparison of CL methods on upcoming tasks selected by CLDyB from the
original and the augmented data pools. Additional diffusion-generated images are added to the data
pool at time step t = 2 (denoted by the dashed line).


5.4          A BLATION S TUDIES

To isolate the contributions of individual components in CLDyB, we systematically remove each of
them, resulting in four degenerates: 1) Sampling tasks randomly (as a performance lower bound),
2) replacing greedy task sampling with uniform sampling from the classes within each dataset in
the data pool for candidate task set construction, 3) disabling functional task clustering, and 4)
substituting MCTS for selecting the next task with a method that consistently chooses tasks most
similar in representation to previous tasks, as suggested in (Bell & Lawrence, 2022).
In Fig. 6, it is evident that the full version of CLDyB outperforms all degenerates in identifying more
challenging task sequences, which leads to lower ACC and AR, thus validating the necessity of each
component. Furthermore, to assess the effectiveness of CLDyB in handling long task sequences, we


                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         (a) Random                               (c) CLDyB w/o functional task clustering         CLDyB
                         (b) CLDyB w/o greedy task sampling       (d) CLDyB w/o MCTS
                                                   0.00
      0.90                                        -0.03                                             0.90
      0.80                                        -0.05


                                                                                              ALA
Acc
                                                                                                    0.80


                                             AR
      0.70                                        -0.08
      0.60                                        -0.10                                             0.70
                                                  -0.13
      0.50
             0   2   4         6       8                  0   2       4        6        8                  0   2       4   6   8
                                                                   Time step

Figure 6: Average performance comparison of the nine CL methods on the CLDyB sequences and
those generated by four CLDyB degenerates.



conduct experiments on an extended sequence consisting of 40 tasks, with results shown in Fig. 9.
It is clear that, on average, CL methods consistently underperform on CLDyB sequences compared
to random sequences. Finally, Fig. 10 illustrates that CLDyB remains effective in dynamically iden-
tifying commonly challenging sequences to combat data contamination and performance saturation
using alternative foundation models (i.e., CLIP-ViT-Base (Radford et al., 2021)).



6        C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION

We have introduced CLDyB, a dynamic computational benchmarking framework that systematically
identifies challenging and algorithm-dependent task sequences based on MDPs. To make sequen-
tial task generation computationally feasible, CLDyB makes two reasonable approximations: ac-
tion space reduction via greedy task sampling and clustering, and value function approximation via
MCTS. By evaluating nine state-of-the-art CL methods, we demonstrated that CLDyB sequences
expose critical weaknesses in existing methods while providing reliable evaluations aligned with
real-world generalization. CLDyB represents a paradigm shift in evaluating CL methods. By transi-
tioning from static benchmarks to dynamic and algorithm-dependent evaluation protocols, we pave
the way for CL methods that genuinely adapt to open-world complexity. We hope that CLDyB and
its generated task sequences provide a foundation for developing next-generation CL methods that
strike a better balance between stability and plasticity.
While CLDyB represents a significant step towards reliable and realistic CL benchmarking, several
promising directions remain for future research. First, one of our primary motivations for CLDyB is
the issue of data contamination. However, quantifying data contamination precisely is challenging
due to inaccessible pre-training data and the need to assess its overlap with downstream tasks. While
heuristic approaches (e.g., task difficulty metrics) offer approximations, they may conflate contami-
nation with other factors influencing difficulty, limiting their reliability. Although empirical studies
show that CL performance becomes inflated when pre-training and CL tasks overlap significantly,
defining a threshold of contamination beyond which CL evaluations lose validity remains difficult.
Addressing this could refine benchmark design and strengthen evaluation protocols for CL methods.
Second, the development of self-evolving data pools through human-AI collaboration and gener-
ative models presents an important avenue. Although we demonstrated preliminary success using
diffusion-generated image data by further exploiting known failure scenarios, a systematic approach
is needed to automatically and dynamically expand tasks in the data pool in terms of quality, diffi-
culty, and diversity. Third, the current MCTS-based method, while effective, offers only a coarse
approximation of the value function and incurs high computational costs. Hybrid methods that in-
tegrate learned value estimators—without the need for computationally expensive continual model
adaptation—alongside tree search could improve scalability. Fourth, although our experiments have
thus far focused on image recognition, CLDyB is readily extendable to other domains, including
video, text, and embodied AI. Last, establishing a community-driven platform for the collaborative
evolution of CLDyB-enabled benchmarks is highly desirable. Inspired by Dynabench (Kiela et al.,
2021), a web-based interface could facilitate the submission of new datasets to expand the data pool
and accommodate new CL models while ensuring backward compatibility for fair and consistent
progress tracking.


                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Xuelin Liu for assistance with the plots and diagrams. This work was
supported in part by the Hong Kong RGC General Research Fund (11220224), the CityU Applied
Research Grant (9667264), and an Industry Gift Fund (9229111).

R EFERENCES
Hongjoon Ahn, Donggyu Lee, Sungmin Cha, and Taesup Moon. Uncertainty-based continual learn-
  ing with adaptive regularization. ArXiv, abs/1905.11614, 2019.
Kyra Ahrens, Hans H. Lehmann, Jae Hee Lee, and Stefan Wermter. Read between the layers:
  Leveraging intra-layer representations for rehearsal-free continual learning with pre-trained mod-
  els. ArXiv, abs/2312.08888, 2023.
Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample selection
  for online continual learning. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Zach Aluza. CNFood-241: Chinese Food Dataset, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.com/
  datasets/zachaluza/cnfood-241. Accessed: 2024-09-23.
Elahe Arani, Fahad Sarfraz, and Bahram Zonooz. Learning fast, learning slow: A general contin-
  ual learning method based on complementary learning system. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.
Sourav Banerjee. Indian Food Images Dataset, 2023. URL https://www.kaggle.com/
  datasets/iamsouravbanerjee/indian-food-images-dataset.               Accessed:
  2024-09-23.
Sourav Banerjee.    Animal Image Dataset:  90 Different Animals,   2024.
  URL            https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/iamsouravbanerjee/
  animal-image-dataset-90-different-animals. Accessed: 2024-09-23.
Samuel J. Bell and Neil D. Lawrence. The effect of task ordering in continual learning. ArXiv,
  abs/2205.13323, 2022.
Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-101—Mining discriminative com-
  ponents with random forests. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 446–461, 2014.
Pietro Buzzega, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Davide Abati, and Simone Calderara. Dark
  experience for general continual learning: A strong, simple baseline. ArXiv, abs/2004.07211,
  2020.
Hyuntak Cha, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Co2 L: Contrastive continual learning. In IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9496–9505, 2021.
Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efficient
  lifelong learning with A-GEM. ArXiv, abs/1812.00420, 2018.
Gong Cheng, Junwei Han, and Xiaoqiang Lu. Remote sensing image scene classification: Bench-
  mark and state of the art. Proceedings of the IEEE, 105(10):1865–1883, 2017.
Rémi Coulom. Efficient selectivity and backup operators in Monte Carlo tree search. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Computers and Games, pp. 72–83, 2006.
Li Deng. The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alexander Mott, and Ang Li. Orthogonal gradient descent for
 continual learning. ArXiv, abs/1910.07104, 2019.

Alexandre Galashov, Jovana Mitrovic, Dhruva Tirumala, Yee Whye Teh, Timothy Nguyen, Arslan
  Chaudhry, and Razvan Pascanu. Continually learning representations at scale. In Conference on
  Lifelong Learning Agents, pp. 534–547, 2023.

Jhair Gallardo, Tyler L. Hayes, and Christopher Kanan. Self-supervised training enhances online
  continual learning. ArXiv, 2103.14010, 2021.

Qiankun Gao, Chen Zhao, Yifan Sun, Teng Xi, Gang Zhang, Bernard Ghanem, and Jing Zhang. A
  unified continual learning framework with general parameter-efficient tuning. In IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 11449–11459, 2023.

Andrei Grigorev. Clothing Dataset Full, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.com/
  datasets/agrigorev/clothing-dataset-full. Accessed: 2024-09-23.

Gunshi Gupta, Karmesh Yadav, and Liam Paull. La-MAML: Look-ahead meta learning for continual
  learning. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 11588–11598, 2020.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 9726–9735, 2020.

Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Introducing EuroSAT:
  A novel dataset and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE
  International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 204–207, 2018.

Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Lixuan Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Xiaodong Song, Jacob Steinhardt,
  and Justin Gilmer. The many faces of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution gener-
  alization. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8320–8329, 2020.

Muhammad T. Islam. Jute Pest Dataset, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.com/dsv/
 8332009. Accessed: 2024-09-23.

Paul Janson, Wenxuan Zhang, Rahaf Aljundi, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. A simple baseline that
  questions the use of pretrained-models in continual learning. In Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems Workshop on Distribution Shifts: Connecting Methods and Applications,
  2022.

Khurram Javed and Martha White. Meta-learning representations for continual learning. In Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

Kaiska. Apparel Dataset, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/kaiska/
  apparel-dataset. Accessed: 2024-09-23.

Parneet Kaur, Karan Sikka, Weijun Wang, Serge Belongie, and Ajay Divakaran. FoodX-251: A
  dataset for fine-grained food classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06167, 2019.

Douwe Kiela, Max Bartolo, Yixin Nie, Divyansh Kaushik, Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Bertie
  Vidgen, Grusha Prasad, Amanpreet Singh, Pratik Ringshia, Zhiyi Ma, Tristan Thrush, Sebastian
  Riedel, Zeerak Talat, Pontus Stenetorp, Robin Jia, Mohit Bansal, Christopher Potts, and Adina
  Williams. Dynabench: Rethinking benchmarking in NLP. In Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
  4110–4124, 2021.

James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A.
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hass-
  abis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting
  in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pushmeet Kohli, Anton Osokin, and Stefanie Jegelka. A principled deep random field model for
  image segmentation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  1971–1978, 2013.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Master’s Thesis, Uni-
  versity of Toronto, 2009.
Vencer Lanz. Sea Animals Image Dataset, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.com/
  datasets/vencerlanz09/sea-animals-image-dataste. Accessed: 2024-09-23.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny ImageNet Dataset, 2015. URL https://paperswithcode.com/
  dataset/tiny-imagenet. Accessed: 2024-09-23.
Sebastian Lee, Sebastian Goldt, and Andrew M. Saxe. Continual learning in the teacher-student
  setup: Impact of task similarity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6109–
  6119, 2021.
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 40(12):2935–2947, 2016.
Yan-Shuo Liang and Wu-Jun Li. InfLoRA: Interference-free low-rank adaptation for continual
  learning. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23638–
  23647, 2024.
Weiduo Liao, Ying Wei, Mingchen Jiang, Qingfu Zhang, and Hisao Ishibuchi. Does continual
 learning meet compositionality? New benchmarks and an evaluation framework. In Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 33499–33513, 2023.
Zhiqiu Lin, Jia Shi, Deepak Pathak, and Deva Ramanan. The CLEAR benchmark: Continual learn-
  ing on real-world imagery. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
Vincenzo Lomonaco and Davide Maltoni. CORe50: A new dataset and benchmark for continuous
  object recognition. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 17–26, 2017.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6470–6479, 2017.
Zhiyi Ma, Kawin Ethayarajh, Tristan Thrush, Somya Jain, Ledell Wu, Robin Jia, Christopher Potts,
  Adina Williams, and Douwe Kiela. Dynaboard: An evaluation-as-a-service platform for holistic
  next-generation benchmarking. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  10351–10367, 2021.
Subhransu Maji, Esa Rahtu, Juho Kannala, Matthew Blaschko, and Andrea Vedaldi. Fine-grained
  visual classification of aircraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.5151, 2013.
Mark D. McDonnell, Dong Gong, Amin Parvaneh, Ehsan Abbasnejad, and Anton van den Hengel.
 RanPAC: Random projections and pre-trained models for continual learning. In Conference on
 Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 12022–12053, 2023.
Timothy R. McIntosh, Teo Susnjak, Tong Liu, Paul Watters, and Malka N. Halgamuge. Inadequa-
  cies of large language model benchmarks in the era of generative artificial intelligence. ArXiv,
  abs/2402.09880, 2024.
Sanket Vaibhav Mehta, Darshan Patil, Sarath Chandar, and Emma Strubell. An empirical investiga-
  tion of the role of pre-training in lifelong learning. ArXiv, 2112.09153, 2023.
Cuong V. Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D. Bui, and Richard E. Turner. Variational continual learn-
  ing. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Oleksiy Ostapenko, Timothée Lesort, Pau Rodr’iguez, Md Rifat Arefin, Arthur Douillard, Irina
  Rish, and Laurent Charlin. Continual learning with foundation models: An empirical study of
  latent replay. In Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, pp. 60–91, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


James Philbin, Ondrej Chum, Michael Isard, Josef Sivic, and Andrew Zisserman. Object retrieval
  with large vocabularies and fast spatial matching. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–8, 2007.
Greg Piosenka. Balls Image Classification, 2024a. URL https://www.kaggle.com/
  datasets/gpiosenka/balls-image-classification. Accessed: 2024-09-23.
Greg Piosenka. Sports Classification, 2024b. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  gpiosenka/sports-classification. Accessed: 2024-09-23.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Ameya Prabhu, Vishaal Udandarao, Philip H. S. Torr, Matthias Bethge, Adel Bibi, and Samuel
 Albanie. Lifelong benchmarks: Efficient model evaluation in an era of rapid progress. ArXiv,
 abs/2402.19472, 2024.
Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994.
Xiaoman Qi, Panpan Zhu, Yuebin Wang, Liqiang Zhang, Junhuan Peng, Mengfan Wu, Jialong
  Chen, Xudong Zhao, Ning Zang, and P. Takis Mathiopoulos. MLRSNet: A multi-label high
  spatial resolution remote sensing dataset for semantic scene understanding. ISPRS Journal of
  Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 169:337–350, 2020.
Jingyang Qiao, Zhizhong Zhang, Xin Tan, Chengwei Chen, Yanyun Qu, Yong Peng, and Yuan
   Xie. Prompt gradient projection for continual learning. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8748–8763, 2021.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H. Lampert. iCaRL:
  Incremental classifier and representation learning. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5533–5542, 2016.
Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Robert Ajemian, Miao Liu, Irina Rish, Yuhai Tu, and Gerald
 Tesauro. Learning to learn without forgetting by maximizing transfer and minimizing interfer-
 ence. ArXiv, abs/1810.11910, 2018.
Mark B. Ring. CHILD: A first step towards continual learning. Machine Learning, 28:77–104,
 1997.
David Rolnick, Arun Ahuja, Jonathan Schwarz, Timothy P. Lillicrap, and Greg Wayne. Experience
  replay for continual learning. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Gobinda Saha, Isha Garg, and Kaushik Roy. Gradient projection memory for continual learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jonathan Schwarz, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Jelena Luketina, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska,
  Yee Whye Teh, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progress & compress: A scalable frame-
  work for continual learning. ArXiv, abs/1805.06370, 2018.
Kritik Seth. Fruit and Vegetable Image Recognition, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.
  com/datasets/kritikseth/fruit-and-vegetable-image-recognition.
  Accessed: 2024-09-23.
Weijia Shi, Anirudh Ajith, Mengzhou Xia, Yangsibo Huang, Daogao Liu, Terra Blevins, Danqi
 Chen, and Luke S. Zettlemoyer. Detecting pretraining data from large language models. ArXiv,
 abs/2310.16789, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
  replay. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, L. Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game
  of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Aditya Sisodiya. One Piece Anime, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  aditya2803/one-piece-anime. Accessed: 2024-09-23.
James Smith, Leonid Karlinsky, Vyshnavi Gutta, Paola Cascante-Bonilla, Donghyun Kim, Assaf
  Arbelle, Rameswar Panda, Rogério Schmidt Feris, and Zsolt Kira. CODA-Prompt: Continual
  decomposed attention-based prompting for rehearsal-free continual learning. In IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11909–11919, 2022.
Stealth Technologies. Rock Classification, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.com/
  datasets/stealthtechnologies/rock-classification. Accessed: 2024-09-23.
Phuc Thai. Butterfly Image Classification, 2024. URL https://www.kaggle.com/
  datasets/phucthaiv02/butterfly-image-classification. Accessed: 2024-
  09-23.
Bart Thomee, David A. Shamma, Gerald Friedland, Benjamin Elizalde, Karl Ni, Douglas Poland,
  Damian Borth, and Li-Jia Li. YFCC100M: The new data in multimedia research. In Communi-
  cations of the ACM, volume 59, pp. 64–73, 2016.
Michalis K. Titsias, Jonathan Schwarz, Alexander G. de G. Matthews, Razvan Pascanu, and
 Yee Whye Teh. Functional regularisation for continual learning with Gaussian processes. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 9(86):2579–2605, 2008.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The Caltech-
  UCSD Birds-200-2011 Dataset. 2011.
Liyuan Wang, Mingtian Zhang, Zhongfan Jia, Qian Li, Chenglong Bao, Kaisheng Ma, Jun Zhu, and
  Yi Zhong. AFEC: Active forgetting of negative transfer in continual learning. In Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 22379–22391, 2021.
Liyuan Wang, Jingyi Xie, Xingxing Zhang, Mingyi Huang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Hierarchical
  decomposition of prompt-based continual learning: Rethinking obscured sub-optimality. In Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 69054–69076, 2023a.
Liyuan Wang, Xingxing Zhang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. A comprehensive survey of continual
  learning: Theory, method and application. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 46(8):5362–5383, 2023b.
Siyuan Wang, Zhuohan Long, Zhihao Fan, Zhongyu Wei, and Xuanjing Huang. Benchmark self-
  evolving: A multi-agent framework for dynamic LLM evaluation. ArXiv, abs/2402.11443, 2024.
Zifeng Wang, Zizhao Zhang, Sayna Ebrahimi, Ruoxi Sun, Han Zhang, Chen-Yu Lee, Xiaoqi Ren,
  Guolong Su, Vincent Perot, Jennifer G. Dy, and Tomas Pfister. DualPrompt: Complementary
  prompting for rehearsal-free continual learning. ArXiv, abs/2204.04799, 2022.
Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A. Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. SUN database:
   Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to zoo. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3485–3492, 2010.
Samuel Yeom, Irene Giacomelli, Matt Fredrikson, and Somesh Jha. Privacy risk in machine learn-
  ing: Analyzing the connection to overfitting. IEEE Computer Security Foundations Symposium,
  pp. 268–282, 2017.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jaehong Yoon, Divyam Madaan, Eunho Yang, and Sung Ju Hwang. Online coreset selection for
  rehearsal-based continual learning. ArXiv, abs/2106.01085, 2021.
Gengwei Zhang, Liyuan Wang, Guoliang Kang, Ling Chen, and Yunchao Wei. SLCA: Slow learner
  with classifier alignment for continual learning on a pre-trained model. In IEEE International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 19091–19101, 2023.
Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A 10 mil-
  lion image database for scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 40(6):1452–1464, 2017.
Da-Wei Zhou, Han-Jia Ye, De chuan Zhan, and Ziwei Liu. Revisiting class-incremental learning
  with pre-trained models: Generalizability and adaptivity are all you need. ArXiv, abs/2303.07338,
  2023a.
Da-Wei Zhou, Hai-Long Sun, Han-Jia Ye, and De chuan Zhan. Expandable subspace ensemble
  for pre-trained model-based class-incremental learning. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23554–23564, 2024a.
Da-Wei Zhou, Qi-Wei Wang, Zhi-Hong Qi, Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan, and Ziwei Liu. Class-
  incremental learning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
  46(12):9851–9873, 2024b.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-
  language models. International Journal of Computer Vision, pp. 2337 – 2348, 2021.
Kun Zhou, Yutao Zhu, Zhipeng Chen, Wentong Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin,
  Ji-Rong Wen, and Jiawei Han. Don’t make your LLM an evaluation benchmark cheater. ArXiv,
  abs/2311.01964, 2023b.
Kaijie Zhu, Jiaao Chen, Jindong Wang, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, Diyi Yang, and Xing Xie. DyVal:
  Dynamic evaluation of large language models for reasoning tasks. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A       CLDY B DATA P OOL
A.1      CLDY B DATA P OOL C ONSTRUCTION

Photographic image data. This portion of the CLDyB data pool includes 2, 043 classes from 22
publicly available image recognition datasets, and can be categorized into two major domains:
  • Natural and biological scenes. This category includes images of fauna, flora, and various
    natural elements and ecosystems, spanning multiple levels of granularity, from coarse-grained
    categories (e.g., different animal species in Animal-90 (Banerjee, 2024)) to fine-grained distinc-
    tions (e.g., specific butterfly species in Butterfly-70 (Thai, 2024)).
  • Man-made scenes. This category contains images depicting clothing, food, building, and en-
    tertainment scenes, capturing a rich diversity of cultural and historical contexts from multiple
    geographic regions and time periods. For example, it includes Food-101 (Bossard et al., 2014),
    CNFOOD-241(Aluza, 2024) with Chinese cuisine, and Indian Food Images (Banerjee, 2023),
    which together represent a variety of regional culinary traditions.
Diffusion-generated image data. In addition to photographic images, our data pool incorporates
four AI-generated image datasets by SDXL (Podell et al., 2024) to expand its data distribution and
introduce new challenges for CL. These datasets contain 360 classes across three animal categories
and one product category, created using the following prompts:
  • ‘A high-quality image of a kind of animal: {animal name}’
  • ‘A high-quality sketch image of a kind of animal: {animal name}’
  • ‘A high-quality {image style} image of a kind of animal: {animal name}’
  • ‘A high-quality image of a kind of product: {product name}’
Table 2 gives the details of these datasets, which retain the licensing terms of their original sources
whenever explicitly stated. In cases where no specific license is provided, the dataset is distributed
under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license3 , permitting use only for non-commercial purposes.

A.2      C URRENT CL B ENCHMARKS

The standard practice for evaluating class-incremental learning methods, first established in (Re-
buffi et al., 2016), involves partitioning the classes of a labeled dataset into sequentially ordered
tasks with non-overlapping class labels for training and testing. Commonly used datasets include
MNIST (Deng, 2012), CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009), CUB-200 (Wah et al., 2011), and various
ImageNet derivatives (Le & Yang, 2015; Hendrycks et al., 2020). Additionally, benchmarks like
OmniBenchmark and VTAB (Zhou et al., 2023a) aggregate multiple standard classification datasets,
each regarded as an individual task. Beyond remixing available datasets, several new datasets have
been specifically curated, including Core50 (Lomonaco & Maltoni, 2017), which features diverse
objects in varying contexts, and CLEAR (Lin et al., 2021), which captures natural temporal pro-
gressions of visual concepts. Furthermore, Liao et al. (2023) introduced CGQA and COBJ bench-
marks to assess the compositional generalization abilities of CL methods. However, existing CL
benchmarks remain static, and do not explicitly account for assessment of CL methods with strong
foundation models.


    3
        https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Statistics of the CLDyB data pool. For certain datasets, the number of classes (i.e., # of
classes) is smaller than the original, as we have selected only those with fewer than 45 images.

        Type                           Dataset                           # of classes # of images
                                       Fruits-Vegetable (Seth, 2024)          35         3,047
                                       Jute-Pest (Islam, 2024)                17         7,151
                                       Animal-90 (Banerjee, 2024)             90         5,400
                                       Sea-Animal (Lanz, 2024)                23         13,711
                                       Rock (Technologies, 2024)               9         3,687
                                       Butterfly-75 (Thai, 2024)              75         6,499
                                       Clothing-20 (Kaiska, 2024)             17         5,325
                                       Apparel (Grigorev, 2024)               37         16,170
                                       Food101 (Bossard et al., 2014)        101        101,000
                                       FoodX251 (Kaur et al., 2019)          250        118,441
                                       Indian-Food (Banerjee, 2023)           80         4,000
        Photographic image data
                                       CNFOOD241 (Aluza, 2024)               240        170,835
                                       Oxford5k (Philbin et al., 2007)        17         5,063
                                       SUN397 (Xiao et al., 2010)            339         17,355
                                       Places365 (Zhou et al., 2017)         365       1,803,460
                                       RESISC45 (Cheng et al., 2017)          45         5,100
                                       EuroSAT-RGB (Helber et al., 2018)      10         27,000
                                       MLRSNet (Qi et al., 2020)              46        109,161
                                       FGVC-Aircraft (Maji et al., 2013)     100         10,000
                                       Balls30 (Piosenka, 2024a)              29         3,708
                                       Sports100 (Piosenka, 2024b)           100         13,492
                                       One-Piece-Anime (Sisodiya, 2024)       18         11,737
                                       Product-71                             71         7,095
                                       Animal-Multi-Style                    133         19,962
        Diffusion-generated image data
                                       Animal-Sketch                          77         8,494
                                       Animal                                 79         8,292
        CLDyB data pool                Combined                             2,403      2,505,185



B      CL M ETHODS

B.1     T RADITIONAL CL M ETHODS

Traditional class-incremental learning methods can be broadly divided into five categories:
1) Replay-based, 2) regularization-based, 3) model-based, 4) optimization-based, and 5)
representation-based approaches. Specifically,
    • Replay-based methods use a memory buffer to store and replay previous samples when learn-
      ing new tasks, with recent emphasis on exemplar selection (Aljundi et al., 2019; Yoon et al.,
      2021), constraint optimization (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018), and gener-
      ative replay (Shin et al., 2017).
    • Regularization-based methods (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) penalize significant changes in CL
      methods to preserve acquired knowledge. These include regularization of important parameters,
      where the importance is measured by the Fisher information matrix (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017),
      weight uncertainty (Ahn et al., 2019), and variational posterior (Nguyen et al., 2018), as well
      as functional regularization that leverages Gaussian processes (Titsias et al., 2020), knowledge
      distillation (Li & Hoiem, 2016; Buzzega et al., 2020), and contrastive learning (Cha et al., 2021).
    • Model-based methods often involve model expansion (Schwarz et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
      2023a) and parameter isolation (Wang et al., 2022) to manage task-specific knowledge.
    • Optimization-based methods employ techniques like orthogonal gradient projections (Fara-
      jtabar et al., 2019; Saha et al., 2021) and meta-learning (Riemer et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2020)
      to mitigate negative interference between tasks.
    • Representation-based methods exploit the advantages of meta-learning (Javed & White,
      2019), self-supervised learning (Gallardo et al., 2021), and large-scale pre-training (Mehta et al.,
      2023) to improve feature representations in model initialization and adaptation.
We refer interested readers to (Wang et al., 2023b) for a comprehensive survey.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   S ELECTED CL M ETHODS FOR CLDY B

We provide a brief description of the selected CL methods for CLDyB. All CL methods work seam-
lessly with foundation models of varying backbones. Table 3 summarizes the design principles of
different CL methods for better comparison.
  • ER (Rolnick et al., 2018) is the simplest replay-based method that stores previous exemplars in
    a fixed memory buffer, and replays them during training to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.
  • AFEC (Wang et al., 2021) enhances elastic weight consolidation (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) by
    introducing a second Fisher information matrix derived from the current and task-specific fine-
    tuned models as regularization. Inspired by biological neural networks, this approach enables
    selective forgetting of old knowledge conflicting with new experiences, moving beyond rigid
    retention strategies.
  • CLSER (Arani et al., 2022) employs two models: a stable one (for long-term memory) and a
    plastic one (for short-term memory), updated via distinct exponential moving average (EMA)
    strategies. During training, it incorporates the mean squared error between the working model
    and the most confident EMA model as a form of distillation loss.
  • DualPrompt (Wang et al., 2022), a prompt-based CL method, improves upon L2P (Zhou et al.,
    2021) by attaching prompts to multiple attention layers. It also distinguishes task-agnostic and
    task-specific prompts, enhancing the model’s ability to learn both global (cross-task) and local
    (within-task) knowledge.
  • LAE (Gao et al., 2023) maintains an online parameter-efficient module through regular training
    and updates an offline parameter-efficient module using EMA. During inference, it employs a
    routing strategy by selecting the more confident prediction from the two modules.
  • HiDe-Prompt (Wang et al., 2023a) enhances prior prompt-based methods with several im-
    provements, including a prompt-ensemble strategy, a contrastive feature constraint, and a joint
    optimization of three tasks: within-task prediction, task-identity prediction, and task-adaptive
    prediction.
  • SLCA (Zhang et al., 2023) employs a dual learning rate strategy: the feature encoder (back-
    bone) is fine-tuned with a smaller learning rate to maintain stable feature extraction, while the
    classifier is updated with a larger learning rate. Additionally, SLCA mitigates classifier forget-
    ting by modeling and replaying class-wise feature distributions, ensuring robust calibration of
    the classifier over time.
  • PGP (Qiao et al., 2024) demonstrates that orthogonalizing prompt gradients via singular value
    decomposition prevents forgetting.
  • RanPAC (McDonnell et al., 2023) freezes the backbone after initial task training, and applies
    non-learnable random projections to enhance feature separability. It further decorrelates class
    prototypes using the inverse of the Gram matrix of the projected features, achieving strong
    performance without the use of any memory buffer.

       Table 3: Summary of design principles of the nine selected CL methods for CLDyB.

                      Replay             Training               Regularization                   Model
 Method                                   Parameter- Functional Parameter Orthogonality Isolation or
               Exemplar Statistic Full                                                               Ensemble
                                            efficient  -based     -based       -based    expansion
 ER               ✓                ✓
 AFEC                              ✓                                ✓
 CLSER            ✓                ✓                     ✓                                             ✓
 DualPrompt                                   ✓                                             ✓
 LAE                                          ✓                                                        ✓
 HiDe-Prompt                   ✓              ✓                                             ✓          ✓
 SLCA                          ✓   ✓
 RanPAC                        ✓   ✓
 PGP                                          ✓                                 ✓           ✓



B.3   M EMORY F OOTPRINT C ALCULATION

In the calculation of memory footprint, we consider three main sources beyond the ViT backbone:
1) learner parameters including model replicas (e.g., old and EMA-updated models) and parameter-


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


efficient modules, 2) dataset metadata containing per-task statistics like mean and variance, and 3)
image storage retaining raw 8-bit 224 × 224 RGB exemplars from previous tasks. All data are stored
in 32-bit floats.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P SEUDOCODE FOR CLDY B
We present the pseudocode for CLDyB in Algorithms 1, 2, and 3.

Algorithm 1 Ãt = GreedyTaskSampling(Dt , Ft−1 , B̃, K)
                                                              n     oM
                                                                (i)
Require: Data pool Dt , continually learned classifiers Ft−1 = ft−1    , # of candidate tasks to
                                                                         i=1
    sample B̃, and # of classes per task K
Return: Ãt                                                                ▷ Reduced action space
                  1
                    PM
                                         (i) (i)

 1: Ψ(Cu , Cv ) = M   i=1 s CosSim ut , vt          , ∀u, v ∈ Dt      ▷ Compute pairwise potentials
 2: Ãt ← ∅
 3: for j ∈ {1, . . . , B̃} do                                                    ▷ Sample each task
 4:     V0⋆ ← ∅
 5:     for k ∈ {1, . . . , K} do                                     ▷ Sample each class in the task
 6:         if k == 1 then                                         ▷ Sample the first class uniformly
 7:             u⋆k ∼ [|Dt |]
 8:         else                                   ▷ Sample subsequent classes according to Eqn. (6)
                u⋆k = arg maxu v∈V ⋆
                                  Q
 9:                                         Ψ(Cu , Cv )
                                      k−1
10:        end if
           Vk⋆ ← Vk−1
                  ⋆
                      S ⋆
11:                    uk
12:    end for S
                    ⋆
13:    Ãt ← Ãt VK                                               ▷ Add the task to the candidate set
14: end for


Algorithm 2 Āt = FunctionalTaskClustering(Ãt , Ft−1 , B̄, C)
                                                                        n     oM
                                                                          (i)
Require: Candidate task set Ãt , continually learned classifiers Ft−1 = ft−1    , # of candidate
                                                                                  i=1
    tasks to sample B̄, and # of task clusters C
Return: Āt                                                                 ▷ Condensed action space
 1: G ← 0|n  Ãt |×M
                          o                                        ▷ Initialize the task feature matrix
 2: for i ∈ 1, . . . , Ãt do
 3:    for j ∈ {1, . . . , M } do             ▷ Compute the average negative log-likelihood of sample
                            (i)                                (j)             (j)
    predictions for task T̃t using the j-th k-NN classifier pt−1 built from ft−1
                                                    (j)
            G[i, j] = − 1(i)
                                P
 4:                                        (i) log pt−1 (y|x)
                            T̃t   (x,y)∈T̃
                                        t

 5:    end for
 6: end
    n for                      o
       (1)   (2)           (C)
 7: T̄t , T̄t , . . . , T̄t      = KMeans(G, C)                     ▷ Cluster Ãt into C task clusters
 8: Āt ← ∅
 9: for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , B̄} do                           ▷ Sample each task without replacement
10:     j ∼ [C]                                                 ▷ Sample one task cluster uniformly
                 (j)
11:    T̃t ∼ T̄t                                        ▷ Sample one task from the cluster uniformly
          (j)    (j)
12:    T̄t ← T̄t \ T̃t                                           ▷ Remove the task from the cluster
                 S
13:    Āt ← Āt T̃t                                              ▷ Add the task to the candidate set
14: end for


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 CLDyB
                                                      n      oM
                                                         (i)
Require: Data pools {Dt }N
                         t=1 , foundation models F0 =  f 0      , CL methods {CL(i) }M
                                                                                     i=1 , # of
                                                                   i=1
    candidate tasks B̃ and B̄, # of task clusters C, and # of classes in each task K
Return: T<N +1                                                              ▷ CLDyB task sequence
 1: T<1 ← ∅
 2: for t = {1, . . . , N } do
 3:     Ãt = GreedyTaskSampling(Dt , Ft−1 , B̃, K)                                  ▷ Algorithm 1
 4:     Āt = FunctionalTaskClustering(Ãt , Ft−1 , B̄, C)                           ▷ Algorithm 2
 5:     Tt = MCTS(current state = Ft−1 , action space = Āt , value function = Jµt (Ft−1 ))        ▷
    Identify the optimal task according to Eqn. (7)
                  (i)               (i)    (i) (i)
 6:     Ft ← {ft }M       S, where ft = CL (ft−1 , Tt ) ▷ Train each classifier on the selected task
                        i=1
 7:     T<t+1 ← T<t Tt                                      ▷ Add the task to the CLDyB sequence
 8: end for


D     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
D.1   CLDY B S EQUENCES WITH VARYING D IFFICULTY L EVELS

While the main text describes CLDyB as selecting the hardest task at each time step (via greedy
maximization of Eqn. (7)), we extend it to generate sequences with varying difficult levels. This can
be done by replacing greedy task sampling with task reward-based sampling:

                                              exp JT̃t (Ft−1 )/τ
                            p T̃t = P                                  ,                          (8)
                                           T ′ ∈Āt exp JTt (Ft−1 )/τ
                                                           ′
                                             t

where we slightly abuse the math notation by putting the action (i.e., T̃t or Tt′ ) in the subscript of
the value function J instead of the policy µt to be optimized. The temperature hyperparameter τ
controls the difficulty bias. Lower τ values (τ → 0) prioritize high-reward (challenging) tasks,
mimicking greedy sampling, while higher τ values promote diversity by flattening the probability
distribution. All other components in CLDyB remain unchanged.
Using reward-based sampling within CLDyB, we generate two additional sets of sequences at the
medium and easy difficulty levels, retaining the original as hard sequences. Table 4 presents the
results, where we observe two key trends. First, performance improves predictably as difficulty
decreases, with the hard sequences providing performance lower bounds. Second, while minor
ranking fluctuations occur, results across all CLDyB sequences remain strongly correlated with
those on held-out sequences.

Table 4: Final average accuracy (%) of CL methods on CLDyB sequences at the easy, medium, and
hard levels.

              Method                               Easy     Medium        Hard    Held-out
              ER (Rolnick et al., 2018)            76.3      60.5         54.8     79.9
              AFEC (Wang et al., 2021)             72.5      51.9         49.5     76.3
              CLSER (Arani et al., 2022)           75.4      60.7         57.0     81.1
              DualPrompt (Wang et al., 2022)       69.0      53.7         41.9     70.8
              LAE (Gao et al., 2023)               70.1      50.9         48.1     71.1
              HiDe-Prompt (Wang et al., 2023a)     80.1      67.6         62.5     84.9
              SLCA (Zhang et al., 2023)            77.2      59.7         56.2     80.3
              RanPAC (McDonnell et al., 2023)      77.0      62.2         56.9     81.0
              PGP (Qiao et al., 2024)              69.2      52.0         44.0     68.7
              SRCC (per column & held-out)        0.867∗    0.833∗       0.983∗    N/A
              KRCC (per column & held-out)        0.722∗    0.667∗       0.944∗    N/A


D.2   A DDITIONAL F IGURES

Figs 7 to 12 provide additional results under various conditions. Specifically,


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  • Fig. 7 evaluates CL methods on random sequences.
  • Fig. 8 compares the commonly challenging CLDyB sequences with random sequences.
  • Fig. 9 tests the robustness of CLDyB in long-sequence, commonly challenging scenarios.
  • Fig. 10 validates CLDyB with CLIP-ViT-Base (Radford et al., 2021) in commonly challenging
    scenario, a stronger foundation model pre-trained on a much larger web-scale dataset, FYCC-
    100M (Thomee et al., 2016), in comparison to ViT-Base-Sup21K (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).
  • Fig. 11 assesses CL methods on the commonly challenging CLDyB sequences, when combining
    ViT-Base-Sup21K (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and CLIP-ViT-Base (Radford et al., 2021).
  • Fig. 12 benchmarks CL methods separately using the hybrid configuration from Fig. 11.
  • Fig. 13 compares CL methods on the CLDyB sequences, discovered from the original data pool
    and its augmented version with AI-generated image data, respectively.

             ER       AFEC       CLSER        DualPrompt       LAE             HiDe-Prompt               SLCA       RanPAC       PGP
      0.90                                    0.00                                            0.90
      0.85
                                              -0.05                                           0.85


                                                                                        ALA
      0.80
Acc


                                         AR

      0.75                                                                                    0.80
                                              -0.10
      0.70
                                                                                              0.75
      0.65
             0    2      4   6       8                0    2     4         6       8                 0          2   4        6   8
                                                               Time step

Figure 7: Performance comparison of CL methods on random sequences drawn from the CLDyB
data pool.


D.3          V ISUALIZATION OF CLDY B S EQUENCES

Figs 14 to 17 show t-SNE visualizations (van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) of tasks in the commonly
and individually challenging CLDyB sequences. Figs. 18 to 20 provide sample images from the
commonly challenging CLDyB sequences. Additionally, Fig 21 demonstrates the effect of adding
AI-generated image data to the CLDyB data pool over time.


                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      0.90                                       0.00                                         0.90
                                  Random
                                  CLDyB         -0.05                                         0.88
      0.80
                                                -0.10                                         0.86


                                                                                        ALA
Acc


                                           AR
      0.70                                      -0.15                                         0.84
                                                -0.20
      0.60                                                                                    0.82
                                                -0.25
             0      2     4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0   2   4   6   8
                                                                    Time step

                                                                  (a) ER
      0.90                                      0.00                                          0.90
                                  Random
      0.80                        CLDyB         -0.05                                         0.85


                                                                                        ALA
                                                                                              0.80
Acc


                                           AR



      0.70                                      -0.10
      0.60                                                                                    0.75
                                                -0.15                                         0.70
      0.50
             0      2     4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0   2   4   6   8
                                                                    Time step

                                                              (b) AFEC
                                                0.00                                          0.88
      0.80                                                                                    0.86
                                                -0.05
                                                                                              0.84
                                                                                        ALA
Acc


                                           AR


      0.70                                      -0.10                                         0.82
                 Random
                                                -0.15                                         0.80
      0.60       CLDyB
                                                                                              0.78
             0      2     4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0   2   4   6   8
                                                                    Time step

                                                              (c) CLSER
      0.90                                      0.00                                          0.90
                                  Random
      0.80                        CLDyB                                                       0.85
      0.70                                      -0.10
                                                                                        ALA
Acc


                                           AR


                                                                                              0.80
      0.60
                                                -0.20                                         0.75
      0.50
      0.40                                                                                    0.70
             0      2     4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0   2   4   6   8
                                                                    Time step

                                                            (d) DualPrompt
                                                0.00
                                  Random                                                      0.85
      0.80                        CLDyB         -0.05                                         0.80
                                                                                        ALA


      0.70
Acc


                                           AR


                                                -0.10                                         0.75
      0.60
                                                -0.15                                         0.70
      0.50                                                                                    0.65
             0      2     4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0   2   4   6   8
                                                                    Time step

                                                                  (e) LAE

Figure 8: Joint evaluation of the five CL methods using CLDyB relative to random sequences. All
methods use the ViT-Base backbone (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), pre-trained on ImageNet-21K.


                                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 0.00
      0.85                                                                                                                0.85
                                                                -0.01
      0.80                                                                                                                0.80


                                                                                                                    ALA
Acc                                                             -0.02


                                                           AR
      0.75
                                                                -0.03                                                     0.75
      0.70       Random
      0.65       CLDyB                                          -0.04                                                     0.70

             0       2         4         6         8                    0       2          4         6        8                  0       2         4          6        8
                                                                                      Time step

                                                                            (f) HiDe-Prompt
      0.90                                                       0.00                                                     0.90
                                                  Random
      0.80                                        CLDyB                                                                   0.85
                                                                -0.05


                                                                                                                    ALA
Acc


                                                           AR
                                                                                                                          0.80
      0.70
                                                                -0.10                                                     0.75
      0.60
                                                                                                                          0.70
             0       2         4         6         8                    0       2          4         6        8                  0       2         4          6        8
                                                                                      Time step

                                                                                (g) SLCA
      0.90                                                       0.00                                                     0.90
                                                  Random
                                                  CLDyB         -0.02                                                     0.85
      0.80


                                                                                                                    ALA
                                                                                                                          0.80
Acc


                                                                -0.04
                                                           AR


      0.70                                                                                                                0.75
                                                                -0.06
                                                                                                                          0.70
      0.60                                                      -0.08                                                     0.65
             0       2         4         6         8                    0       2          4         6        8                  0       2         4          6        8
                                                                                      Time step

                                                                                (h) RanPAC
      0.90                                                       0.00                                                     0.90
                                                  Random
      0.80                                        CLDyB         -0.05                                                     0.85
      0.70                                                                                                          ALA   0.80
Acc


                                                                -0.10
                                                           AR


      0.60                                                                                                                0.75
                                                                -0.15
      0.50                                                                                                                0.70
                                                                -0.20
                                                                                                                          0.65
             0       2         4         6         8                    0       2          4         6        8                  0       2         4          6        8
                                                                                      Time step

                                                                                    (i) PGP

Figure 8: Continued. Independent testing of the four CL methods using the same CLDyB sequences
as in Figs. 8(a)-(e), relative to random sequences.

                                                                                                                                     Random                 CLDyB
                                                                0.00
      0.90                                                                                                                0.90
      0.80                                                      -0.05
                                                                                                                          0.80
                                                                                                                    ALA
Acc


                                                           AR


      0.70                                                      -0.10
      0.60                                                                                                                0.70
                                                                -0.15
      0.50                                                                                                                0.60
             0   5   10   15       20   25   30    35   40              0   5    10   15       20   25   30   35   40            0   5   10   15       20    25   30   35   40
                                                                                      Time step

Figure 9: Average performance comparison of CL methods on random and long commonly chal-
lenging CLDyB sequences (when N = 40).

                                                                                                                                     Random                 CLDyB
                                                                 0.00
      0.90                                                                                                                0.95
                                                                -0.05
      0.80                                                      -0.10                                                     0.90
                                                                                                                    ALA
Acc


                                                           AR


      0.70                                                      -0.15
                                                                                                                          0.85
                                                                -0.20
      0.60
                                                                -0.25                                                     0.80
             0       2         4         6         8                    0       2          4         6        8                  0       2         4          6        8
                                                                                      Time step

Figure 10: Average performance comparison of CL methods on random and CLDyB sequences,
with CLIP-ViT-Base (Radford et al., 2021) as the foundation model.


                                                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                    Random       CLDyB
                                           0.00                                          0.95
      0.90
                                           -0.05                                         0.90
      0.80


                                                                                   ALA
Acc


                                      AR
                                           -0.10                                         0.85
      0.70
                                           -0.15
                                                                                         0.80
      0.60
             0   2   4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0     2      4    6      8
                                                               Time step

Figure 11: Average performance comparison of CL methods on random and CLDyB sequences,
using a mixture of ViT-Base-Sup21K (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and CLIP-ViT-Base (Radford et al.,
2021).



                                            0.00                                         0.98
                             Random                                                      0.95
      0.90                   CLDyB         -0.05                                         0.93


                                                                                   ALA
Acc


                                      AR


      0.80                                 -0.10                                         0.90
                                                                                         0.88
      0.70                                 -0.15                                         0.85
             0   2   4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0     2      4    6      8
                                                               Time step

                                                             (a) ER
                                            0.00                                         0.95
                             Random
      0.80                   CLDyB         -0.10                                         0.90


                                                                                   ALA
Acc


                                      AR


                                           -0.20                                         0.85
      0.60
                                           -0.30                                         0.80
      0.40                                                                               0.75
             0   2   4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0     2      4    6      8
                                                               Time step

                                                         (b) AFEC
      0.95                   Random         0.00
                                                                                         0.95
      0.90                   CLDyB                                                       0.93
                                           -0.05
                                                                                   ALA


      0.85
Acc


                                      AR


                                                                                         0.90
      0.80
                                           -0.10                                         0.88
      0.75
                                                                                         0.85
      0.70
             0   2   4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0     2      4    6      8
                                                               Time step

                                                         (c) CLSER
                                            0.00
                             Random                                                      0.95
      0.90                   CLDyB         -0.05
                                                                                         0.90
                                                                                   ALA
Acc


                                      AR


      0.80
                                           -0.10
                                                                                         0.85
      0.70
                                           -0.15
                                                                                         0.80
             0   2   4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0     2      4    6      8
                                                               Time step

                                                       (d) DualPrompt
      0.90                                  0.00
                             Random                                                      0.90
                             CLDyB         -0.05
      0.80
                                                                                   ALA


                                                                                         0.85
Acc


                                      AR


                                           -0.10
      0.70
                                           -0.15                                         0.80
      0.60
                                           -0.20                                         0.75
             0   2   4   6    8                    0     2       4         6   8                0     2      4    6      8
                                                               Time step

                                                             (e) LAE

Figure 12: Performance comparison of individual CL methods on random and commonly challeng-
ing CLDyB sequences.



                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      0.90                                                                                            0.90
                                                      0.01                                            0.88
      0.85                                                                                            0.85


                                                                                                ALA
                                                      0.00
Acc


                                                 AR
                                                                                                      0.82
      0.80       Random                               -0.00
                                                                                                      0.80
                 CLDyB
                                                      -0.01                                           0.78
             0      2     4         6    8                    0     2       4         6    8                 0   2       4    6       8
                                                                          Time step

                                                                  (f) HiDe-Prompt
                                                      0.00
      0.90                                                                                            0.95
      0.80                                            -0.10                                           0.93


                                                                                                ALA
Acc


                                                 AR
      0.70                                            -0.20                                           0.90
      0.60       Random                               -0.30                                           0.88
      0.50       CLDyB                                                                                0.85
                                                      -0.40
             0      2     4         6    8                    0     2       4         6    8                 0   2       4    6       8
                                                                          Time step

                                                                     (g) SLCA
                                                      0.00
                                        Random                                                        0.95
      0.90                              CLDyB         -0.01
                                                                                                      0.90


                                                                                                ALA
                                                      -0.02
Acc


                                                 AR


                                                                                                      0.85
      0.80
                                                      -0.03                                           0.80
      0.70                                            -0.04                                           0.75
             0      2     4         6    8                    0     2       4         6    8                 0   2       4    6       8
                                                                          Time step

                                                                    (h) RanPAC
                                                      0.00                                            0.95
                                        Random
      0.90                              CLDyB
                                                      -0.05                                           0.90
                                                                                                ALA
Acc


                                                 AR


      0.80
                                                      -0.10                                           0.85
      0.70
                                                                                                      0.80
             0      2     4         6    8                    0     2       4         6    8                 0   2       4    6       8
                                                                          Time step

                                                                        (i) PGP

Figure 12: Continued. Performance comparison of individual CL methods on random and com-
monly challenging CLDyB sequences.


                   AFEC Original          CLSER Original                HiDe-Prompt Original          RanPAC Original        PGP Original
                   AFEC Augmented         CLSER Augmented               HiDe-Prompt Augmented         RanPAC Augmented       PGP Augmented
      1.00                                            0.00                                            1.00

      0.80                                            -0.10                                           0.90
                                                                                                ALA
Acc


                                                 AR


                                                      -0.20                                           0.80
      0.60
                                                      -0.30                                           0.70
             0      2     4         6    8                    0     2       4         6    8                 0   2       4    6       8
                                                                          Time step

Figure 13: Performance comparison of CL methods on upcoming tasks selected by CLDyB from
the original and the augmented data pools. Additional diffusion-generated images are added to the
data pool at time step t = 2 (denoted by the dashed line).


                                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       Task 1                                                                                       Task 2                                                                                              Task 3                                                                                                                               Task 4                                                                                                           Task 5
                                   000000                                                                                              1111
                                     000 0000
                                         00         00000                                                                         11111111 11111111111                                                                                                                                                                                                        33333333333
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3333 3333333333333333
                    000 000000000000 00 000000                                                                        11111111 11111111111 1111111 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                         33 3 33
               000000 000000000                                                                                 1111111111111111111111111111111 1 1111
                                                                                                                                                     111                                                                                                                                                                                                        3333333333333 3 333
                                          0
             0 0 00000000000000000000000000000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              333333333 33333333
                0000000000                                                                                            1 1111111111 11111 111
                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                                                                            3 33333333333 33333333333
           000 000000000000000000000000000000000000                                                            11111 11111111111111 1111111                                                                                                                                                                                                        33 333333 3 333333333333333333333333                                                                                          4                              4 4 444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            44 4 4 4 4 4
    0      0               0 000 0
  000000000000000 0 00000000                                                                            11111111111 111111 1 1                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               33333333 3 33333333333333
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          33                                                                                                                       4 444 4 44444444444444444 4 44 44
                                                                                                              1111 11 1                                                                                                                                                                              2 22222222222222222222                          3 333 33                                                                                                                                                     44 444 44 44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 44
                  0                                                                                                     1111                                                                                                                                                                      222222222222222222222222222222222222222222                                                                                                                                                              4 4 44 4444444444 44444 4444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                      22 2 2222                                                                                                                                                                       4 4 444444 444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2 22222222222222222                                                                                                                                                                      4           4444 44 4 4 444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4 4 4 44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4 4 44 4             444 4444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2   222222 22                                                                                                                                                                          444444 44 4 44 44444 444 44444444 44 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2222 2 2222222222 22 2                                                                                                                                                                     444 44 4 4 44                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 222222222 2222222222222 22                                                                                                                                                                          4 444 4                      44444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    22222 222 22222222222222222222222222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 22222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   222 2 22 2222222222222222222222222222222222222                                                                                                                                                    4 4 444 4 4 4 44 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2                  2222 2222                                                                                                                                                                   4 4 444 4 4 4                  44444 44              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2                                                    2222222222 2 222222222222222222222222222222222                                                                                                                                                   44 4 4 4 4 4 44444 444444444444444 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 22222 2                                                                                                                                                                                              44 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 44 444 4 4 4 4 4 444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         444 44 4444 4444444 44 4444444 4 4 444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              44444 44 4444444 4444444 4               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4 4 44



                                                   Task 10                                                                                          Task 9                                                                                              Task 8                                                                                                                               Task 7                                                                                                           Task 6

                                                                          9
                                                               9 9 99999999
                                                            9               9 9                                                                                                           88 88                                                                                                                    7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            55
                                                                             99
                                                                             9 999                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7777777777777777777777777 7                                                                                                        66 6666666 66                                                                                                          555 55555555555555555
                                                                                                                                                                                 88888888888888888888888888888888                                                                                       7 7777777777777                                                                                                              6666666666666666666                                                                                                                  5 55 5 5
                                                              999 99 999999999999 9                                                                                                888888888888888888888888888888                                                                                  77777777777777777  777777777777                                                                                               66666666666666666666666666666666666666666666                                                                                 5555 555555555555555
                                                 9 99999 9 999 99 9999                                                                                                          888      88 8 8888 88                                                                                                77777 7 777777777                                                                                                                6666666 666666                                                                                                          555555555555555555555555555555555
                                          9 9 99 9 9 99 9999                                   9                                                                         8 8888 8 888888                                                                                                        7 777777777777                                                                                                         6666 6 6 66 6 6                                                                                                                 555 555 5555555555 5
                                    999999999999 99999999999 99999999999 99999 99 9 99                                                                                  88 88888 8888888                                                                                              7777777                            7                                                                                66 6666666666666666666 66666                                                                                                         555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5     5 5                     5
                            9 9 99999999999999999999 9 99                                                                                                          88 88 88888888888888888 8                                                                                              777 7777777 7 7 777 777                                                                                   6                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             55555555555 5 5555555555555 5 555 5
                                      9 999999 99 9 9 9                              9 9 999 9 9 9                                                                  8 8888 88 88 8                                                                                                  7777 77 777 777 77777 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7                                                                                            6     66666666666666666666666 666666 66 6                                                                                               55 5 5 5 5 5
                                 9 9 99999 9 9 9 9 999999                                        99                                                               8888888888888888888888888888888888 88888888888888888888                                                      777777777777777777777 7777777777777777777777777777777                                                                                  66                       6 66 66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            666666666666666666666666666666666666666666666666666666666                                                                55555555 55555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555
                    9999999 9 9999 9 99999 99 9 9                                              9 9                                                                         8 88 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       555555555555555555555555555 5
                                                                                      9       99                                                                          88888888888888888888888888888888888 8                                                                   77777777777777777777777777777777                                                                                                 66666666 66                    6 6666666                                                                                              5 5 55555 5555555555555
                                                9           9 99 9                     9            9                                                                  8 88888888888888888888888888888888                                                                              77 77777777777777777777777777777777777                                                                                                           6 666 666666 66                                                                                       555 555555555555555555555555555555555
                  9 999 9 9 9
         9999999999999999999999999 9 99 9 9 99
                                                            99 9 99
                                                                                                                                                                       8888 8 8888888888888888888 8                                                           7                          7777 7 777 7777777777777 7                                                                                               666666 666666666666666666                                                                                                      555                  55555555555555 5
                                                                                                                                             8             8                                                                                                  7                                                                                                                                                                           6 666666 66                                                                                                                     5 55555 55
                   999                9                    99 9 9 9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7777 7                                                                                                                              66
                9 999999999999999 9 9 9                                9     99 999
                                   99                                999999999 999999
                                       9                                    99
                                                               9



                                                   Task 11                                                                                       Task 12                                                                                             Task 13                                                                                                                             Task 14                                                                                                           Task 15

                                                                                                                                                          111111                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                           10 10 10                                                                                              11 11111111
                                                                                                                                                         11     11
                                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                                           111111 11                                                                                          121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12   12                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13                                                                                                            141414  1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14  1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        141414
                10                        1010 1010
                                             101010
                                                   10
                                                   1010                                                                                    1111
                                                                                                                                       11 11    11
                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                                 1111     11
                                                                                                                                                     1111 111111
                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                                1111                                                                                         1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13                                                                                       14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1414   1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           141414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14 14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                            10
                                           10      10                                                                                                                                                                                                12 12     121212   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13                                                                                                                  14 1414  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14 14                                 14
                                     10 1010                                                                                             11 1111 11                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12 12                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           141414141414
                                      10
                                     10
                                    1010    1010   10101010
                                                  10
                                                  10      10   10                                                                      1111
                                                                                                                                          11            111
                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                     1111
                                                                                                                                                          1 111111 11                                                                                  12 121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12121212  12                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13      13  13                                                                                                                  1414  14141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14             14
                               1010
                                     10
                                     1010
                                      1010
                                       10 10
                                           10
                                           10 1010
                                           1010 10 1010 1010
                                                         10
                                                         1010
                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                          1111
                                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                                           11 111111
                                                                                                                                             11  11 11
                                                                                                                                                       1111
                                                                                                                                                         11 1111
                                                                                                                                                       1111                                                                                        12 12 12   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12 121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        131313 13                                                                                               14                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1414 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14  1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                1010
                                    10
                                 1010
                                    1010
                                    10
                                         10
                                        10
                                        1010
                                          10      1010 10 10
                                                           10
                                                          10
                                                           10
                                                        1010
                                                     1010     10
                                                            1010
                                                           10
                                                                                                                                     1111
                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                        11 1111
                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                          11 11
                                                                                                                                              1111
                                                                                                                                               1111
                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                11 11
                                                                                                                                                  11  11 1111
                                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                                  11 11 1111
                                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                    11       11
                                                                                                                                                                1111
                                                                                                                                                             1111
                                                                                                                                                                11 11                                                                       121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12 12 12 12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      121212 12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12 121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13 13 13          131313 13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13                                                                                                  1414141414  1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           141414
                       10101010 10
                               10 10 10
                                 10           1010
                                              10 10 10 10101010 1010 1010
                                                                                                                              1111 11
                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                           111111
                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                               1111 111111 11                                                                            121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12 12121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12             12                                                                                                     13 13 1313                                                                                                    14     14           14 14 14       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                     1010        10 10
                                     10   10
                                           10    10
                                                               10 1010 10
                                                                                                                       1111
                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                         11 11
                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                           11   11
                                                                                                                                11 11
                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                 11  11
                                                                                                                                    11  11
                                                                                                                                       11   11  11
                                                                                                                                               11                                                                                         12 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1212  1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12 12           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12                                                                                                 13    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13     1313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13                                                                                                        1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14                   14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14                        14
                     10
                     1010 10     10
                                10 10
                              1010
                                        10
                                   1010 1010
                                         10
                                       1010 10 10
                                           1010                           10                                        111111
                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                      11   11
                                                                                                                         1111
                                                                                                                        11 11
                                                                                                                           11111111
                                                                                                                            11   1111111
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                     111 1111
                                                                                                                                       11 11    11 11 11
                                                                                                                                                1111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1212           12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            121212 12121212     12                                                                                  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1133 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1313       13 13      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13131313131313                                                                                               14 141414 14                  1414 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                             1010 1010
                                                     10            10                                                        111111111111
                                                                                                                                       11 11    11
                                                                                                                                             1111
                                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                   11 1111 11                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12 12 121212 12 12 12                                                                                                        13 13 13   13 13                                                                                                       14                 14    14         14
                 10 10 10 10 1010   10101010  101010  1010 10 10
                                                     10
                                                   1010
                                                      10                                                                  1111            11 11  1111 11 11
                                                                                                                                                 11                                                                                                  121212 12 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1212        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13 1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13        1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13   13                                                                                                             14 14 141414 1414           14
                10
                 101010
                10       10
                        10  10 1010
                              10   10
                                  10
                                   10
                                  10  10
                                     10 1010
                                       10    10 1010 10                                                                           11 11   11   11
                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                               11                                                                                 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12       12                                                                                   13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13                                                                                                                    1414 14     141414 14
                  10
                   10
                       10 1010
                         10   1010
                             10   10
                                1010
                                     10
                                    10
                                     101010
                                       10
                                           10
                                          10
                                           10
                                           10
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                                          11  11
                                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                                            111111 11
                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                                     111111
                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1212                12121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1212     1212                     12                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13     13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13 1313  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1414  1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
               10  10
                  10
                   10
                    10
                   1010 10
                    10 10      10 10  10   10
                                    10 10 1010                                                                        11
                                                                                                                     11      11     11
                                                                                                                                     1111 11    11     11
                                                                                                                                                      11 11
                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 121212 12                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1212   1212 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13   13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13                                                                                                                     1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1414        14     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14     14   14 1414
              10101010    1010101010       10 10                                                               11    11
                                                                                                                    111111111111
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                          11         11 11 11                                                                                 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12            12 12 12 1212         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12                                                                        1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13 113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          133 13  13 1313 13 1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13                   13                                                                                  1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14     1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14     14 14141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          141414 14  14
                   101010
                      1010
                        10
                        10  101010 10
                                  10
                       10 10 1010 10    1010     10 10
                                                   10 10
                                                     10                                                         11
                                                                                                                1111
                                                                                                                 11 11
                                                                                                                  11111111  11
                                                                                                                        111111
                                                                                                                                111111            11 11                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12        121212 121212 12      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13 13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13                                                                               1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14   1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14  14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                 10
                  10   10        1010 10    10 101010 10      10                                                 11
                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                11 11 11 1111
                                                                                                                                11 11 11
                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                     1111     111111 11                                                                     12  1212                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                     1313                           13                                                                                    14 14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14 1414141414                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1313
                  10                                                                                                                    11                                                                                                           12 1212 1212    12                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14             1414                    14
                      1010101010
                   1010             10 10 10 10 10           10
                                                             1010
                                                              10
                                                              10                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                       1111
                                                                                                                                        11  11
                                                                                                                                          1111
                                                                                                                                         11   1111                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12 121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12        1212  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12              1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13                                  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14 14 14 14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14 14 14    14                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                 1010
                                10            10 10 10 10
                                                    10         10                                                                        11 11                                                                                           12121212 12                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12                                                                                         131313 1313                                                                                                                  141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1414             14
                    10
                     101010 10
                         1010       10 1010
                                   10
                                  10         10 10
                                                    10                                                                       11
                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                           11 111111           11                                                                                     12 1212 1212           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12                                                                                                           13                                                                                                                      141414141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                           1010 10 10
                            10                                                                                                 11 111111                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1212 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12                                                                                                   1313 131313                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414   14 14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                             10                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                       11                                                                                                  1212     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12


                                                   Task 20                                                                                       Task 19                                                                                             Task 18                                                                                                                             Task 17                                                                                                           Task 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                           18                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16                                                                                                              15 1515 1515
                                                      19                                                                                          18181818
                                                                                                                                                 18       1818                                                                                                 17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17                                                                                                            1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16                                                                                                                           151515
                                     19 19                                                                                                   1818
                                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                              1818
                                                                                                                                               18    18 18
                                                                                                                                                 181818
                                                                                                                                                18        18
                                                                                                                                                          18                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16  1616                                                                                 15                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15151515 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15           15    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                           18                18181818
                                                                                                                                               1818   181818                                                                                               17 17 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1717 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1717                   17 17                                                                                   16   1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1616  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16                                                                                     15                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15 151515 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                            191919
                                            19
                                           19
                                            19                                                                                          18 18
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                              18    1818    18 1818                                                             17                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16 16 161616  16                                                                                                             15 1515 15151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15 15                                         15
                                  19 19
                                 19
                                19         19
                                            1919 19
                                           19
                                            19      19                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                      1818
                                                                                                                                       18    1818 1818
                                                                                                                                                 18  1818 18    18                                                                                              171717 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17  17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17                   17                                                                                   16                                                                                                                      151515 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15     1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1515
                                  191919 191919 1919                                                                                   18    18
                                                                                                                                         1818 1818 18
                                                                                                                                                    18 18
                                                                                                                                                       1818
                                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                                        1818
                                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17 17 17 17       171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16                       1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16  16  16 161616   1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16                                                                                              1515 15  15 151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                         1919
                          19
                          1919 1919
                           19       191919 19  191199 19
                                                19
                                                19
                                                19
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                                    1818
                                                                                                                                                     18181818
                                                                                                                                                          1818                                                                                       1717171717 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17            17                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   161616 1616  1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15151515 15 15 15
                                   19
                                        19    19  19
                                                   1919                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                    1818
                                                                                                                                     18 1818
                                                                                                                                           1818
                                                                                                                                           18  1818 18  18
                                                                                                                                                        18                                                                                          1717             171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1717 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1717         17                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1616 16 161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16        1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16161616                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                               19 19 19            19
                                                  19  19                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                181818
                                                                                                                                18    18
                                                                                                                                     18 18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                           18 18181818         18                                                                      17171717 1717   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17                     17 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1717                                                                                           16         16 16                                                                                        15 15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15 15 151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15151515                 15
                   19
                1919                          19 19
                                                    19
                                                    19
                                                     19
                                                      19                                                             18 18 18
                                                                                                                     18         1818
                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                 18  18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                    1818
                                                                                                                                       1818
                                                                                                                                          1818             18                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1717       1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1717   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17    1717  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1717 17 17 17 17 17 1717  17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 16 16    1616 16        1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     161616161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1515 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15 1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
               19
              1919 191919
                19             191919 1919 1919      19 19                                                           18 18 18      18
                                                                                                                                    1818
                                                                                                                                     1818
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                     18  18
                                                                                                                                         18 18 18 1818
                                                                                                                                        1818181818
                                                                                                                                        18                                                                                            17 171717       1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17                                        17                                                             16 16 16 16         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16         16  16                                                                              15        15 151515 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15  1515151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                           191919 19 19                                                                               18 1818       18
                                                                                                                            1818181818
                                                                                                                                      18         181818
                                                                                                                                                     18181818
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17 17 1717     17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1717 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17 17  17                                                                      16  16 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16  16   16                                                                                  1515 15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15  15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1515 1515151515 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1515
                        19
                      191919
                         1919
                           19
                           19             19 19 19                                                                  1818
                                                                                                                  1818 18 18
                                                                                                                           18    1818                 18 18                                                                                 171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17    171717                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16 1616161616     16                                                                                        151515         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
         19       19
               1919     1919
                   19 1919  19
                           19
                            19  1919 1919 1919
                               19
                              19                                                                               18 1818181818     18181818    18
                                                                                                                                          181818    18
                                                                                                                                                18 18 18
                                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                                     18           18                                                           17171717 1717  1717         17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 1717                                                         16 161616 16     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16    1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15 15 15 15 15151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15       151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15     15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1515 15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
        19 191919
        1919    19
               19
                19
                  19
                 19
                  19     1919
                          191919
                             19      19
                                    19                                                                           18          1818 18
                                                                                                                                   18         18 1818                                                                         17   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17  1717 17   17171717 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17             17                                                             16 16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          161616 16161616 16       16                                                                                         15 15    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       151515 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15    1515
            19191919
                 19 19       19
                            19 19            1919
                                              19                                                             1818  18
                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                 18             18
                                                                                                                                18     18
                                                                                                                                      18                   18                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17 1717 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17  1717       1717  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17  17                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16             16 16 16                                                                                                                       15
               19
                19 1919    19191919
                                19 191919
                                  19    1919 19
                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                               18  18
                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                 18              18  18
                                                                                                                                   1818
                                                                                                                                      181818
                                                                                                                                     18       18 18 18   1818                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1717171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17  17       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17       17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    171717                17                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16 16 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16     16161616 16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1616                                                                                       1515 1515 15                15
        1919191919 19
                  19  19
                   1919
                      19
                      19  19
                         19191919
                               19 19  1919
                                      19                                                                      18 18 18 18 18
                                                                                                                   18     18     1818
                                                                                                                                  18  18
                                                                                                                                      18 18                18
                                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                                                          1818                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 7 17  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17                                                                                                  1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16  161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15            151515
          1919191919
               1919
               19  19
                   19  19
                      19        19 191919
                                      19                 1919                                                       181818  18  18
                                                                                                                             181818 18181818
                                                                                                                                         18  18   18      18
                                                                                                                                                           18                                                               17 17 17     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             171717  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17 17     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1616161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16  16 16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16                                                                                  15 15             15                 1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15 15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                   19
                     19
                         19
                          191919
                           19
                            19
                           19
                          19
                           1919
                                1919
                              191919
                                   19
                                   1919
                                    19
                                    19
                                   19 19
                                      19
                                     19
                                    19
                                        19191919
                                       19
                                      19       1919 19    19
                                                         19
                                                          19
                                                          19
                                                         19                                                         1818181818
                                                                                                                             1818
                                                                                                                              1818181818
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                   18  181818 18                                                                                 17 17       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17  1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1717171717  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16    16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16 1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16          16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16                                                                                         15           15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15                       15
                19 19191919
                         19
                          19
                         19 19
                           191919
                             19
                            19   19
                                19 19
                                  19
                                  19 19
                                      19                 19                                                             1818 181818
                                                                                                                                1818181818 1818
                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                18              18
                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                                 18                                                                                    1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1717    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17                                                                                                 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16                                                                                                                                                15
                     19
                    19
                     19
                     1919
                      19
                      19
                         19
                        19
                       19 19
                         19
                          19
                         19
                                 19
                                191919 1919                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                 18             18
                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1616    1616                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15 15
                                     19                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                            18 18
                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                           18        1818                                                                                                          17                                                                                                              161616 1616                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                            18                                                                                                                    17                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1616


                        Figure 14: t-SNE visualizations of tasks in the commonly challenging CLDyB sequences.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  Task 1                                                                        Task 2                                                                                                                            Task 3                                                                                                                                 Task 4                                                                                                                       Task 5
                              0 00000000000
                                0000 0
                            0000000000 00 0 000
           000 00000000000000000     00 0 0
                            00000000000 00000                                                                                                                                    111 1111111                                                                                                                                 22 2 2222                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
      0000000 0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
   00000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         22222222222222222222222222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3333333 333                                                                                                  4444444444444444444444
        000000000 0 000000000000 00                                                                                                                                 111 11111111111111111                                                                                                                                                22222222222222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         33333333333333333333333333333333333                                                                            4 4444444444444444444444 4
     00000
                 00 0000   00000 0 0                                                                                                                              1 11111111111111111111111111                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2 2222222222222222222222222222222                                                                                                         333 3 3 3                                                                                                   444444444444444     4 44 4
                                                                                                                                                                 111111111111111111
                                                                                                                                                                                 111111 1                                                                                                                                 2 22                                                                                                                      33333333333333333 33 33 3                                                                                           44 444444444444 4
                                                                                                                                                                     1 111111 1111111 1                                                                                                                             222 22 222222                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         444               4 4
                                  0000000                                                                                                                                   1                                1                                                                                              22                                                                                                                                                          3 3 33 3                                                                                        4 4 4 44
                                                                                                                                                                11 1 11 11111111111111 1                                                                                                                   22                     2222222222222 22                                                                                              33333333 33 33333 33333333 3                                                                                     44444444 44 4444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3 3                                     33
                                                                                                                                                                                  11111111 1111 1 1111                                                                                               222222222 222 222222222222222222 22                                                                                                       333333333333333333333 33333333333333333333333333333                                                            44444444 4444444444444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                      1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111                                                                           22222222 222 2222 22222222222222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2222 2 2 2222 2                                                                                                                3 333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333                                                                  4         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 4 44 444444444444444 4444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                             1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111                                                                       2 22222222222222222222222222 2222222222222222222222222222222222222222                                                                                                                                                                                                 444 44444444444444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                1                                                                                                                                  2                                                                                                                                           3                               333333333 3333333 333333 333                                                                                4 444444444444444444 4444444 44
                                                                                                                                                               1 111 111111111111111111111111111 111                                                                                                       2222222 2 22222222222 222222222222                                                                                                  3 33 33333333333333333333333333333333                                                                                           44 444444 44444 4444
                                                                                                                                         1 1                                1111 1 1111 11 111                                                                                                                                    2 22222222                                                                                                                                            333333 3                                                                                              4 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                      111111 1                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                                            33                           333333333                                                                                                 44444444


                                              Task 10                                                                           Task 9                                                                                                                            Task 8                                                                                                                                 Task 7                                                                                                                       Task 6
                                                                                                                                                   88       8                                                                                                                    77
                                                                                                                                                         8                                                                                                                         77 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5 5 5555555555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6                                                                      6                                                                                                      555555555555555555555555555555555
                                                                                                                                              88
                                                                                                                                                  8                                                                                                                                                      7       7                                                                                                                                   6                                                                                                                 555 555555555555555555555555555555555555555
                                                                                                            88                           8 888888                                                                                                                                        777777                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5 55555 55
                                                               9                             9                                               888888 8888 8                                                                                                                            7777777777777 7                                                                                   6                                                                                                                                                                                            5 5 55555 55
                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                                          88
                                                                                                                                           88   8 8 8
                                                                                                                                         88 888 8888 88   8                                                                                                                7777 7777777777 7777777777777
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7777777       7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6                                                                                                                    5 5
                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                      88 88 8888888 8888888 8                                                                                                               777777777777 777 77                       7                              7                                                                                                                                                                                                             55 5 55555555555555 5
                                                                         9                                                   8888 8 8 88 8 88888888888                                                                                                                      77777
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7777                              7                                  7                                                                                                                                                                                                           55555555 55555555555555555555555555555555555
                                                                                                                          88 8 8888888888888888 888 8 8 8                                                                           7777               7 7 7777777777777777777777 7777 7 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5 55 5555 5555555555 55
                                                                                                       88 8                                          8                                                                               77                                    77 777
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7777777 7 77 777777777777777 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             77                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    555555555 555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555
                                                                                                       8 8 8888888 888888888888888 8 888 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5 555 55 5555555555555555555
                                                                                                              8 88 888888 8888888888 88888 8                                                                                                      7777777777 7 77777 77777 77 7 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7                                                                                            6 6666 6 6 6                                6 6666                                                                                                                             5 5 5 5555555555555555 5
                                                                        9                        9                888888888 888888888888 88 8888                                                                                                  77 7 7777777 7 7777                                                   7                                                                   66               6                              6 6 66666 6                                                                                                                                                          5555
                                                       9        9                                               88888888888888   8  8
                                                                                                                           88888888888 888 8                                                                                                       77777 777777777777777777 7777              7               777                                                                               66 6 6                                                                                                                                                                                   5555555 55
                                                    9 9 999 9 999                                                          88888 8 888                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6 6
                                     999
                                      99999              9                 9999999                   8      8           8 8888888888 8               8 8 88 8                                                                   7                             77
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7 777 7777 7 777                                7                                                                                                                  6 666 6 6 66666      6666
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        66666
                                            9 99999 9 9999 9 9                                                               8 888 8 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6 66 6666666 66
                                         9 999999999999999                9                                                                             8                                                                             7                                      777 7                                                                                                           6666666666 666666666666666 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6                                          66         6
                      9                         9999 99999 9 99999 9 99                                                                88
                                                                                                                            8 8888 8 8 8
                                                                                                                                                           8 8                                                                                                                             7                                                                                                                     6666 66666666 6 6 66 6
                                             9 999
                                                 999 9 9                             99                                                                                                                                                                             7                      7                                                                                                         666666666666                             6666666
                                       999 9999 9999999999999999999999999999999
                                                                             999999999 9                                                 8                                                                                                                                           777                                                                                                                   66666666 666666666 6666666666 6 666
                                                999999         999999 9 99    9 9999999999                                                                                                                                                                                            777 7 7                                                                                                               6 666666666
                                                           999999999999                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6666666 666
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6


                                              Task 11                                                                           Task 12                                                                                                                        Task 13                                                                                                                                Task 14                                                                                                                       Task 15
                    10 10
                       1010
                         10
                       10101100
                          10
                           10
                          10
                          10
                         10                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    121212   12
                    10  10
                         10
                        10 1010
                          10                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1212 1212
                    1010
                   10     10                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                   110
                   10
                  10
                  1010
                    10
                   10
                    101100 10
                     10
                     010    10
                            10
                           10
                            10                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
      10   1010101010   10101010
                              1010
                               10
                               10                                                                                                                                                                                                      1212 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
   10
   1010
       1010
         10
          10
          10
          1010
             10
             10
              10
              1010
                1 10
                  0101010  10
                          10
                         101010
                            10 10
                              10
                             10
                             10
                            10 10
                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12   212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14 14
   1010
    10
    1010 10
         10
        10
         10
          10 1010
              10
              101010 10 10
                       10
                        10
                        1010
                         10
                         1010
                            1010
                               10
                               10                                                                                                                                                                                                   1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12121212     1212  1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1212
      1010
    1010  1010
     101010 10    1010
             101010   101010
                           10 10                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12  12 1212        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1212
             101010
             10      10
                    10
                     1010
                       1010
                      101010
                         1010
                           10
                            1010                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
     10
    10
    10
    10
   10 10
     10
     10 10101010
       10
       10
                              10
                               10                                                                                                                                                                                                    1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1212 12 12      12
       10
      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12 2 12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1212                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                       10                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1414141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                       10                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14 14 14  14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14             14
                                                                                                                                            1111                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14 14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       141414              141414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                           11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1313                                                                                                                        14                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14 14    1414   14 14141414
                                                                                                                                                 1111                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13      13                                                                                                                                      14 14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1414  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14          14 14 141414
                                                                                                                                    11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13                                                                                                                      1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14 1414               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14  1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 14              14 14
                                                                                                                    11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14 14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14 1414   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 141414  14 1414                 1414
                                                                                                                         1111                 11111111111111                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14   141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1414 14    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1414              14
                                                                                                                                                   1111 11
                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                     111111
                                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                                          11                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13               13                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1414 1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          144 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        141414 1414 14  14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14              14 14
                                                                                                                                  11           11
                                                                                                                                               11         11
                                                                                                                                                          11                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1414            141414 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                      1111           11 11      11         11
                                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                                           11 11
                                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                                          11    11
                                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                                                11                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13 13                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14    14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         141414                14 1414 14
                                                                                                                                                       11 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13   1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13  13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13       13   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13                                                                                                                                   14              14 14
                                                                                                                            1111 11  11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13 131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                               11  1111
                                                                                                                                      1111
                                                                                                                                      11 1111
                                                                                                                                          11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13 1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13   13       13
                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                      1111 11
                                                                                                                     11       11
                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                    1111
                                                                                                                                   11   11
                                                                                                                                       11 11
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                       11111111
                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                            111111
                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                               1111 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     131313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                              1111
                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                 1111
                                                                                                                                  1111
                                                                                                                                  1111
                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                    11   1111
                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                                          11 11
                                                                                                                                            1111
                                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                                            11  11    1111                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13 13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1313
                                                                                                                           11    11
                                                                                                                                1111
                                                                                                                                   111
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                    11 1
                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                   1111 1111
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                                       11 1111  11 11   11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1313                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                             1111 11 11  11 11 111111 11
                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                       1111
                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                    1111
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                            11 1111
                                                                                                                                 11 11   11
                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                         11         11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                 11 11
                                                                                                                                 11       11
                                                                                                                                         1111 11


                                              Task 20                                                                           Task 19                                                                                                                        Task 18                                                                                                                                Task 17                                                                                                                       Task 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16 16                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       161166116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16  1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16  16 16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17                                                                                                         1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16  1616
                                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                                   1818                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17                                                                                                            16 16
                                                                                                                                     18 18 18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                                    18                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1616161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1616 1616                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                181818
                                                                                                                                                   18                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16 16        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                        18 18 1818
                                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                     18                                                                                                              17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     171717 17   17            17                                                                                     16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16   16 16  16                        16
                                                                         19                                                         18
                                                                                                                                     18   18
                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                              1818
                                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                                  1818        1818                                                                                              1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1717     1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17   17                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1515
                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                         1818                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1515 1515
                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                           1818
                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                  181818
                                                                                                                                1818 18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                       1818
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                       1818
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                          18 18
                                                                                                                                            118   18
                                                                                                                                              81818                                                                                                        171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17     17171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1717       17 17 17171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16                                                                           15 1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                           18          18
                                                                                                                                      18  18
                                                                                                                                         18      1818 18                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 17                          17                                                                                                                                                                                                         15 15  15 115  15
                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                              1818
                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                              18 18
                                                                                                                             181818181818
                                                                                                                                      1818
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                        18818
                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                        18 18
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                             181818
                                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                                  181818
                                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                                        18                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1717 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17 17 17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15  15
                                                                                                                          1818
                                                                                                                           181818
                                                                                                                            18  18       1818
                                                                                                                                           18  18
                                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                              18       18
                                                                                                                                                      18                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1717 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            171717   17   1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17      17                                                                                                                                                                                                               1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15  515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15      15
                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                    18 18
                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                       18 18
                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                         1818
                                                                                                                          18    18
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                 1818
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                   8 18
                                                                                                                                     18      18         1818
                                                                                                                                                       18                                                                                   1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17  17    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17  17 17171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17  1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17 17                 17 17                                                                                                            16                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1515 15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                    19 19 19 19                                                           18 18
                                                                                                                       1818      181818 1818 18
                                                                                                                                     18               1818
                                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17    17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17  1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1717   17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1515  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                               19                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                              18           18
                                                                                                                                                          18                                                                                           17  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             171717   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            171717171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17 17      1717
                                                19 19             191919
                                                                   19
                                                                   19                                                                                                                                                                                      17                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                          19
                                                           19 191919                                                          18              18                                                                                                           17                            17                                                                                                      16
                                         19        19191919
                                                          19
                                                          19
                                                          19
                                                          19
                                                          1919
                                                            19
                                                           19
                                                                        19
                                                                       19
                                                                        1919
                                                                       19                                                   1818
                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1717 17                       17                                                                                                                                                   16
                                         19 19    191919
                                                 19      19
                                                        19
                                                        1919
                                                         19 19
                                                           19          19  19
                                                                            1919
                                                                           19
                                                                           19
                                                                          19                                                 1818
                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                              18                                                                                                                                             17
                                               1919
                                                19            19
                                                             19
                                                             19
                                                            19 119
                                                              1919
                                                                 91919 19 191919
                                                                             1919
                                                                              19
                                                                              19                                      18 18
                                                                                                                     18                                                                                                                                                 17 17
                                             1919
                                            19  19119
                                                  19
                                                 19   1919 19
                                                       19
                                                    9 19
                                                       19
                                                      19
                                                              19
                                                              1919
                                                                 19
                                                                  19                                                     18 18   18
                                             19
                                              19   19  19         19
                                           19
                                           19
                                          19
                                            1919
                                              19
                                           1919
                                              1919
                                               19
                                                  19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                  191919
                                                       1919191919
                                                      19
                                                                  19
                                                                 1919 19
                                                                  19
                                                                 19
                                             19 19
                                               19
                                               19
                                                19     19        1919
                                                                  19 19                                                                     18
                                            19
                                             19
                                            19 1919
                                              19
                                             191919                 1919
                                                                     19
                                                                     19 19
                                                                      1919
                                                                       19
                                                                      19  19
                                                                         1919
                                                                           19
                                                                          19
                                                                           19                                                                18


Figure 15: t-SNE visualizations of tasks in the individually challenging CLDyB sequences for ER.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Task 1                                                                                         Task 2                                                                                                          Task 3                                                                                                            Task 4                                                                                            Task 5
                                                00
              0000000000000 00000000000000
                           00 00000
      00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000                                                                                                                                                                                                                2222
           00000000000000000000000 000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
      000000000000000000000000000 0000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3                                                                                                                       44444444444444
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   44444444444444444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      444444444444             44444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         444444444444444444 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      44 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            222222                                                                                                                              33 3                                                                                                                               44444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2                                                                                                                               33333333                                                                                                                  444444444444     44444444444444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                      2                               22 2 2                                                     3                                              3            3 3333333333333 3                                                                                                       4 44 44444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22222 2                2 22 22222                                                                                             3 3                             33333 33 333 3                                                                                                                             4444444
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  22222222222222222 22 2 2222 22222222 22 2                                                                               33 3333333333333333333 3                     333333 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                22 222222 22 22 22222222 2222222222222222222222222222222222222                                                             33 33 33 3                                      33333
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                        11                                                                                                                            222 2 22222222222222222222222222222222 22222222 2                                                              333333333 3333333333333 333333 33333333333333333333333333333333 33                                                    4
                                                                                                              111111111
                                                                                                                      11111111                                                                                                                                         22222222222222222222 22 2222222222222222                                                                            33333333333333333333 3 3333333 3 333333 3 333333
                                                                                                                  11111111111111 1                                                                                                                                   2222                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                             111111111111111111111111111111111 11111 1 1 1                                                                                                 2                   22222 22      222222 222                                                                                     3            3 333 3333333333333 33 333333
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           33
                                                                                                             1 11 1111111111111                                                                                                                                    2 2 2222 2222222222222222 22                                                                                                         3  3   33 33333 333333333 33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 22 2                                                                                            3                           3 3 3
                                                                                                                                    11111 1111111111111111111111111                                                                                                2                   2
                                                                                                                                           11111 11111111111111111111111111 1                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                             11111111 11111111111111111                                                                                                 22
                                                                                                                                                      11111111111111111111111111
                                                                                                                                               111111111                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                     111  111


                                    Task 10                                                                                             Task 9                                                                                                          Task 8                                                                                                            Task 7                                                                                            Task 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6                                                                                                                                5555555555 55555555 555555555555555  55555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6                       6          6                                                                                                     55 5555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5555555555555555555   5555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7                                                                   66 6 6 66 6 666                                                                                                                                  5555555555555555555555555555
                                                                                                                                                                                   8                                                                                           7                                                                                                                                                                                                                            555555555  555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     555
                                                                                                                                                                              8                                                                                                                                                                            6 66666666666666666 6666 66666
                                                                                                                                                8           8                                                                                                                                                                                       6 6666666666666666666666666 66
                                                                                                  888                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6     66666 66 6666666666
                                                                                                                                         8 8888
                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                                                                           8 8   77777                                                                                                                                                         66 66666666
                                               9 9 9                                                                                                                                                                         7 7777 7                                   77
                                                      99999999 9                                                                                      888888                                                            77777 77777 7 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7
                                                                        999 9
                                                                          9
                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                  888888 8 88 8 88 8 8
                                                                                                                                                           8                         88888888                     777 777777777777777777 777                            7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6666
                            9                 99 9 9 9 99 9                                                                      8     88     8 8 8 888 8888 88 88888888                                             77777
                                                                                                                                                                                                         777777777 7777
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            77777
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       777777    77
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7777777777777                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                         9 999 9 99 9 9999 9999                                         8                                    88 8 8
                                                                                                                           88888888 8 8888888888 88 888888888888888888888888888888                                                                                                   7                                                                                                                6
                             9999999999 99999999999 99 9999999999 99 999999999999999999999
                                                                                        99                                         88 888888888 8888888 8888888 88888 8 888                                          777                                                                                7
                           9 9999999 99 9 9999999                                 999999                                     8888888 888888888  88888888 88 8888888 888 8                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                             9 9999 999999 9999 9 999999999999999999 9                                                                                   88 8 8 888888888888 888
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6                                        6 6
                                        99             99 999999 9999 9999999999999                                               8
                                                                 99999999                                                                                    88 8 888888 8 8888888
                                                                          99999999 999 9                                  8                    8 8 8888 8 8 8888888 88
                                                         99 999999 9 9                                                                            8                         8
                                                                    9                                                                                      8
                                                                   999999                                                                     8                88


                                    Task 11                                                                                        Task 12                                                                                                           Task 13                                                                                                             Task 14                                                                                          Task 15
                                                                      10
                                                                  10 1010
             10 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      131313
           10         1010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13
                                       10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1313  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
          10
          10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12            12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13       1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13131313
                   1010        10 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      121212  1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       21212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1313131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13 13                                              14
                       1010
                      10    10 10 1010
                                         10
                                                                                             10                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1212                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13 13  13 1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1313                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  114
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14 414                           14
                           10
                           101010         1010
                                            1010
                                              1010
                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12 121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 14             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14 14     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1414
    1010
       10            10 10                    10
                                              10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1212    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12                                                                                                 1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13                        14 14 14 14            14 14     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
        10 10 1010 10
       10                     10                10
                                                10 10
                                           101010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1212 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1212                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13                                               14 14 141414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                 1010
                 10     10
                       10        10
                                 101010
                                 10
                                10    10 10
                                     10
                                     10   10 10
                                             101010
                                                  10
                                                 10
                                                  1010 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13                          1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14      1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
              1010
                 10
                     10
                      10
                  101010
                       10
                       10
                       10 10 10
                         10
                        10
                         10    10     10
                                     1010  10
                                          10
                                          10
                                             10
                                             1010
                                               10
                                              10
                                           1010
                                                 10
                                                1010
                                                  101010  10
                                                       1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         141414 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14  14141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
        1010101010
                 1010
                   10
                  10   10
                      1010
                       10
                      10  10101010    10
                                1010 10 10
                                        10 10  10
                                               10
                                              10 10
                                                1010
                                                 10101010
                                                   1010    10
                                                          10 10
                                                            10
                                                           10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14  14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14           14   14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414
                    10
                   10
                   10
             1010101010
                      10
                      10
                     10
                        1010
                        1010 1010  10    1010
                                        10
                                        10
                                             1010
                                              10  10
                                                 10
                                          1010101010
                                                 10
                                                  10
                                                    10
                                                   10 1010
                                                     10     10                                                11
                                                                                                               1111 11
                                                                                                                  1111                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1414141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    141414 14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14   14
                  10 10 10      1010
                                  10     10      10
                                                101010
                                                   10
                                                    10  101010
                                                       10                                                        11
                                                                                                                11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14              1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
            101010           1010
                              10
                               1010
                                  10
                                 10101010
                                  10    1010
                                         1010
                                          101010
                                             10
                                                10
                                               10
                                               101010
                                                  10
                                                  10
                                                  10
                                                 10101010
                                                     10
                                                    10  10
                                                       10
                                                        10
                                                          10
                                                           10                                                11
                                                                                                             1111
                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                1111
                                                                                                                  1111
                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                      1111
                                                                                                                         11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14141414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                    10            10 101010     10
                                               101010
                                                  1010
                                                   10
                                                  10
                                                      10
                                                     10
                                                      1010
                                                       1010
                                                         1010
                                                        10                                                   111111
                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                            11       1111
                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                  1111
                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                         1111
                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                           11         11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1414141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                              10              10                                                                      11
                                                                                                                      11111111
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                          11 1111
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                           1111   1111
                                                                                                                                     11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                 10                                                                                                111111
                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                   11   1111
                                                                                                                         11 11
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                         111111
                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                               1111
                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                               1111
                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                     1111
                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                     111111
                                                                                                                                         1111
                                                                                                                                            11
                 10                                                                                                            111111
                                                                                                                                  1111 1111
                                                                                                                                      11   11
                                                                                                                                          1111
                                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                                              11
                                          10                                                                                  11 11
                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                1111
                                                                                                                                  1111
                                                                                                                                   1111
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                   11  11
                                                                                                                                      1111
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                      111111
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                        11   11
                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                             1111
                                                                                                                                1111
                                                                                                                                111111
                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                   11 111111
                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                           1111
                                                                                                                               1111 11     11
                                     10                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                              11 11
                                                                                                                                 1111
                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                  11 1111
                                                                                                                                     11111111
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                        11   1111
                                                                                                                                             11


                                    Task 20                                                                                        Task 19                                                                                                           Task 18                                                                                                             Task 17                                                                                          Task 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1515  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1515 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15 1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15    1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15 15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                          19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                  1919                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 115 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5151515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15      1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15 151515
                                                19
                                                19
                                               19
                                               1919 19   19                                                                                                                                                                                                               17 17                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1616 16
                                             191919
                                            19          19 19
                                                         1919
                                                            19 19                                                                                                                                                                                                       1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17    17 17                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                           19
                                            19
                                           19     19
                                                 19191919
                                                      19   19                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1717 17  117
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            116  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              61616
                                          19
                                          19 19
                                            19
                                            19
                                           19
                                          1919
                                               19
                                              19
                                             19 19
                                                1919
                                                 19919
                                                           19
                                                     1919 19                                                                                                                                                                                                        17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1717717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 117                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16 166
                                     19
                                      19  19 1919
                                              19
                                               19119
                                                 19
                                                19
                                               19
                                                1919919
                                               191919
                                                  11919
                                                   19
                                                    19                                                                                                                                 18                                                                         1717 171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17                                                         1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16  1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16 16
                                     19
                                     19
                                    19
                                     19 919
                                      119
                                        19
                                       19 19
                                          19
                                           19
                                           1919
                                             19
                                            191919
                                                1919
                                                  19
                                                 19
                                                  19 19
                                                    19
                                                     19
                                                    19
                                                   19
                                                    19 1919
                                                      19
                                                      19
                                                      19  19
                                                          19                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17  1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17                                                         16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                19
                               19
                               19
                                      19
                                     19    1919
                                          19
                                      191919
                                             19
                                              19
                                              1919
                                                 19
                                                 1919
                                                   1919
                                                    19 19
                                                      19                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1177 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17   17                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16 16 16
                                   19 191919     19
                                                19
                                           191919
                                           19      19  19
                                                      1919
                                                         19
                                                         19
                                                        19
                                                        19      19 19                                                                                                                                                                            1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  117
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17 17 71717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7117
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17        17                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
           19                              19          1919                                                                                                                                                                                                               17 17
                                      19        19
                                                19191919
                                                       19
                                     19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                   19                                                         18                                                                                                                                       17
                                        19                               19                                         18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                              18181818
                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                             19                                                18
                                                                                                              1818
                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                 1818
                                                                                                                  18  18
                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                    1818181818
                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                     18                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                            1818 18
                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                1818
                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                               1818 18
                                                                                                                    18     18 18                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                              181818
                                                                                                                 1818
                                                                                                                  1818
                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                   18 1818
                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                          181818 1818
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                   181818
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                           19                                                     1818   18
                                                                                                                        18 1818
                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                             18118
                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                               1818
                                                                                                                                 818
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                 18 18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                   18 18
                                                                                                                                      818
                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                    118
                                                                                                                                      18
                                   19                                                                                  181818
                                                                                                                            1818
                                                                                                                              18   18
                                                                                                                                   18 18
                                                                                                                        1818
                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                              1818
                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                  1818
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                     18  18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                       18 18
                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                           18  18
                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                18  18
                                                                                                                                   1818
                                                                                                                                   1818
                                                                                                                                  1818
                                                                                                                                     1818
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                         1818
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                            1818
                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                              18 18
                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                18 18
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                   18 18
                                                                                                                                     18 18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                      18 18
                                                                                                                                       18


Figure 16: t-SNE visualizations of tasks in the individually challenging CLDyB sequences for LAE.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       Task 1                                                  Task 2                                                                                                               Task 3                                                                                                                      Task 4                                                                                                                Task 5
                                0000000000000 00
                         0 000000000000
                 000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
                 00
                    000000000000          000000000000
                                     000000
                               00000000000000


                                                                                                                                                                                            1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3 33                                                                                                                             4 444
                                                                                                                                                                            1 1111111111111 111111111                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           222222 222222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2                                                                                               33 33333333333333333                                                                                          4 4444444444 444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                 1 111111111111111 1111                                                                                                   2 22222222222222222222222222222222                                                                                333333333 33333333333333333333333333                                                                                         44444444444444444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                1111111111 111111111111111                                                                                            22222222         222222 2                                                                                                                              3333                                                                   4                            4 44444 44444444
                                                                                                                                                                       1111 111111111111 111111111                                                                                                     22 2222222222222222222222                                                                                             333 333333333333333333333333                                                                                 444 4 4 444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                11111111 1 11 1 11 111 1                                                                                                   2222                          22                                                                                            333 3 333 3 333
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2222222222222 22 22                                                                                                    3 3 3 333 3333 3                                                                                                     4444444                                   4 4
                                                                                                                                                                    11 1             1
                                                                                                                                                                                     1 1
                                                                                                                                                            11111111111111111111111 11111111
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 11                                                                      22 222 2 22222222222 2                                                                                                               333333333333 3 3 3                                                                                        4 4444 44 4 4444444 4
                                                                                                                                                             1111 11 1111 1 1111 111                                                                                                222222222222222222222222222222222 2222                                                                                     3333333333333333 3 33333                                                                                         44444 44444 444444444444 4 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3              3
                                                                                                                                                            111111 11111111111111111111 1 1                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2222222222222 222222222 2 22 2222                                                                                    333333333333333333333333333333333333333                                                                                   4444444444444 4444444444444444 4
                                                                                                                                                           1 11 111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 1                                                                    222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222                                                                                 3 3 3333333 3333333333333333333 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  33 3 33333333333                                                                                                    44444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                             11 111 1
                                                                                                                                                           11 1111111111111111111111111111111111111111                                                     2                   22222222 2 222222222222222222222222222222222                                                                              33 333 3333333333333333333333
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         44 444 4444 444 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 44 444444444444444444444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                        11 11111 111 1111111                                                                                     2222 22 2222222 2222222                                                                                                 3333333 3333333333333333333333333333333333                                                                            44444 444444444444444444444
                                                                                                                                                                                   1 11 1                                                                                                          22 2 222222 2222                                                                                                               333 33                                                                                                                         44444


                                                                       Task 10                                                 Task 9                                                                                                               Task 8                                                                                                                      Task 7                                                                                                                Task 6
                                                                                                                                   8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     66
                                                                        9 9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            66 6666666666
                                                                          9    99                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6 6
                                                                                                                           8            88                                                                                                           77                                                                                                                            6 6
                                                     99 9                                                                                 8 8 8 88                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                       88
                                                        9 999 99 9                                                                       88 8 888888                                                                                                                          7 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6 66 6
                                                  9 99999 9999 999                               8                        88 8 88 888888888888888888888 888888                                                           7                                                                                                                                                                            66
                                           999999 999 9 999999                                                                               8                                                                                                            7777777 7              77 7                                                                                                  6 6 6 6 6 66666
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            66
                                  9       9 99999999 999 9999                                                            8 8 88 8 8 88888888 8888                                                                                                          777 77 77              7
                               9       99999 99999 99999999999 99999                                               888 8 8888888888888 8 88 8888                                                                                                        777 77 7 7 7 7 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         666              6                                                                                                                                                         5
                             9                99 999 9 9
                       9999999 99 99 99 99 99 9 999 9 9                                                      8             8 8 8888                  8 8 8 88                                                                         7 7 77 7777 7777777 7 7 7 7 7                                                                                                              6          6  66 66 6                                                                                                                              55                     55555555555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        55555555555 55 5
                                        999 9 999 9                                                                     8 8                                                                                                                7   7 7  7   7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       777 77777777777777 77 7  77       7 7  7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7777 7 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6 6 6 6666 6 6 6 6                                                                                                                                                       5555555555555555555555555555555555555555
                             99
               9 999 99 9999999999999 999999 99                                                                    88 8      8 88888888 8 888 8                                                                       7 77777 77 7 7 7 77 7 77 7777 7777 77 7                                                                                                    6      6 666 6 6 66666666666666 666 666 6                                                                                                                                   5 5 55 55555 5 5555555
                                                                                           8 8 8 88888888888888 8888888 8             8888 8                                                                                                                                                                                                       6                  666 6 6 6 666 666                 6                                                                                                                                5555 5 5 5 5 5555
                        99          9 9 9 99 9 9 9
                                                                                                     8 8 88888888888 888 8 8 888888888888888
                                                                                                                                                                                                                7 7 7 7 777                                      777777 77 77777                                                                         6 666666666666 6 6 6666666666666                                                                                                                                          55555555555 5 55 5 5555 5
                                    9
            999 9999 99 99999999999 99999 9999 9 9
                                                     99                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                7 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                               7777 7 7777777777777  7     7            7         77
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         77777 777777777 777                                                                   66 66 6 666666666 66666666 66666 66666666 666       66666 6                                                                                                                                                       55
                                                                                                      88 88 888 888                    888 8 88                                                                  777777777 777 7                                                                                                                                 66 6             6        66 666666 6                                                                                                                                       555555555 55555555555 555
                                    9 999 999999999 9                                               8 88 888 8888888 8 88 888 8 888                                                                                     777 7 7 7 7 7 777 7 77 7 7777 7 7                                                                                         6666666666 66666666666666666                                                                                                                                                                      5                         5
                        99 9              9                                                8
                                                                                                   8888 8 888 88 888 8                                                                                                           7                    7                                                                                                                             6 66 66666 6                                                                                                                                       5 555555555555555555555555555555 5 5
       9 9 9999 9999 999 9 99 99 9                                                                 8                                          88                                          8                            7 7 7 77 7777 7 777 7 77 77 77                                                                                                      6           66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6 66 6 6 66 66666666 66666 666666666 66                                                                                                                                        5 5 5555555    5 55555555555555555555555
        9 99                                                                                      8                            88                            8                                                    7 7777777777777 7777 7 77 77 7 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5                  5
            9 99999 999999 999999 9 99999999 9 9 9999                                       88 888 88 888 8 8 8 888 8888 88888 888                                                                                         777 777 777777 7777 7                                                                                                     6 6666
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6 6          6 6666
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       666 66 6 66 66 6 6 6 6      6 66   6                                                                                                                                           5 55555555555555555555555555555555555555
      999999 999999999999 999999 99 99999 9                                                 8 8888 88 8 88 88 8 8888 88888                                                                                                       7                  7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7777777777777777777 777777777 77 7 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          55555 5555555555555555555555555    5555 55555
         99 99 9999999 999                                           9                                8888888888888 8 8 88 888888                                                                                                                                                                                                                    66666666 6666666666 6 6666666 66 6 6                                                                                                                                      555 555555555 5555555555
                9 99999 99                                                                         8 8 88888 888                                                                                                             777777777777 777777                    777                                                                                       6 66666 6666              6 6666                                                                                                                                               5 5 55
                                             9 999                                                          88888888 888
                                                                                                             888                        8 8                                                                                            77             7            77 77777777
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6 6 6 66                                                                                                                                                                            5
                               999                                                                                                      88                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            666
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6



                                                                       Task 11                                              Task 12                                                                                                              Task 13                                                                                                                     Task 14                                                                                                               Task 15
                                                                                                                                          1111                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13  1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                              10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13 13                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                      11                                                                                                                  12                                                                                                                  13131313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1313
                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13 13131313 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12                                                                                                                  13                   13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                   11                                                                                                                             1212                                                                                                                13
                                                        101010                                                                    1111 11111111                                                                                                      12 12      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                      1010
                                         10            10101010
                                                             10
                                                             1010                                                                11
                                                                                                                                  1111     1111111111
                                                                                                                                               11                                                                                                  1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12121212 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1212                                                                                               13                                                                                                                                     14
                                     10
                                     10   1010
                                          10
                                  1010 1010
                                            10
                                             101010
                                              10
                                              10      10
                                                      1010  10
                                                            10
                                                             1010
                                                            10                                                                 1111
                                                                                                                              11    11111111
                                                                                                                                           11 11  1111                                                                1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
        10                                      1010
                                                10  10
                                                     10    10
                                                          101010                                                                    11                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      121212 12    12   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12                                                                                                                    1313 1313                                                                                               14 1414 14 14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14 14
                            10 10 10 10 10
                           10
                                                    1010 10
                                                       1010
                                                          1010                                                               11 11                                                                                  12                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12      121212   12 12121212 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12                                                                                                                                          1313                                                                          14                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14 14
                          10
                          10
                         1010     10 10       10      10 10
                                                          10
                                                        1010 10  10                                                 11
                                                                                                                 1111
                                                                                                                 11                      11
                                                                                                                                          11 11 1111                                                                                1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12              1212                                                                                                     13                                                                                                           14                        14 14   14 14 14 141414
  10 10                                10
                                      10
                                         10
                                        10
                                        10
                                         101010
                                           10
                                          10   10
                                              10
                                                   10
                                                  1010 10
                                                   101010
                                                   10
                                                  10
                                                   10     1010
                                                          10  10
                                                             1010                                                                11
                                                                                                                               1111
                                                                                                                             1111 1111
                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                      11          11
                                                                                                                                        1111 11 1111111111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12 12 1212 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                                                                                               13                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14 14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14      14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14141414
          1010                      10
                                     10
                                    10 10
                                       10 10
                                          10
                                         10    10         10                                                         11
                                                                                                                    11 11        1111
                                                                                                                                    11 11                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1212          12 12 12 121212          12      12 12 12                                                                                                                                                                                                    14        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14 14      14 14         1414        14
   10
   10
    10               10           10 10  10
                                         1010
                                          10
                                         10
                                         10
                                        10  1010 10 10                                      11                  11 11          11
                                                                                                                            1111    11
                                                                                                                                   11   11
                                                                                                                               11 11 11111111 11111111                                                            1212            12 12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12 12   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12                                                                                                                                                                                                   141414           14   141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        141414      14 14 14 1414 14     14
             10 10   10    1010 1010   1010
                                        10 10
                                          10 1010
                                                 10 10    10
                                                         10                         10
                                                                                             1111
                                                                                               11 111111
                                                                                           11 11          1111 11
                                                                                                               11  11   1111  11 1111
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                     1111
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                           11 111111 11
                                                                                                                                               11                                                               1212  12121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12  12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12     1212 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12 121212 12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12                                                                                                                                                                                 141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14   1414       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1414 141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                     10                        10                                                          111111
                                                                                                    11111111   11     11 11 111111111111                                                                           1212     1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12                12 1212  12                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12      12                                                                                                                                                                                      14        141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14      14 14141414   14  1414
 1010 10   10 10
           10    10101010
                     10  101010 10101010       1010
                                                10
                                                 10
                                                 1010
                                                10   10
                                                                                           1111 1111
                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                 1111
                                                                                                                    11 11 11      11 111111        1111 11                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                               12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                12     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12     12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1212    1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12 12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12                 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1212                                                                                                                                                                                     1414  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14     14 1414 141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14  14                                   1414
  10 1010 10
            1010
                    10
                     1010
                       10
                      10
                         10      10
                           10101010 10 101010    10
                                                  1010                                                11
                                                                                                       111111
                                                                                                          111111  11 11 11  1111 1111          111111
                                                                                                                                               1111              1111                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                12      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1212  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12      12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1212121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12 121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12   12                   12 12                                                                                                                                                                             14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14    1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1414   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        141414 14 1414 14141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
      1010  10
           10  101010
                    1010
                        10
                       10 10 10
                          10                                                               11 11   11  11
                                                                                                    1111
                                                                                                   11         11
                                                                                                               11     111111
                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                         1111             11 11
                                                                                                                                         11    11                                                                  1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1212   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12    1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12                                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1414 1414          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
     10
    101010
          10
         10
          10
         10        10   10
                         10
                          10     1010
                                10                                                                     1111
                                                                                                      11     1111     11   111111 11
                                                                                                                            11          11
                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                        1111   1111 11 11 111111                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12 12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1212       12121212 12 12                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14 1414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14 141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14  1414 14          1414 14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
        10
         10 1010
                1010        101010
                                10101010 10 10
                                 10
                                                                                                 111111
                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                             11  11
                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                 11111111   1111111111
                                                                                                                           11         1111 1111
                                                                                                                                          11   11                                                                                   121212 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1212 12        121212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12           12                                               12                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14    1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14   1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414            14
     1010
  1010        10 1010
                 10
                10  10
                 1010
                   1010 10
                    10        10 10                                                                   1111  11  11
                                                                                                               1111
                                                                                                                11  11
                                                                                                                   1111 1111    11 11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                       11          11 11      11 111111                                               12 121212 12  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12  12              1212                                                                                                                                                                                                               14 141414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14 1414141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14 141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14             141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
        10  10
           10
               10
            1010     10101010
                           10          1010
                                          10                                                          11
                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                       111111
                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                            1111
                                                                                                             11 11
                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                              11    11
                                                                                                                   11       1111  11
                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                         11 11 11
                                                                                                                                         1111                                                                      1212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1212 12 1212 1212   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1212 12 12                         12                                                                                                                                                                                             141414   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14 1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14   14      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
         1010
           10101010 10
                   101010  10
                        1010                                                                             11     11 11  11
                                                                                                                      1111 11111111
                                                                                                                            11    11
                                                                                                                                   1111      11         1111 11 11 11                                                        12 1212         1212 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1414 14141414    14 141414 14  14                 14
           10 10     1010
                       10101010
                        10
                        10    10101010                                                      1111   1111
                                                                                                11111111
                                                                                                     11   11
                                                                                                       11 11
                                                                                                       11    11  1111
                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                 1111
                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                    1111
                                                                                                                         1111
                                                                                                                          11111111 1111                      11       11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1212 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12   12 12             12 12                               12                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          141414141414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14141414 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
              10 10    101010 10                 10                                                   11
                                                                                                     11               1111    11                                                                                   12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12                     12                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1414
                     10
                    1010
                          10                                                                               11 11
                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                            11 11
                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                 11     11
                                                                                                                  11 111111
                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                             1111                                                                                   121212                      12
                 1010                    10
                                         1010
                                          10
                                          10
                                           10                                                           1111
                                                                                                         1111
                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                                            1111               11                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14



                                                                       Task 20                                              Task 19                                                                                                              Task 18                                                                                                                     Task 17                                                                                                               Task 16
                                                                               19
                                                                               19                                                      18                                                                                                                           17
                                                                               19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                        1818
                                                                                                                                       18                                                                                                                17 17                                                                                                                             16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16                                                                                15
                                                1919    1919                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17                                                                                                                          16       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16                                                                   15
                                                    91919
                                                    19
                                                  119  1919
                                                        19
                                                         19                                                                          18 18   1818                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17                                                                                                                    16 16    16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                1919
                                               19
                                               19
                                                   19
                                                   19
                                                    19
                                                 191919
                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                                      18                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1717  1717                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16 16    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16 16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16   16161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                     191919 19  19
                                               19
                                               19
                                            191919                                                                            18 18
                                                                                                                           18 181818 181818                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17 17 171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16                          1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16       16 16                                                           1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                155 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1515
            19                       19
                                     1919
                                    19   1919
                                           19 19191919  19                                                               18 1818181818   181818
                                                                                                                                            18   18
                                                                                                                                                 18                                                                                             1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  171717                                                                                                        1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16 161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               115
                                   19
                                    19  19
                                       1919
                                        19 19
                                          19
                                          19 19191919
                                            19
                                            19       19    19
                                                        19 19                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                           1818
                                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                            1818
                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                              18 18
                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                               18 1818
                                                                                                                                                  18                                                                 171717                   1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1717 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                171717  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17                                                                          16             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 16       16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16     16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1515115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15155
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                     19
                  1919
                 19   19 19 19     19
                                  19 19
                                    19
                                   19 1919
                                       19
                                      19 19           19
                                                     19
                                                     19
                                                     19
                                                  1919 19
                                                       19
                                                      191919                                                    18
                                                                                                                 18 18
                                                                                                                18                        1818
                                                                                                                                         18   18
                                                                                                                                             181818
                                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                                18   18                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17 1717 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17  17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16     16 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                             19  19 19
                                   19
                                    19
                                    19
                            1919 19191919  19
                                          19 19
                                              19
                                          19 19
                                         19      19
                                                19   19
                                                    19 19
                                                      19
                                                       1
                                                      19
                                                     19
                                                      19
                                                         19
                                                         9
                                                        19
                                                        1919
                                                           19                               18 18               18  18 181818
                                                                                                                 1818                18
                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                    18 18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                      1818    18
                                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                              18 18
                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                 18                     18                                      17 17              17 17 17 17     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17                                                                                            16 16 16   16   16  16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       161616      16    16                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15    15
           19 19 19
              19 19       19
                          1919
                           19
                        1919        19
                                    19
                                     1919
                                      19
                                     19
                                    19   19     1919
                                               19
                                               19 191919                                      18
                                                                                             18                    18
                                                                                                                 181818 1818
                                                                                                                    18             18
                                                                                                                                  18 18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                   18  1818
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                     18      1818
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                              1818
                                                                                                                                           1818    18
                                                                                                                                                  18                 18                                                                 1717 17 17 17171717                                                                                                      16 1616 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 161616      16 16 1616                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
      19 19 19 1919
                          1919191919 19
                                    19
                                     1919 19
                                         19  19 191919 19
                                                                                             18
                                                                                             18           18 1818 1818 1818      18
                                                                                                                                  1818
                                                                                                                                   1818
                                                                                                                                    18 18
                                                                                                                                      1818
                                                                                                                                         18   18                                                                      1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       171717 1717           17  17    17      17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17                              17                                             1616 1616 161616            16 1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1616 161616      16
            191919        191919   19
                               191919
                                   19
                                    19
                                      1919
                                     19
                                     19
                                          1919
                                         19
                                        1919  19
                                                                                               18
                                                                                               18
                                                                                               1818 1818
                                                                                                18 18
                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                        1818
                                                                                                       18  18           1818 1818     18
                                                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                        1818
                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                        1818
                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                           1818
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                                18 18
                                                                                                                                               18                                                              17 171717 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17           17 17 17 1717 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1717171717 171717                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17                                                                                 1616                   1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16  1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16    16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
   1919      19  19 19 19 19 19        19
                                        19   19                                          1818181818 1818 18
                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                   181818 18
                                                                                                                      18         18      18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                         18 18
                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                                           18 18 18 18
                                                                                                                                             18                                                                1717    1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    171717171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17  17         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        171717 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17 17                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1616   161616         16  161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                19
              1919
                                     19
                                      19 19191919
                                            19  19               19                            18
                                                                                                18
                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                             18            1818
                                                                                                                             181818
                                                                                                                                  18 1818 18 18 1818
                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1717     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1717    17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1717 171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17      1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17    1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17                                                                                   16 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1616          161616 1616 16 161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1616
   19           19 1919 19 19 19
                    1919
                                        1919
                                          19191919
                                            19                                              1818
                                                                                               18
                                                                                               181818
                                                                                                 18  18
                                                                                                     181818 18
                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                             1818
                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                              18 18      18
                                                                                                                    18 18 18
                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                      181818 18 18     18181818                                                          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1717 1717 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1717 17    17   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17117
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             171717171717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7 17    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17 17         1717                                                                                    161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16       16 16  161616 16            1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
            19     19                                         19                            18181818           18181818 18
                                                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                     18                    18      1818
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1717171717 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17    17 17   17                                                                                      16      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16        161616
              19 19                     1919
                                     1919
                                       19                                                                        18
                                                                                                              1818                      18                                                                         171717                         17 17                                                                                          161616 16            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               161616 16
         1919  1919
              1919
            1919   19
                  1919
                   19191919 19 19 19 19
                           19          1919
                                        19
                                         1919                                                     18 1818
                                                                                                  18 181818  18
                                                                                                          181818
                                                                                                             18     181818 18
                                                                                                                  1818
                                                                                                                    18   18        18                           18                                                17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17         1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17             17 171717 17                                                                                                       16 1616   1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
     19 19
                19 19
                  19  191919
                    1919   19 19                                                                              1818  1818
                                                                                                                 1818    18
                                                                                                                      181818 18
                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                       1818 18 18                           18      18                                                  1717 17                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17                                                                                       1616  16   1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             161616      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16161616 16
        19
         19
        1919
             19
            19
             19
             19
            19
               19
              19
              1919
                 19
                19
               19  191919
                        19 19
                            19   19           19
                                             19                                               18 18181818181818
                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                  18           18
                                                                                                             1818
                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                               1818181818
                                                                                                                       18                                                                                            17 17 1717 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17 171717 17                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16   16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16161616  1616
           19
          19 1919   19                                                                                  1818                                                                                                                                     17                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 1616
         19
         191919
             191919
            19
             19    19
                  19
                   19                                                                                        18 18 18                                                                                                17                       17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17                                                                                                            161616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 16
          1919      19                                                                                   18
                                                                                                          1818                                                                                                                          17 17 17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17 1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17                                                                                               16   1616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                  1818
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                    18                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                    18                                                                                                               1717
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17


Figure 17: t-SNE visualizations of tasks in the individually challenging CLDyB sequences for Ran-
PAC.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Class
           0     1    2   3   4    5   6   7   8    9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19
       0


       1



       2


       3


       4
Task


       5


       6


       7


       8


       9



               Figure 18: Sample images in a commonly challenging CLDyB sequence (seed-0).



                                                    Class
           0     1    2   3   4    5   6   7   8    9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19
       0


       1



       2


       3


       4
Task


       5


       6


       7


       8


       9



               Figure 19: Sample images in a commonly challenging CLDyB sequence (seed-1).



                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Class
           0     1    2   3   4    5   6   7   8    9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19
       0


       1



       2


       3


       4
Task


       5


       6


       7


       8


       9



               Figure 20: Sample images in a commonly challenging CLDyB sequence (seed-2).


                                                    Class
           0     1    2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9    10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19
       0


       1



       2


       3


       4
Task


       5


       6


       7


       8


       9



Figure 21: Sample images in a commonly challenging CLDyB sequence from the augmented data
pool by AI-generated images after time step t = 2. Tasks consisting of AI-generated images are
selected at time steps {3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9}.



                                                   33
