Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A C AUSAL L ENS FOR L EARNING L ONG - TERM FAIR
P OLICIES
 Jacob Lear & Lu Zhang
 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
 University of Arkansas
 {jdlear,lz006}@uark.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Fairness-aware learning studies the development of algorithms that avoid discrim-
         inatory decision outcomes despite biased training data. While most studies have
         concentrated on immediate bias in static contexts, this paper highlights the im-
         portance of investigating long-term fairness in dynamic decision-making systems
         while simultaneously considering instantaneous fairness requirements. In the con-
         text of reinforcement learning, we propose a general framework where long-term
         fairness is measured by the difference in the average expected qualification gain
         that individuals from different groups could obtain. Then, through a causal lens,
         we decompose this metric into three components that represent the direct impact,
         the delayed impact, as well as the spurious effect the policy has on the qualifica-
         tion gain. We analyze the intrinsic connection between these components and an
         emerging fairness notion called benefit fairness that aims to control the equity of
         outcomes in decision-making. Finally, we develop a simple yet effective approach
         for balancing various fairness notions.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence and machine learning decision-making systems are being increasingly imple-
mented in real-world scenarios Zhang et al. (2017a); Johnson et al. (2016); Baker & Hawn (2021);
Lee & Floridi (2021); Schumann et al. (2020); Berk et al. (2021). Real-world data, influenced by
social and historical contexts, often carries biases related to gender, race, and other factors. These
biases can be inadvertently embedded in the algorithms, leading to discriminatory outcomes. As a
result, fairness-aware learning, which aims to satisfy various fairness constraints alongside the usual
performance criteria in machine learning, has received increasing attention. A body of literature on
fairness-aware learning focuses on developing fair policies in reinforcement learning (RL) Sutton &
Barto (2018). For a comprehensive survey on fair RL, please refer to Gajane et al. (2022).
Most studies in fairness-aware learning focus only on the immediate implications of bias in a static
context. These works typically quantify the fairness of model predictions or outcomes in a static
population. However, real decision-making systems usually operate dynamically, and the decisions
made by these systems have long-term consequences. The literature has shown that fairness notions
and techniques focusing on the immediate bias produced by automated decisions cannot guarantee
to protect disadvantaged groups in the long run Liu et al. (2018). It has hence been proposed to
consider the delayed impact of automated decisions in sequential decision-making systems due to
the interplay between the decisions and individuals’ reactions Liu et al. (2020). For example, Zhang
et al. (2020) proposes to use the equilibrium of the dynamics of population qualifications across
different groups of individuals as a measure of the delayed impact of decisions on fairness. In this
paper, when the context is clear, we refer to the instantaneous fairness concerns, such as demographic
parity Feldman et al. (2015), equal opportunity Hardt et al. (2016), and causality-based notions like
direct and indirect discrimination Zhang et al. (2017b), as short-term fairness. On the other hand, we
refer to fairness concerns that arise over time due to dynamic user-decision interactions as long-term
fairness, which is the primary focus of this paper.
Given that the objective of RL is typically to maximize the long-term (discounted) reward, long-
term fairness has been studied in the context of RL where Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


utilized to model and learn the system dynamics Jabbari et al. (2017); Ge et al. (2021); Wen et al.
(2021); Yu et al. (2022); Hu et al. (2023); Yin et al. (2023). However, such requirements may be
conflict with long-term fairness constraints. For instance, Hu et al. (2024) models the sequential
decision-making system with a temporal causal graph and captures long-term and short-term fair-
ness as causal effects transmitted through different paths in the temporal causal graph. The authors
demonstrated that achieving long-term fairness could be impeded by the requirement of sensitive
attribute unconsciousness, i.e., no direct causal effect of the sensitive attribute on the model deci-
sion, implying an inherent conflict between long-term and short-term fairness. Thus, understanding
the connection between long-term and short-term fairness is critical for developing comprehensive
strategies that balance both fairness requirements.
In this work, we study the specific task of analyzing the long-term fairness that can be achieved in
the context of RL. We focus on the impact of the model’s decisions on individuals’ qualifications and
aim to understand how long-term fairness intertwines with immediate short-term fairness concerns
during sequential decision-making. To this end, we propose a novel decomposition of long-term
fairness that differs from existing causal decomposition techniques applied to the advantage func-
tion, such as Pan & Schölkopf (2024). We begin by introducing a general framework for studying
long-term fairness in RL, where we assume a flexible qualification gain function that measures an
individual’s qualification gain as they transition between qualification states. Accordingly, we de-
fine the expected total qualification gain accumulated from a given state while following a specific
policy as a state value function, which can be expressed using Bellman’s equation. Based on that,
long-term fairness can be readily formulated based on the disparity in the expectation of the state
value function across different groups. We then conduct a causal decomposition of the qualifica-
tion gain disparity to identify the various sources of inequality, noting that the qualification gain is
influenced by both the policy and the environment. We end up obtaining three components of the
qualification gain disparity: (1) the Direct Policy Effect (DPE) which represents the direct causal
effect of the policy on the long-term qualification gain; (2) the Indirect Policy Effect (IPE) which
represents the indirect causal effect of the policy on the long-term qualification gain through the
environment; and (3) the Spurious Policy Effect (SPE) which represents the spurious effect only due
to the environment. Interestingly, we identify an inherent connection between these components and
an emerging fairness notion called benefit fairness that aims to control the equalty of the outcome of
the decision-making Plecko & Bareinboim (2023). Our analysis shows that benefit fairness may not
necessarily conflict with long-term fairness, suggesting that it is possible to reconcile short-term and
long-term fairness objectives. This connection may offer insights for designing decision-making
systems where the long-term and short-term objectives are aligned. Finally, we provide a simple yet
effective approach to strike a balance between qualification gain parity and benefit fairness.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Early research in long-term fair machine learning focuses on specific applications and scenarios.
For example, the authors in Holzer (2007) examine the long-term effects of affirmative action in
hiring and highlight its positive impacts on minority and low-income communities. The authors in
Hu & Chen (2018) study long-term fairness in a two-stage labor market and construct a dynamic
reputational model that shows how unequal access to resources leads to different investment choices,
which in turn reinforces unequal outcomes between groups. The study in Liu et al. (2018) inves-
tigates the delayed impact of decisions in lending scenarios using a one-step feedback model and
reveals that short-term fairness notions generally do not reshape the population to foster long-term
improvements.
Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a solution for modeling the long-term impact of decisions
through Markov decision processes. Fairness methods in RL designed to address long-term effects
have been proposed. The study in Jabbari et al. (2017) presents a fairness constraint that guaran-
tees an algorithm will not favor one action over another if the latter has a higher long-term reward.
However, this notion of fairness is solely based on the reward of each action and does not consider
demographic information. The research in Ge et al. (2021) studies long-term fairness and formulates
a Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) for recommendation systems. In Wen et al. (2021),
fairness constraints are defined based on the average rewards received by individuals across different
groups, and two algorithms have been designed to learn policies that meet these fairness constraints.
Yu et al. (2022) suggests incorporating fairness requirements into policy optimization by regulariz-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ing the advantage assessment of different actions. Similarly, Hu et al. (2023) incorporates long-term
fairness constraints into the advantage function but proposes a pre-processing technique called ac-
tion massaging to address short-term fairness, aiming to balance both requirements. The research in
Yin et al. (2023) also demonstrates that achieving long-term fairness may require sacrificing short-
term incentives, It also develops probabilistic bounds on cumulative loss and cumulative fairness
violations. Finally, different from the above work, Henzinger et al. (2023) develops a monitor that
continuously tracks events generated by the system in real-time, providing an ongoing assessment
of the system’s fairness with each event.
Another related research direction is performative prediction and performative optimization which
have emerged as powerful tools for addressing distributional shifts that occur when deployed models
influence the data-generating process Perdomo et al. (2020); Jia et al. (2024). This line of research
also offers valuable insights into achieving long-term fairness in dynamic systems. For instance,
Jin et al. (2024) examines issues of polarization and unfairness within performative prediction set-
tings. They demonstrate that traditional penalty terms for long-term fairness may fail in performative
prediction settings and propose new fairness mechanisms that can be incorporated into iterative al-
gorithms, such as repeated risk minimization, which has been shown to be effective in these settings.
Our research complements related studies by examining the trade-off between long-term and short-
term fairness in RL settings from a causal perspective and establishing a connection between them.

3     M ETHODOLOGY

3.1   P RELIMINARIES

We adopt Pearl’s structural causal model (SCM) and causal graph framework Pearl (2009) to facili-
tate modeling the Markov decision process and formulating long-term fairness. Here, we provide a
brief overview of the fundamentals of SCM. A detailed introduction to SCM can be found in Pearl
(2010). An SCM is a mathematical framework used in causal inference to represent and analyze the
relationships between variables in a system. It provides a formal way to describe how changes in one
variable can causally affect other variables, enabling the analysis of cause-and-effect relationships.
An SCM defines the causal dynamics of a system through a collection of structural equations. Each
SCM is associated with a causal graph that includes a set of nodes to represent variables and a set of
directed edges to depict direct causal relationships.
Causal inference within the SCM is enabled through interventions, as described in Pearl (2009).
A hard intervention assigns specific constant values to certain variables, while a soft intervention
establishes a functional relationship for some variables in response to others Correa & Bareinboim
(2020). A causal path from node X to node Y in a causal graph is a directed sequence of arrows
leading from X to Y . The total causal effect refers to the impact of X on Y when the intervention is
transmitted along all causal paths connecting X to Y . If the intervention is restricted to only a subset
of these causal paths, the resulting effect is known as the path-specific effect Avin et al. (2005).

3.2   F ORMULATING L ONG - TERM FAIRNESS

Consider a discrete-time sequential decision-making process applied to a certain population, de-
scribed as a Markov decision process (MDP). Each individual in the population is described by a
sensitive feature and a qualification state. The sensitive feature S is assumed to be a binary vari-
able in this paper for ease of representation, i.e., S ∈ {s+ , s− }. The qualification state, denoted as
X, represents the individual’s suitability or potential performance in the given context relevant to a
specific decision-making task. It could be a variable vector and may evolve over time, reflecting the
dynamic nature of an individual’s attributes or skills. At each time step, a Markov policy π(d|x, s)
is used to make decisions D ∈ {d0 , d1 } where d0 represents negative decision or non-treatment, and
d1 represents positive decision or treatment. A reward R is received following each decision and the
utility of the policy is defined as the expected total reward received during the process. Meanwhile,
individuals may also take actions upon receiving the decisions, which may change their qualification
states at the next time step. This interplay is captured by a transition probability P (xt+1 |xt , dt , s).
The above process can be described by the causal graph shown in Fig. 1 which can represent either
a randomly sampled individual or a population undergoing the decision cycles. In general, at each


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


time step t, the agent selects an action dt based on the policy π. This causes the qualification state to
transition from xt to an intermediate state (xt , dt ), which subsequently transitions to the next state
xt+1 according to the transition probability. Without loss of generality, we assume that the sensitive
feature S may influence any part of the process, including the initial state distribution, the transition
probability, the policy function, etc.
A metric of long-term fairness typically con-
siders the equilibrium of qualification states
across different groups. It can also be treated
as the causal effect of the sensitive feature on
the qualification states. For instance, the au-
thors in Hu et al. (2024) investigate long-term
fairness by examining the path-specific ef-
fect, i.e., the causal effect transmitted through
all paths from s to xT in the graph. They            Figure 1: Causal graph for representing the discrete-
conclude that the objective of eliminating this      time sequential decision-making process where S is
causal effect may conflict with the require-         omitted. At each time step t, the state xt transits
ment of sensitive attribute unconsciousness.         to the intermediate state xt , dt based on the policy
                                                     π, and then transits to xt+1 based on the transition
In this work, we explore long-term fairness          probability. The reward rt is received based on the
and establish a general formulation within the       decision/action xt , and the qualification gain is ob-
framework of MDPs. The typical objective             tained based on both xt , dt and the next state xt+1 .
of MDPs is to maximize the expected cumu-
lative reward for an agent interacting with an
environment over time. Taking fairness into consideration, different from previous work that incor-
porates long-term fairness as an advantage regularization (e.g., Yu et al. (2022); Hu et al. (2023)),
we argue for considering the expected total change in the qualification state when the individual in-
teracts with the decision policy. To achieve this, we introduce a flexible qualification gain function,
denoted as g s (x, x′ ), which quantifies the increase/decrease in qualifications when an individual
from the sensitive group s transitions from state x to state x′ . This qualification gain function can
be defined in any form as long as it satisfies the additive property over intervals, i.e., for all inter-
mediate states x1 , . . . , xn between x and x′ , we have g s (x, x′ ) = g s (x, x1 ) + · · · + g s (xn , x′ ).
Then, for a given trajectory in the sequential decision-making process, the total qualification gain
from transitioning from the initial state to the final state is equivalent to the cumulative qualification
                                    PT
gain throughout the process, i.e., t=0 g s (xt , xt+1 ).
To define the expected qualification gain an individual can achieve through the deployment of this
policy, we employ the notations from Hu & Zhang (2022), where the policy deployment is treated
as a soft intervention, denoted as do(π). Meanwhile, in line with causality-based fairness notions,
we consider the qualification gain individuals would achieve if their sensitive features were altered
to different values. This involves performing hard interventions on the sensitive feature S. By
conducting both interventions, we consider the interventional expected qualification gain, denoted
as Vdo(π,s) (x). Adopting the causal perspective of reinforcement learning Zeng et al. (2023), the
interventional
    hP                             i gain can be defined as the state value function Vdo(π,s) (x) :=
                expected qualification
        T     s
Eπ      t=0 g (xt , xt+1 ) | x0 = x . This state value function above captures the cumulative impact
of decisions over time, enabling us to address the need for equity in decision-making systems over
extended periods. A natural long-term fairness requirement, therefore, is to ensure that the average
expected qualification gain is equal across different groups over time. Consequently, we define
qualification gain parity as a general metric for long-term fairness, as detailed below.

Definition 1 (Qualification Gain Parity) We say that a policy π exhibits qualification gain parity
if Cπ (θ) = E[Vdo(π,s+ ) (x0 )] − E[Vdo(π,s− ) (x0 )] is equal to zero.

3.3   P OLICY O PTIMIZATION WITH C ONSTRAINTS

Qualification gain parity can be achieved through policy optimization with constraints. To this end,
we first express the state value function using Bellman’s equation as follows.
                                             X
                              Vdo(π,s) (x) =     π(d|x, s)Qdo(π,s) (x, d),                       (1)
                                                 d


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where                                   X
                                                P (x′ |x, d, s) g s (x, x′ ) + Vdo(π,s) (x′ )

                    Qdo(π,s) (x, d) =
                                           x′
is the action value function.                 By following the Policy Gradient Theorem Sut-
ton & Barto (2018),   P the        gradient P  of the state value function Eq. (1) is given by
                             π,s           ′               ′               ′            π          ′
∇θ Vdo(π,s) (x) =       x′ η     (x  →   x   )   d ∇θ π(d|x , s)Qdo(π,s) (x , d) where η (x → x )
                                                                       ′
is the probability of transitioning from state x to state x with policy π after an ar-
bitrary number     of steps.        Thus, the  gradient  of Cπ (θ) is given by ∇θ C          π (θ) =
α Eπ|s+ ∇θ ln π(d|x, s+ )Qdo(π,s+ ) (x, d) − Eπ|s− ∇θ ln π(d|x, s− )Qdo(π,s− ) (x, d) ,

where the expectation is over   the state visitation distribution and α                            =
2 E[Vdo(π,s+ ) (x0 )] − E[Vdo(π,s− ) (x0 )] . A detailed derivation is included in Appendix A.
Policy Optimization. Our choice for policy optimization is mostly typical as a variant of Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) that incorporates the KL divergence as a penalty Schulman et al. (2017).
Using a slight variation of notations, we use Vdo(π,s) (x) and Qdo(π,s) (x) to denote the state/action
value function in terms of utility rt = r(xt , dt ). The advantage function for a state is given as
Ado(π,s) (x, d) = Qdo(π,s) (x, d) − Vdo(π,s) (x). We then write the objective function as

                                    J P P O (θ) = LU T IL − β KL LKL
                   h                                       i
                     π(dt |xt ,st )
where LU T IL = Êt πold (dt |xt ,st ) Â(π,st ) (xt , dt ) is the expected advantage with importance sam-
pling, and LKL = Êt [KL[πold (st |xt , dt )||π(st |xt , dt )]] is the KL divergence to penalize large
divergences between the new and old policies. We use the hat symbol to denote the emperical
estimation of a given function or operator.
As PPO updates the policy using minibatch SGD, we can separate the batch of timesteps t that
were sampled for the minibatches into those belonging to the advantaged group t+ and those for the
disadvantaged group t− . The constraint then becomes Ĉπ =

        π(dt+ |xt+ , st+ )                                      π(dt− |xt− , st− )
Êt+                         Q̂         + (x + , dt+ ) −Êt−                         Q̂         − (x − , dt− ) .
       πold (dt+ |xt+ , st+ ) do(πold ,s ) t                   πold (dt− |xt− , st− ) do(πold ,s ) t
We then integrate the constraint into the full objective function as

                               J(θ) = LU T IL − β KL LKL − β C (Ĉπ )2 .                                 (2)

3.4   C AUSAL D ECOMPOSITION OF Cπ (θ)

As mentioned earlier, it is important to study the connection between long-term and short-term
fairness requirements as they may be conflicting objectives. To this end, in this section, we perform
a causal analysis to decompose the qualification gain parity, enabling us to identify and distinguish
various components contributing to bias. We study the various ways in which the policy π influences
the qualification gain, where we examine the instantaneous impact of the policy as well as the
delayed impact through the transitions of the environment.
As shown in Fig. 1, from a causal perspective, the instantaneous impact of the policy can be captured
by the direct edges from (xt , dt ) to gt while the delayed impact can be captured by all other paths
from the states to the qualification gain. To examine these different mechanisms through which
the policy impact manifests respectively, we leverage the path-specific technique Avin et al. (2005)
in causal inference, which can isolate the effect transmitted through a particular causal path while
controlling the effect transmitted through other pathways. To achieve this, we construct two hypo-
thetical policies that are not actually implemented. One is a baseline policy π0 that always makes
the non-treatement decision, i.e., π0 (d0 |x, s) = 1 (see Fig. 2(a)). The state value function of π0 ,
denoted as Vdo(π0 ,s) , is given by
                                     X
                                         P (x′ |x, d0 , s) g s (x, x′ ) + Vdo(π0 ,s) (x′ ) .

                    Vdo(π0 ,s) (x) =                                                              (3)
                                      x′

The other is a virtual policy π P S where the qualification gain is assumed to be obtained as if fol-
lowing policy π0 , while the state transitions occur as if under policy π (see Fig. 2(b)). Its state value


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


function, denoted as Vdo(πP S ,s) , can be given by
                    X                                 X           X
 Vdo(πP S ,s) (x) =   P (x′ |x, d0 , s)g s (x, x′ ) +   π(d|x, s)   P (x′ |x, d, s)Vdo(πP S ,s) (x′ ). (4)
                      x′                                d             x′


Facilitated by these hypothetical policies, we can decompose Vdo(π,s) into three components: the
component that captures the direct impact of the policy π on the qualification gain, the component
that captures the delayed impact, as well as the component that captures the spurious effect solely
attributable to the environment, given below.
      Vdo(π,s) (x) = Vdo(π,s) (x) − Vdo(πP S ,s) (x) + Vdo(πP S ,s) (x) − Vdo(π0 ,s) (x) + Vdo(π0 ,s) (x)
                     |             {z              } |                 {z              } |      {z      }
                                direct impact                     delayed impact            spurious effect


The explanation of this decomposition is as follows. For
deriving the direct impact, we employ the policy π P S
as the reference policy and assume that the decision-
making system shifts from this reference policy to policy
π. During this process, the policy π is used for generating
episodes. However, when calculating the instantaneous
qualification gain at each time step, the policy that is used
to make the decision shifts from π0 to π, which subse-
quently influences the next state that is used to compute
the qualification gain via g s (xt , xt+1 ). The direct im-
pact is then computed as the difference in the qualifica-
tion gain. Since the episodes remain unchanged during
the shift, this difference eliminates the policy’s delayed
impact, capturing only the direct effect of switching from
the baseline policy π0 to the behavior policy π.
Similarly, for the delayed impact, we employ the policy           Figure 2: Causal graphs for represent-
π0 as the reference policy where both the episodes and            ing the two hypothetical policies (the
the instantaneous qualification gain are determined by π0 .       reward is omitted from the figures).
Then, we switch to policy π P S , allowing policy π to gen-       (a) The baseline policy π0 that always
erate the episodes. Thus, the change in the qualification         makes the negative decisions. (b) The
gain is due to the delayed impact of policy π. Finally,           virtual policy where the state transitions
since π0 is unrelated to π, we can treat the qualification        occur as if under π while the qualifica-
gain achieved, i.e., Vdo(π0 ,s) (x), as being solely due to       tion is obtained as if under π0 .
the environment’s transitions, which can be treated as the
spurious effect in the impact of policy π.
Correspondingly, by taking S into account and conducting the decomposition for both do(s+ ) and
do(s− ), we can decompose Cπ (θ) into three components, referred to as the Direct Policy Effect
(DPE), the Indirect Policy Effect (IPE), and the Spurious Policy Effect (SPE), as given below.
                                    Cπ (θ) = DPE + IPE + SPE,

where DPE = E Vdo(π,s+ ) (x0 ) − Vdo(πP S ,s+ ) (x0 ) − E Vdo(π,s− ) (x0 ) − Vdo(πP S ,s+ ) (x0 ) ,

IPE = E Vdo(πP S ,s+ ) (x0 ) − Vdo(π0 ,s+ ) (x0 ) − E Vdo(πP S ,s+ ) (x0 ) − Vdo(π0 ,s− ) (x0 ) , and SPE =

E Vdo(π0 ,s+ ) (x0 ) − E Vdo(π0 ,s− ) (x0 ) .

3.5    C ONNECTION WITH B ENEFIT FAIRNESS

The decomposition of Cπ (θ) allows us to build a connection between qualification gain parity and
instantenous fairness requirments. For the former, we pay special attention to the DPE which repre-
sents disparity in the instantaneous impact of the policy on the qualification gain. For the latter, we
consider benefit fairness proposed in Plecko & Bareinboim (2023), which does not merely allocate
equal treatment to each group’s entire population but instead it takes into account the proportion of
the population that can benefit from the treatment, making it more suitable for controlling fairness
in the outcomes of a decision model.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In Plecko & Bareinboim (2023), the benefit is defined as the conditional average treatment effect
(CATE) which represents the increase in the outcome (e.g., survival) associated with the treatment.
In our context, the outcome of interest is the qualification gain an individual receives as a result of
the treatment. Hence, the benefit can be defined as the expected increase in the qualification gain an
individual can achieve if they receive treatment compared to not receiving treatment, i.e.,
                            X
                                 P (x′ |x, d1 , do(s)) − P (x′ |x, d0 , do(s)) g s (x, x′ ),

                ∆(x, s) =
                             x′

where P (x |x, d, do(s)) = P (x′ |x, d, s) in our context. Then, benefit fairness is defined as follows.
           ′


Definition 2 (Benefit Fairness Plecko & Bareinboim (2023)) We say that a policy π satisfies ben-
efit fairness if
                  ∀x, x′ , π(d1 |x, s+ ) = π(d1 |x′ , s− ) if ∆(x, s+ ) = ∆(x′ , s− ).

In words, benefit fairness means that individuals from different groups who would benefit equally
from a treatment should have similar probabilities of receiving that treatment.
The following proposition reveals the connection between the direct impact component of
Vdo(π,s) (x) and benefit. Please refer to Appendix B for the proof.

Proposition 1 Given a policy π and hypothetical policies π0 , π P S defined in Eqs. (3), (4), we have
                                                X
              Vdo(π,s) (x) − Vdo(πP S ,s) (x) =   η π,s (x → x′ )π(d1 |x, s)∆(x, s),
                                                      x′
                                      X                                          X
Vdo(πP S ,s) (x) − Vdo(π0 ,s) (x) =        (η π,s (x → x′ )−η π0 ,s (x → x′ ))         P (x′′ |x, d0 , s)g s (x, x′′ ),
                                      x′                                         x′′

where η π,s (x → x′ ) is the probability of transitioning from state x to state x′ with policy π after
any number of steps.

Using this proposition, we can reformulate DPE as follows
                 DPE = E π(d1 |x, s+ )∆(x, s+ ) − E π(d1 |x, s− )∆(x, s− ) ,

                        x∼π|s+                          −  x∼π|s

where the expectation is over the state visitation distributions.
By combining the above expression and Definition 2, we observe that the DPE is closely related
to benefit fairness. When the state visitation distributions in terms of benefit are identical across
the two groups, benefit fairness will result in a zero DPE. This implies that both groups have equal
opportunities and exposure to the decision-making process so that achieving benefit fairness leads to
equitable direct impact. However, if the state visitation distributions differ between the two groups,
achieving benefit fairness becomes incompatible with eliminating the DPE. This discrepancy arises
because differing state visitation distributions indicate that the two groups are not equally repre-
sented in the sequential decision-making process. Hence, enforcing benefit fairness, which aims to
equalize the true benefits received by different groups, may inadvertently introduce or maintain dis-
parities in the DPE. On the other hand, we note that the IPE is less sensitive to benefit fairness. Thus,
enforcing benefit fairness may not result in a significant change in the IPE. This analysis highlights
the complexity of balancing fairness objectives and the challenges of ensuring equitable outcomes
across diverse populations in sequential decision-making systems.
Remark. A key insight we gain from the above analysis is that, if the benefit ∆ is independent of
the sensitive feature S, then achieving benefit fairness aligns with decreasing DPE and also loosely
corresponds to the goal of equalizing feature distributions across different groups. This is because,
in this context, the state visitation distribution approximates the feature distribution, suggesting that
benefit fairness could be achieved simultaneously with a reduced DPE and equalized feature distribu-
tion. This insight motivates us to introduce an additional consideration into the design qualification
gain function when designing practical decision-making systems, which is to ensure that the benefit
∆ remains independent of S, even though the transition probability may be dependent on S. This
may imply that the qualification gain function should be adjusted to account for differences in ben-
efits. It also underscores the importance of understanding why benefits differ between groups, as
highlighted in Plecko & Bareinboim (2023).


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Balancing qualification gain parity and benefit fairness. We propose a simple yet effective ap-
proach to achieve benefit fairness while promoting parity in qualification gains during policy op-
timization. Our approach leverages the concept of individual fairness Dwork et al. (2012) which
demands that any two similar individuals should receive similar decision outcomes. Individual fair-
ness is relevant and applicable to our setting, as we require that if two individuals from different
groups receive similar benefits from the policy, their probabilities of receiving a positive decision
should also be similar. To establish a quantitative metric for benefit fairness, we draw inspiration
from the Gini coefficient, commonly used to measure income equality in economic theory Mota
et al. (2021), which has also been applied
                                      Pn P  to individual fairness
                                                                 PSirohi  et al. (2024). Mathematically,
                                               n                    n
the Geni coefficient is defined as i=1 j=1 |si − sj |/2n j=1 sj where si is the income of a
person. Inspired by this, we define a metric that measures the difference in positive decision rates
for all pairs of individuals from different sensitive groups, weighted by the inverse distance in their
benefits, as follows.
                          X |π(d1 |x, s+ ) − π(d1 |x′ , s− )|
                     Λ=         ϵ·            + ) − ∆(x′ , s− )|
                                                                 P (x|s+ )P (x′ |s− ).
                              ′
                                   ϵ + |∆(x, s
                         x,x

Here, ϵ is a small positive value that prevents division by zero and also controls the radius within
which we require similar positive decision rates. As ϵ decreases, similar positive decision rates are
only enforced when the benefits are nearly identical. Conversely, a large ϵ will penalize differences
in positive decision rates when the benefits are close but not exactly the same. The final objective
function is obtained by incorporating Λ into Eq. (2):
                          J(θ) = LU T IL − β KL LKL − β C (Ĉπ )2 − β Λ Λ.                          (5)

4       E XPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments to evaluate the policy optimization algorithms we have proposed and com-
pare them with baselines regarding the achievement of long-term fairness1 . We also present the
results from the decomposition and the performance of our algorithm when taking benefit fairness
into consideration, demonstrating how the constraint of benefit fairness influences different compo-
nents of qualification parity. We refer to our algorithm with objective function Eq. (2) as PPO-C and
the algorithm objective function Eq. (5) as PPO-Cb.

4.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We leverage the simulation environment developed in D’Amour et al. (2020) that is commonly used
in related work (e.g., Yu et al. (2022); Hu et al. (2023)). The environment is designed to simulate the
process of a bank dispersing loans to members of a population. Each individual in the population
belongs to either the advantaged group s+ or the disadvantaged group s− . At each time step, an
individual applies for a loan and the bank has to make a binary decision, dt ∈ {d0 , d1 }, on whether
to approve or deny the loan. The decision is made in accordance with the current policy πθ (d|st , xt ),
a distribution produced by a feedforward neural network from which the decision dt is sampled. By
default, the average qualification level of individuals belonging to s+ is higher than that of those
belonging to s− . These distributions evolve with time in response to factors in the environment and
loan decisions.
To facilitate the idea that the environment can have effects, unrelated to the decision, on an individ-
ual’s qualification level, we also include a term xdrif t ∈ {−1, 0, 1}. This represents the change in
an individual’s credit score which would occur regardless of whether or not a loan was received by
the individual. As a result, an individual is represented by the 4-tuple (s, x, xdrif t , y). To sample
an individual, first we sample the sensitive attribute s ∼ P (s), then the credit score x ∼ P (xt |s),
followed by the ability to repay the loan y ∼ P (y|x, s). The credit drift xdrif t ∼ P (xdrif t ) is
sampled independently of the other attributes. Note that xdrif t and y are unobserved for the policy
and are not used as input for decision-making.
We designed the qualification gain function to reflect the real-world phenomenon where progressing
from beginner to intermediate requires less effort than progressing from advanced to expert. The
    1
        All the code is available at https://github.com/j-proj/Causal-Lens-Fair-RL.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Figure 3: Utility comparison across different settings.


              Figure 4: Qualification gain disparity comparison across different settings.


distribution P (xt+1 |xt , s) is a deterministic function of (st , xt , xdrif t , yt , dt ) where a small amount
of mass representing an individual is moved from P (xt |st ) to P (xt+1 |st ). In the evaluation, we use
three different settings for the simulation environment which we will simply refer to as Setting
1,2, and 3. These settings differ from each other in initial distributions over credit scores, repayment
probabilities, and credit drift likelihoods. The repayment probabilities are learned by using the Home
Credit Default Risk dataset Montoya et al. (2018) and a dataset previously released by Lending Club
Wagh (2017). The details of the experimental setup are provided in Appendix C.
We compare our methods to three baselines: (1) PPO Schulman et al. (2017), a variant of the vanilla
PPO algorithm incorporating a KL-divergence penalty; (2) A-PPO Yu et al. (2022), which intro-
duces additional regularizations to penalize the advantage function in order to enforce equalized
opportunity; and (3) F-PPO-L Hu et al. (2023), which also applies a regularization term to penalize
the advantage function, but with the objective of reducing the 1-Wasserstein distance between group
feature distributions.
Due to the large variance in a model’s performance in both training and evaluation due to the highly
stochastic nature of the system, for all results and methods, we perform multiple training runs with
different random seeds for initialization and then take an average to better gauge performance.

4.2   R ESULTS

Evaluating long-term fairness. We first evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed approaches in
achieving qualification gain parity. We compare PPC-C and PPC-Cb against the baseline methods
PPO, which purely optimizes for utility, as well as A-PPO and F-PPO-L which optimize for utility
and their own fairness objectives. In Figure 3, we see that PPO-C, the constraint-only variant, is
fairly competitive with regard to utility when compared to the baselines. While the inclusion of
the additional benefit fairness term in PPO-Cb tends to decrease the performance, it manages to
produce a respectable profit in Setting 2, where A-PPO struggles to do so. Since PPO-C and PPO-
Cb both optimize for the qualification gain disparity, it is unsurprising that they both outperform the
baselines in this regard as shown in Figure 4. However, it is interesting that PPO-Cb outperforms
PPO-C in Setting 1, while in Settings 2 and 3 they exhibit relatively similar performance. This may
be attributed to the connection between qualification gain disparity and benefit fairness, which is
further analyzed in the following.
Evaluating causal decomposition. We then evaluate the causal decomposition and how different
components are impacted in the training. In Figure 5, we show Cπ (θ) together with the decompo-
sition of the constraint into its constituent components that are IPE, DPE, and SPE for PPO-C and


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   (a) Setting 1                                      (b) Setting 2

                       Figure 5: Qualification gain disparity decompositions.


            Figure 6: Benefit fairness and DPE for PPO-C and PPO-Cb model variants.


PPO-Cb. In both settings, the DPE varies more significantly over time compared with the IPE. This
behavior implies that policy optimization is more effective in decreasing DPE, the instantaneous im-
pact of the policy, than IPE, the delayed impact of the policy. Comparing the two methods, PPO-Cb
exhibits a more pronounced reduction in the DPE than in the IPE, suggesting an inherent connection
between the DPE and benefit fairness.
Evaluating benefit fairness. Finally, we evaluate the effectiveness of objective function Eq. (5)
in ensuring benefit fairness as well as the connection between benefit fairness and DPE. Figure 6
is a demonstration of the effect of increasing the β Λ parameter to increase the enforcement of the
benefit fairness constraint in PPO-Cb, with PPO-C included as further reference. The first two plots
are generated using the environment Setting 1, with the left corresponding to the base setting for β Λ
and the right for the relatively large setting. Comparing the two plots, we see that benefit fairness
improves as β Λ increases, showing the effecacy of the regularization. Moreover, we see that the
DPE decreases for a larger β Λ , which further reflects the connection between benefit fairness and
DPE as demonstrated in our theoretical analysis. This pattern similarly manifests in the last two
figures, where Setting 2 is used.

5   C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we explored the achievement of long-term fairness in reinforcement learning (RL)
from a causal perspective, emphasizing the importance of simultaneously addressing instantaneous
fairness requirements. We proposed a general RL framework where long-term fairness is quantified
by the difference in the average expected qualification gain that individuals from different groups
could obtain. Through a causal decomposition of this disparity, we identified three key compo-
nents: the Direct Policy Effect (DPE), the Indirect Policy Effect (IPE), and the Spurious Policy
Effect (SPE). Our analysis revealed an intrinsic connection between benefit fairness—an emerging
short-term fairness concept—and DPE, which is particularly sensitive to policy optimization. Fur-
thermore, we developed a simple yet effective approach to balance qualification gain parity with
benefit fairness. Experimental results demonstrated the efficacy of our methods. In future work, we
aim to conduct a more in-depth analysis of the qualification gain function’s design to account for
differences in benefits and align various fairness notions in sequential decision-making.



                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by NSF 1910284, 2142725.

R EFERENCES
Chen Avin, Ilya Shpitser, and Judea Pearl. Identifiability of path-specific effects. 2005.
Ryan S Baker and Aaron Hawn. Algorithmic bias in education. International Journal of Artificial
  Intelligence in Education, pp. 1–41, 2021.
Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in criminal
  justice risk assessments: The state of the art. Sociological Methods & Research, 50(1):3–44,
  2021.
Juan Correa and Elias Bareinboim. A calculus for stochastic interventions: Causal effect identifica-
  tion and surrogate experiments. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 10093–10100, 2020.
Alexander D’Amour, Hansa Srinivasan, James Atwood, Pallavi Baljekar, David Sculley, and Yoni
  Halpern. Fairness is not static: deeper understanding of long term fairness via simulation studies.
  In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 525–
  534, 2020.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science confer-
  ence, pp. 214–226, 2012.
Michael Feldman, Sorelle A Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubra-
 manian. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
 international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 259–268, 2015.
Pratik Gajane, Akrati Saxena, Maryam Tavakol, George Fletcher, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Survey
  on fair reinforcement learning: Theory and practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10032, 2022.
Yingqiang Ge, Shuchang Liu, Ruoyuan Gao, Yikun Xian, Yunqi Li, Xiangyu Zhao, Changhua Pei,
  Fei Sun, Junfeng Ge, Wenwu Ou, et al. Towards long-term fairness in recommendation. In
  Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp.
  445–453, 2021.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In
 Advances in neural information processing systems, volume 29, pp. 3315–3323, 2016.
Thomas Henzinger, Mahyar Karimi, Konstantin Kueffner, and Kaushik Mallik. Runtime monitor-
  ing of dynamic fairness properties. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 604–614, 2023.
Harry Holzer. The economic impact of affirmative action in the us. Swedish Economic Policy
  Review, 14(1):41, 2007.
Lily Hu and Yiling Chen. A short-term intervention for long-term fairness in the labor market. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, pp. 1389–1398, 2018.
Yaowei Hu and Lu Zhang. Achieving long-term fairness in sequential decision making. In Proceed-
  ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 9549–9557, 2022.
Yaowei Hu, Jacob Lear, and Lu Zhang. Striking a balance in fairness for dynamic systems through
  reinforcement learning. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData), pp. 662–
  671. IEEE, 2023.
Yaowei Hu, Yongkai Wu, and Lu Zhang. Long-term fair decision making through deep generative
  models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 22114–
  22122, 2024.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shahin Jabbari, Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, and Aaron Roth. Fairness
  in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1617–1626.
  PMLR, 2017.
Zhuangzhuang Jia, Yijie Wang, Roy Dong, and Grani A Hanasusanto. Distributionally robust per-
  formative optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01344, 2024.
Kun Jin, Tian Xie, Yang Liu, and Xueru Zhang. Addressing polarization and unfairness in perfor-
  mative prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16756, 2024.
Kory D Johnson, Dean P Foster, and Robert A Stine. Impartial predictive modeling: Ensuring
  fairness in arbitrary models. Statistical Science, pp. 1, 2016.
Michelle Seng Ah Lee and Luciano Floridi. Algorithmic fairness in mortgage lending: from absolute
 conditions to relational trade-offs. Minds and Machines, 31(1):165–191, 2021.
Lydia T Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. Delayed impact of fair
  machine learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3150–3158. PMLR,
  2018.
Lydia T Liu, Ashia Wilson, Nika Haghtalab, Adam Tauman Kalai, Christian Borgs, and Jennifer
  Chayes. The disparate equilibria of algorithmic decision making when individuals invest ratio-
  nally. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp.
  381–391, 2020.
Anna Montoya, Kirill Odintsov, and Martin Kotek. Home credit default risk, 2018. URL https:
  //kaggle.com/competitions/home-credit-default-risk.
Nuno Mota, Negar Mohammadi, Palash Dey, Krishna P Gummadi, and Abhijnan Chakraborty. Fair
  partitioning of public resources: Redrawing district boundary to minimize spatial inequality in
  school funding. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 646–657, 2021.
Hsiao-Ru Pan and Bernhard Schölkopf. Skill or luck? return decomposition via advantage functions.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
Judea Pearl. Causal inference. NIPS Causality: Objectives and Assessment, pp. 39–58, 2010.
Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7599–7609. PMLR, 2020.
Drago Plecko and Elias Bareinboim. Causal fairness for outcome control. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 37, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
Candice Schumann, Jeffrey Foster, Nicholas Mattei, and John Dickerson. We need fairness and
  explainability in algorithmic hiring. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
  Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS), 2020.
Anuj Kumar Sirohi, Anjali Gupta, Sayan Ranu, Sandeep Kumar, and Amitabha Bagchi.
  Graphgini: Fostering individual and group fairness in graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.12937, 2024.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Rijuta Wagh,   2017.        URL   https://github.com/rijutawagh04/
  Lending-Club-Loan-Exploratory-Data-Analysis.
Min Wen, Osbert Bastani, and Ufuk Topcu. Algorithms for fairness in sequential decision making.
 In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1144–1152. PMLR, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tongxin Yin, Reilly Raab, Mingyan Liu, and Yang Liu. Long-term fairness with unknown dynamics.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37, 2023.
Eric Yang Yu, Zhizhen Qin, Min Kyung Lee, and Sicun Gao. Policy optimization with advantage
  regularization for long-term fairness in decision systems. NeurIPS, 2022.
Yan Zeng, Ruichu Cai, Fuchun Sun, Libo Huang, and Zhifeng Hao. A survey on causal reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05209, 2023.
L. Zhang, Yongkai Wu, and Xintao Wu. Achieving non-discrimination in data release. Proceedings
   of ACM SIGKDD’17, 2017a.
Lu Zhang, Yongkai Wu, and Xintao Wu. A causal framework for discovering and removing di-
  rect and indirect discrimination. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3929–3935, 2017b.
Xueru Zhang, Ruibo Tu, Yang Liu, Mingyan Liu, Hedvig Kjellstrom, Kun Zhang, and Cheng Zhang.
  How do fair decisions fare in long-term qualification? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:18457–18469, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX A: D ERIVING ∇θ Cπ (θ)
To derive ∇θ Vdo(π,s) (x), we have
                        X
  ∇θ Vdo(π,s) (x) = ∇θ      π(d|s, x)Qdo(π,s) (x, d)
                               d
       X
   =        ∇θ π(d|s, x)Qdo(π,s) (x, d) + π(d|s, x)∇θ Qdo(π,s) (x, d)
        d
                                                                                                                                   !
       X                                                                    X
   =        ∇θ π(d|s, x)Qdo(π,s) (x, d) + π(d|s, x)∇θ                            P (x′ |x, d, s) (g(x, x′ ) + V π (s, x′ ))
        d                                                                   x′
                                                                                                                    !
       X                                                               X
                                                                                   ′                     π      ′
   =        ∇θ π(d|s, x)Qdo(π,s) (x, d) + π(d|s, x)                         P (x |x, d, s)∇θ V (s, x )
        d                                                              x′

                                  +
                   P
If we let ϕ(x) =        d ∇θ π(d|s , x)Qdo(π,s) (x, d), then
                                   X                    X
  ∇θ Vdo(π,s) (x) = ϕ(x) +                  π(d|s, x)           P (x′ |x, d, s)∇θ V π (s, x′ )
                                       d                  x′
                                   XX
                   = ϕ(x) +                      π(d|s, x)P (x′ |x, d, s)∇θ V π (s, x′ )
                                       x′    d
                                   X
                   = ϕ(x) +                 ρπ (x → x′ , 1)∇θ V π (s, x′ )
                                       x′
                                                                                                                                  !
                                   X                                               X
                   = ϕ(x) +                 ρπ,s (x → x′ , 1) ϕ(x′ ) +                       ρπ,s (x′ → x′′ , 1)∇θ V π (s, x′′ )
                                       x′                                              x′′
                                   X                                             X
                   = ϕ(x) +                 ρπ,s (x → x′ , 1)ϕ(x′ ) +                   ρπ,s (x → x′′ , 2)∇θ V π (s, x′′ )
                                       x′                                        x′′
                   = ···
                     XX  ∞
                   =       ρπ,s (x → x∗ , k)ϕ(x∗ )
                         x∗ k=0
                                              P∞
By
P denoting    η π,s (x → x∗ ) =                  k=0 ρ
                                                          π,s
                                                                (x → x∗ , k), then we can rewrite ∇θ V π (s, x) as
  x∗ η
       π,s
           (x → x∗ )ϕ(x∗ ).
Plugging these results into ∇θ Cπ (θ) for s+ , s− , we have that
∇θ Cπ (θ) = α Eπ|s+ ∇θ ln π(d|x, s+ )Qdo(π,s+ ) (x, d) − Eπ|s− ∇θ ln π(d|x, s− )Qdo(π,s− ) (x, d)


where
                                α = 2 E[Vdo(π,s+ ) (x0 )] − E[Vdo(π,s− ) (x0 )] .

A PPENDIX B: P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
Based on the definition, we have that
                            X            X
                                           P (x′ |x, d, s) g s (x, x′ ) + Vdo(π,s) (x′ ) ,

            Vdo(π,s) (x) =     π(d|x, s)
                                       d                x′
and
                        X                                           X                        X
   Vdo(πP S ,s) (x) =         P (x′ |x, d0 , s)g s (x, x′ ) +               π(d|x, s)              P (x′ |x, d, s)Vdo(πP S ,s) (x′ ).
                         x′                                            d                      x′
It follows that
             Vdo(π,s) (x) − Vdo(πP S ,s) (x)
                            X               X
             = Gπ,s (x) +       π(d|x, s)     P (x′ |x, d, s) Vdo(π,s) (x′ ) − Vdo(π,s)
                                                                                 PS
                                                                                        (x′ )
                                   d                 x′


                                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where                                                                                               !
                          X X
            π,s                                   ′          s     ′         ′     0     s      ′
          G       (x) =              π(d|x, s)P (x |x, d, s)g (x, x ) − P (x |x, d , s)g (x, x )
                           x′   d
By writing P (x′ |x, d , s)g s (x, x′ ) as (π(d1 |x, s)+π(d0 |x, s)P (x′ |x, d0 , s)g s (x, x′ )) and rearrange
                          0

the above expression, we have
                             X
    Gπ,s (x) = π(d1 |x, s)         P (x′ |x, d1 , s) − P (x′ |x, d0 , s) g s (x, x′ ) = π(d1 |x, s)∆(x, s)


                                x′
By similarly following the policy gradient theorem, we have
                                                      X
                    Vdo(π,s) (x) − Vdo(πP S ,s) (x) =   η π,s (x → x′ )Gπ,s (x′ )
                                                            x′

The second equation in the proposition can be similarly derived.

A PPENDIX C: E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP D ETAILS
Qualification gain function. We would like the qualification gain function to reflect real-world
phenomena to some extent. One viewpoint is that as an individual’s qualification level increases,
further progression becomes increasingly more difficult. Progression from beginner to intermediate
takes less effort than progression from advanced to expert, so the qualification gain at high levels
should have more weight. To encapsulate this idea, the qualification gain function for a single
transition is defined as
                                                   x3t+1 − x3t
                                 g(xt , xt+1 ) =
                                                 max g(xi , xj )
                                                       |i−j|=1
where the denominator serves to reduce the range of possible values.
Transition probability.               The distribution P (xt+1 |xt , s) is a deterministic function of
(st , xt , xdrif t , yt , dt ) where a small amount of mass representing an individual is moved from
P (xt |st ) to P (xt+1 |st ), i.e.,
                                         
                                         xt + xdrif t + 1 if(dt = 1, yt = 1),
                                 xt+1 = xt + xdrif t − 1 if(dt = 1, yt = 0),
                                         
                                           xt + xdrif t     if(dt = 0).

Enviroment settings. In the evaluation of our proposed algorithms, we use three different settings
for the simulation environment which we will simply refer to as Setting 1,2, and 3. These settings
differ from each other in initial distributions over credit scores, repayment probabilities, and credit
drift likelihoods.
We generated the repayment probabilities by fitting a logistic regression model to credit score
datasets and used the predicted repayment probability from each credit score level. Setting 1 and
2 both use the same distribution over initial credit scores where Ex0 ∼s− [x0 ] < Ex0 ∼s+ [x0 ]. They
differ in the repayment probabilities where Setting 1 uses probabilities generated using the Home
Credit Default Risk dataset Montoya et al. (2018), and the probabilities for Setting 2 are from a
dataset previously released by Lending Club Wagh (2017), a type of peer-to-peer lending market.
In Setting 3, however, the initial distribution for both groups is the same. What does differ between
groups are the credit drift probabilities p(xdrif t ), which is now dependent on the sensitive attribute.
Here, p(xdrif t = −1|s− ) > p(xdrif t = −1|s+ ) while p(xdrif t = 1|s− ) < p(xdrif t = 1|s+ ).

A PPENDIX D: I NFLUENCES OF β KL AND β Λ
We further examine how the penalty coefficients β KL and β Λ quantitatively impact fairness and
model performance. As shown in Figure 7, a larger β KL can help reduce the model variance. In
Figure 8, we show the influence of the strength of enforcing benefit fairness on long-term fairness.
Notably, we observe that the loan rate for β Λ = 2 is more balanced than that for β Λ = 0, further
implying that benefit fairness may align with long-term fairness in certain conditions.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Utility earned by the PPO-C variant comparing when the agent was trained with β KL = 0
versus β KL = 10.


                   Figure 8: Lending rates for the PPO-Cb variant in setting 2.


                                               16
