Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G ENERATOR M ATCHING : G ENERATIVE MODELING WITH
ARBITRARY M ARKOV PROCESSES

    Peter Holderrieth1,† , Marton Havasi2 , Jason Yim1 , Neta Shaul2,3 , Itai Gat2 ,
    Tommi Jaakkola1 , Brian Karrer2 , Ricky T. Q. Chen2 , Yaron Lipman2
    1
      MIT CSAIL, 2 FAIR, Meta, 3 Weizmann Institute of Science
    †
      Work done during an internship at FAIR, Meta.



                                                 A BSTRACT
          We introduce Generator Matching, a modality-agnostic framework for generative modeling
          using arbitrary Markov processes. Generators characterize the infinitesimal evolution of
          a Markov process, which we leverage for generative modeling in a similar vein to flow
          matching: we construct conditional generators which generate single data points, then learn
          to approximate the marginal generator which generates the full data distribution. We show
          that Generator Matching unifies various generative modeling methods, including diffusion
          models, flow matching and discrete diffusion models. Furthermore, it expands the design
          space to new and unexplored Markov processes such as jump processes. Finally, Generator
          Matching enables the construction of superpositions of Markov generative models and
          enables the construction of multimodal models in a rigorous manner. We empirically
          validate our method on image and multimodal generation, e.g. showing that superposition
          with a jump process improves performance.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Early deep generative models—like VAEs (Kingma, 2013) and GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) generated
samples in a single forward pass. With denoising diffusion models (DDMs) (Song et al., 2020; Ho et al.,
2020), a paradigm shift happened were step-wise updates are used to transform noise into data. Similarly,
scalable training of continuous normalizing flows (CNFs; Chen et al. 2018) via flow matching (Lipman
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Albergo et al., 2023) allowed for high-quality and fast generative modeling by
simulating an ODE. Since then, similar constructions based on diffusion and flows have also been applied to
other modalities such as discrete data (Campbell et al., 2022; Gat et al., 2024) or data on manifolds (De Bortoli
et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Chen & Lipman, 2024) leading to a variety of models for different data types.
The single common property of the aforementioned generative models is their iterative step-wise nature:
starting with a sample X0 ∼ psimple from an easy-to-sample distribution psimple , they iteratively construct
samples Xt+h of the next time step depending only on the current state Xt . Mathematically speaking, this
means that they are all Markov processes. In this work, we develop a generative modeling framework that
relies on that Markov property. At the core of our framework is the concept of a generator that describes the
infinitesimal change of the distribution of a Markov process. We show that one can easily learn a generator
through a family of scalable training objectives—a framework we coin Generator Matching (GM).
Generator Matching unifies many existing generative modeling techniques across data modalities such as
denoising diffusion models (Song et al., 2020), flow matching (Lipman et al., 2022), stochastic interpolants
(Albergo et al., 2023), discrete diffusion models (Campbell et al., 2022; Gat et al., 2024; Lou et al., 2024a),
among many others (see sec. 8). Most importantly, GM gives rise to new, unexplored models, and allows us
to combine models across different classes of Markov processes. We make the following contributions:

                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Overview of the Generator Matching (GM) framework to construct generative models. GM works
on any state space (including multi-modal) and Markov processes. Flower image source: vecteezy.com

      1. Generator Matching: We present Generator Matching (GM), a framework for generative modeling
         with Markov processes on arbitrary state spaces. This framework unifies a diversity of prior
         generative modeling methods into a common framework that is modality-agnostic.
      2. Novel models: On discrete and Euclidean spaces, we universally characterize the space of Markovian
         generative models identifying jump models as an unexplored model class for Rd .
      3. Model combinations: We show how GM allows to combine models in 2 ways: (1) Markov
         superpositions enable to construct ensembles of generative models; and (2) Multimodal generative
         models can be constructed by combining GM models built for single data modalities.
      4. Experiments: On image and multimodal protein generation experiments, we show that jump
         models and Markov superpositions allow us to achieve competitive results.

2    G ENERATIVE MODELING VIA P ROBABILITY PATHS
Let S be a state space. Important examples are S = Rd (e.g., images, vectors), S discrete (e.g., language),
S a Riemannian manifold (e.g., geometric data) or their products for multimodal generation. In generative
modeling, we are given samples x1 , . . . , xN ∼ pdata from a distribution pdata on S and our goal is to generate
novel samples z ∼ pdata . GM works for arbitrary distributions, in particular those that do not have densities
(e.g., with discrete support). For general probability measures p, we use the notation p(dx) where "dx" is a
symbolic expression denoting integration with respect to p in a variable x. If for a distribution p a density
                                                               dp
exists with respect to a reference measure ν on S, we write dν    (x) for its density.
A fundamental paradigm of recent state-of-the-art generative models is that they prespecify a transformation
of a simple distribution psimple (e.g. a Gaussian) into pdata via probability paths. Specifically, a conditional
probability path is a set of time-varying probability distributions (pt (dx|z))0≤t≤1 depending on a data point
z ∈ S. Together with the data distribution pdata , this induces a corresponding marginal probability path via
the hierarchical sampling procedure:
                                 z ∼ pdata , x ∼ pt (dx|z)   ⇒     x ∼ pt (dx)                               (1)
i.e. first sample a data point z ∼ pdata and then sample x ∼ pt (dx|z) from the conditional path. As we will see,
this makes training scalable. The conditional probability path is usually chosen such that p0 (dx|z) = psimple
and p1 (dx|z) = δz where δz is the Dirac delta distribution at z (i.e. the trivial, deterministic distribution
returning z every draw). The associated marginal probability path interpolates between psimple and pdata ,
leading to the first design principle of GM:
   Principle 1: Given a data distribution pdata , choose a prior psimple and a conditional probability path such
                 that its marginal probability path (pt )0≤t≤1 fulfills psimple = p0 and pdata = p1 .

                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Two common constructions are mixtures (for arbitrary S) and geometric averages (for S = Rd ):

                                                               z  with prob κt
  pt (dx|z) = (1 − κt ) · psimple (dx) + κt · δz (dx) ⇔ xt ∼                           I mixture              (2)
                                                               x0 with prob (1 − κt )
    pt (dx|z) = Ex0 [δσt x0 +αt z ]                    ⇔ xt = σt x0 + αt z           I geometric average      (3)
where xt ∼ pt (·|z), x0 ∼ psimple , z ∼ pdata , and αt , σt , κt ∈ R≥0 are differentiable functions satisfying
κ0 = α0 = σ1 = 0 and κ1 = α1 = σ0 = 1 and 0 ≤ κt ≤ 1.
Remark. Note that the above includes specific ways of constructing probability paths, e.g. via a forward
process in diffusion models (Song et al., 2020) or an interpolant function (Albergo et al., 2023) (see app. A.4).
GM works for all these cases including if one conditions on more general latent variables z (Tong et al., 2023;
Pooladian et al., 2023). Note also that in the diffusion literature, time is inverted (t = 0 corresponds to data).

3    M ARKOV P ROCESSES
We briefly define time-continuous Markov processes, a fundamental concept in this work (Ethier & Kurtz,
2009). For t ∈ [0, 1], let Xt ∈ S be a random variable. We call (Xt )0≤t≤1 a Markov process if it fulfills the
following condition for all 0 ≤ t1 < t2 < · · · < tn < tn+1 ≤ 1 and A ⊆ S (measurable):
           P[Xtn+1 ∈ A|Xt1 , Xt2 , . . . , Xtn ] = P[Xtn+1 ∈ A|Xtn ]           I Markov assumption            (4)
Informally, the above condition says that the process has no memory. If we know the present, knowing the
past will not influence our prediction of the future. In table 1, we give an overview over important classes
of Markov processes. Each Markov process has a transition kernel (kt+h|t )0≤t<t+h≤1 that assigns every
x ∈ S a probability distribution kt+h|t (·|x) such that P[Xt+h ∈ A|Xt = x] = kt+h|t (A|x). Due to the
Markov assumption, there is a 1:1 correspondence between a Markov process and a transition kernel paired
with an initial distribution p0 . We impose loose regularity assumptions on Xt listed in app. A.2.
In the context of GM, we use a Markov process as follows: Given a marginal path (pt (dx))0≤t≤1 (see
sec. 2), we want to train a model that allows to simulate a Markov process such that X0 ∼ psimple ⇒ Xt ∼
pt for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. That is, if initializing state at t = 0 with X0 ∼ p0 , the marginals of Xt will be
pt for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. Once we have found such a Markov process, we can simply generate samples from
p1 = pdata by sampling X0 ∼ p0 and simulating Xt+h ∼ kt+h|t (·|Xt ) step-wise up to time t = 1. The
challenge with such an approach is that an arbitrary general kernel kt+h|t is hard to parameterize in a neural
network. One of the key insights in the development of diffusion models was that for small h > 0, the kernel
kt+h|t can be closely approximated by a simple parametric distribution like Gaussians (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020). One can extend this idea to Markov processes leading to the concept of the generator.

4    G ENERATORS
Let us consider the transition kernel kt+h|t for small h > 0. Specifically, we consider an informal 1st-order
Taylor approximation in t with an error term o(h):
                                                              d
                   “kt+h|t = kt|t + hLt + o(h)”,       Lt :=        kt+h|t , kt|t (·|x) = δx               (5)
                                                             dh h=0
We call the 1st-order derivative Lt the generator of kt+h|t (Ethier & Kurtz, 2009; Rüschendorf et al.,
2016). Similar to derivatives, generators are first-order linear approximations and, as we will see, easier to
parameterize than kt+h|t . Diffusion, flow, and other generative models can all be seen as algorithms to learn
the generator of a Markov process (see table 1). However, as a probability measure is not a standard function,
equation 5 is not well-defined yet. We will make it rigorous using test functions.
Test functions. Test functions are a way to “probe” a probability distribution. They serve as a theoretical
tool to handle distributions as if they were real-valued functions. Specifically, we use a family T of bounded,

                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                Continous-time
 Name                      Flow                       Diffusion                                   Jump process
                                                                                                                                                 Markov chain

 Space S                 S = Rd                        S = Rd                                       S arbitrary                                      |S| < ∞

                                                  σt2 (x) ∈ Rd×d                                                                           Qt ∈ RS×S , 1T Qt = 0
 Parameters            ut (x) ∈ Rd                                                          Jump measure Qt (dy; x)
                                                 σt2 pos. semi-def.                                                                        Qt (x0 ; x) ≥ 0 (x0 6= x)
                                                             p                                                        R
                                             Xt+h = Xt +         hσt2 (Xt ) t    Xt+h = Xt with prob. 1 − h Qt (dy; x)
 Sampling        Xt+h = Xt + hut (Xt )                                                                                                    Xt+h ∼ (I + hQt )(·; Xt )
                                                                                Xt+h ∼ RQQt (dy;x)
                                                                                                                 R
                                                     t ∼ N (0, I)                           t (dy;x)
                                                                                                     with prob. h Qt (dy; x)
                                                      1 2
                         ∇f T ut                               2
                                                                                                                                                       f T QTt
                                                                                       R
 Generator Lt                                         2 ∇ f · σt                         [f (y) − f (x)]Qt (dy; x)

   KFE            Continuity Equation:        Fokker-Planck Equation:             Jump Continuity Equation: ∂t dp         dν (x) =
                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                              Mass preservation:
                                                ∂t pt = 12 ∇2 · [pt σt2 ]         Qt (x; x0 ) dp     0           0      dpt        0
                                                                                R
 (Adjoint)         ∂t pt = −∇ · [ut pt ]                                                      dν
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                  (x   ) − Qt (x   ; x) dν  (x)v(dx  )              ∂t pt = Qt pt
                                                                                                                  0
 Marginal         Ez∼p1|t (·|x) [ut (x|z)]     Ez∼p1|t (·|x) [σt2 (x|z)]                   Ez∼p1|t (·|x) [Qt (dx ; x|z)]                   Ez∼p1|t (·|x) [Qt (x0 ; x|z)]

                                                                                                                                                          Qθt (x0 ; x)
                                                                                                                                                    P
 CGM Loss                                                                                      ( Qθt (x0 ; x)v(dx0 )
                                                                                                R                                               (
                  kut (x|z) − uθt (x)k2       kσt2 (x|z) − [σtθ ]2 (x)k22                                                                        x0 6=x
 (Example)                                                                            −Qt (x0 ; x|z) log Qθt (x0 ; x)v(dx0 ))            −Qt (x ; x|z) log Qθt (x0 ; x))
                                                                                                                                                 0


Table 1: Examples of Markov models that can be learnt with GM. Derivations are in app. A.5. For diffusion,
we assume zero drift. KFE is listed in its adjoint version, i.e. assumes jump kernel Qt (y; x) and density
dpt                                                                          dpt
 dν (x) exists with respect to reference ν. For Lebesgue measure ν, we write dν (x) = pt (x).



integrable functions f : S → R that characterize probability distributions fully, i.e., two probability
distributions µ1 , µ2 are equal if and only if Ex∼µ1 [f (x)] = Ex∼µ2 [f (x)] for all f ∈ T . Generally speaking,
one chooses T to be as “nice” (or regular) as possible. For example, if S = Rd , the space T = Cc∞ of
infinitely differentiable functions with compact support fulfills that property. We define the action of the
marginal pt and transition kernels kt+h|t for all f ∈ T via the linear function defined via
                                  Z
                              def
                    hpt , f i =     f (x)pt (dx) = Ex∼pt [f (x)]                    I marginal action        (6)
                                     def
                kt+h|t , f (x) = kt+h|t (·|x), f = E [f (Xt+h )|Xt = x]                                                     I transition action                          (7)
where the marginal action maps each test function f to a scalar hpt , f i ∈ R, while the transition action maps
a real-valued function x 7→ f (x) to a another real-valued function x 7→ kt+h|t , f (x). The tower property
implies that pt , kt+h|t , f = hpt+h , f i. We note that the above is only a "symbolic" dot product but
becomes a "proper" dot product if a density dp                              f (x) dp
                                                                          R
                                              dν exists, i.e. hpt , f i =
                                                t
                                                                                  dν (x)ν(dx).
                                                                                     t



Generator definition. Let us revisit equation 5 and define the derivative of kt+h|t . With the test function
perspective in mind, we can take derivatives of kt+h|t , f (x) per x ∈ S and define
                       d                                kt+h|t , f (x) − f (x) def
                                kt+h|t , f (x) = lim                            = [Lt f ](x).                  (8)
                      dh h=0                      h→0              h
We call this action the generator Lt (and define it for all f for which the limit exists uniformly in x and t, see
app. A.1 ). In table 1, there are several examples of generators listed with derivations in app. A.5. With this
definition, the Taylor series in equation 5 has the, now well-defined, form as kt+h|t , f = f + hLt f + o(h).
Under mild regularity assumptions, there is a unique correspondence between the generator and the Markov
process (see (Ethier & Kurtz, 2009; Pazy, 2012)). This allows us to parameterize a Markov process:

                     Principle 2: Parameterize a Markov process via a parameterized generator Lθt .


                                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Of course, it is hard to parameterize a linear operator Lt on function spaces directly via a neural network. A
simple solution is to restrict ourselves to certain subclasses of Markov processes and parameterize it linearly
with a neural network (see app. A.6 for details and examples). For example, flow matching restricts itself to
generators of the form Lt f = ∇f (x)T uθt (x) which correspond to flows. However, as we will show now, we
can in fact fully characterize generators on specific spaces.
Theorem 1 (Universal characterization of generators). Under regularity assumptions (see app. A.2), the
generators of a Markov processes Xt (0 ≤ t ≤ 1) take the form:
      1. Discrete |S| < ∞: The generator is given by a rate transition matrix Qt and the Markov process
         corresponds to a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC).
      2. Euclidean space S = Rd : The generator has a representation as a sum of components described in
         table 1, i.e.,
                                                                      Z
                                                 1
                      Lt f (x) = ∇f (x)T ut (x) + ∇2 f (x) · σt2 (x) + [f (y) − f (x)] Qt (dy; x)    (9)
                                 |    {z      } |2      {z         } |           {z             }
                                         flow           diffusion                   jump

                                d        d
         where u : [0, 1] × R → R is a velocity field, σ : [0, 1] × R     d
                                                                              → Sd++ the diffusion coefficient
         (Sd++ =positive semi-definite matrices), and Qt (A|x) is a finite measure called jump measure.
         ∇2 f (x) describes the Hessian of f and ∇2 f (x) · σt2 (x) describes the Frobenius inner product.

The proof adapts a known result in the mathematical literature and can be found in app. C.1. This result
allows us to not only characterize a wide class of Markov process models but to characterize the design space
exhaustively for S = Rd or S discrete. In Euclidean space, people have considered learning the flow parts
of the generator and for diffusion models, using a fixed σt for a diffusion. Learning σt or jump models on
non-discrete spaces have not (or rarely) been considered. A general recipe to sample from a Markov process
with a universal generator is presented in alg. 2. For S = Rd , we can therefore simplify Principle 2:

 Principle 2 (S = Rd ): Parameterize a Markov process (e.g., using a neural network) via a generator Lt that
          is composed of (a subset of) velocity ut , diffusion coefficient σt2 , and jump measure Qt .

5   KOLMOGOROV F ORWARD E QUATION AND M ARGINAL G ENERATOR
Beyond parameterizing a Markov process, the generator has a further use-case in the Generator Matching
framework: checking if a Markov process generates a desired probability path pt . We discuss the latter now
using the Kolmogorov Forward Equation (KFE). Specifically, the evolution of the marginal probabilities pt
of a Markov process Xt are governed by the generator Lt , as can be seen by computing:

                                d                         d                  (8)
                ∂t hpt , f i =        hpt+h , f i = pt ,        kt+h|t , f   = hpt , Lt f i             (10)
                               dh h=0                    dh h=0
where we used that the hpt , ·i operation is linear to swap the derivative, and the fact that pt , kt+h|t , f =
hpt+h , f i. This shows that given a generator Lt of a Markov process Xt we can recover its marginal
probabilities via their infinitesimal change,
                    ∂t hpt , f i = hpt , Lt f i   I Kolmogorov Forward Equation (KFE)                      (11)
Conversely, if a generator Lt of a Markov process Xt satisfies the above equation, then Xt generates the
probability path (pt )0≤t≤1 , i.e. initializing X0 ∼ p0 will imply that Xt ∼ pt for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 (see app. A.2)
(Rogers & Williams, 2000). Therefore, the key challenge of Generator Matching is:

       Principle 3*: Given a marginal probability path (pt )0≤t≤1 , find a generator satisfying the KFE.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark - Adjoint KFE. We note that the above version of the KFE determines the evolution of expectations
of test functions f . Whenever a probability density dp
                                                     dν (x) exists, one can use the adjoint KFE (see table 1
                                                       t

for examples and app. A.3). In this form, the KFE generalizes many equations used to develop generative
models such as the Fokker-Planck or the continuity equation (Song et al., 2020; Lipman et al., 2022).
We now show how to find a generator that generates a marginal probability path pt with conditional path
pt (·|z). Assume that for every data point z ∈ S, we found a generator Lzt that generates pt (·|z). We call Lzt
conditional generator. This allows us to construct a generator for the marginal path (marginal generator):
Proposition 1. The marginal probability path (pt )0≤t≤1 is generated by a Markov process Xt with generator
                                           Lt f (x) =Ez∼p1|t (·|x) [Lzt f (x)]                                   (12)
where p1|t (dz|x) is the posterior distribution (i.e. the conditional distribution over data z given an observation
x). For S = Rd and the representation in eq. (9), we get a marginal representation of Lt f (x) given by:
                                   ∇2 f (x)
                                                                          Z
∇f (x)T Ez∼p1|t (·|x) [ut (x|z)] +           · Ez∼p1|t (·|x) [σt2 (x|z)] + [f (y) − f (x)] Ez∼p1|t (·|x) [Qt (dy; x|z)]
                                       2
Generally, an identity as in eq. (12) holds for any linear parameterization of the generator (see app. A.6).

The proof relies on the linearity of the KFE (see app. C.2). Proposition 1 immensely simplifies the construction
of a Markov process that generates a desired probability path. To find the right training target, we only need
to find a solution for the KFE for the conditional path. This simplifies Principle 3* to:

      Principle 3: Derive a conditional generator Lzt satisfying the KFE for the conditional path pt (·|z).

In denoising diffusion models, the strategy to find solutions to a KFE is to construct a probability path via a
forward noising process and then use a time-reversal of that process as a solution to the KFE (we illustrate this
in app. H.2). Here, we illustrate two novel solutions for the KFE for common conditional probability paths on
Rd in fig. 2. We discuss them here for d = 1 (in sec. 7.2 it is discussed how to easily extend it to d > 1).
Example 1 - Jump solution to geometric average. Current state-of-the-art models use a geometric average
probability path given by pt (·|z) = N (tz, (1 − t)2 ) called CondOT path (Lipman et al., 2022). We ask the
question: are there other Markov processes that follow the same probability path? As derived in app. E.7,
another solution is given by a jump model with rate kernel Qt : R × R → R:
                         [kt (x)]+ [−kt (x0 )]+ pt (x0 |z)
      Qt (x0 ; x|z) =            R                         ,   kt (x) = x2 − (t + 1)xz − (1 − t)2 + tz 2         (13)
                        (1 − t)3 [−kt (x̃)]+ pt (x̃|z)dx̃
where [x]+ := max(x, 0). In fig. 2, we illustrate how a jump model trained with this conditional rate has the
same marginal probability path as common flow models but with significantly different sample paths.
Example 2 - Pure diffusion solution to mixture path. GM allows to learn the diffusion coefficient σt2 of an
SDE. We illustrate this for the mixture path pt (dx|z) = κt δz + (1 − κt )Unif[a1 ,a2 ] . We introduce a solution
that we call “pure diffusion” (see app. E.3). The corresponding Markov process is given by an SDE with no
drift (i.e., no vector field) and diffusion coefficient given by
                                       a2 − a1 1 (z − a1 )2                 1 (x − a1 )2

                         2
                       σt (x|z) =2κ̇t                          + [x − z]+ −               )                  (14)
                                       1 − κt 2 a2 − a1                     2 a2 − a1
We add an additional reflection term at the boundaries of the data support (see app. E.3). Note the striking
feature of this model: It only specifies how much noise to add to the current state. Still, it is able to generate
data (see fig. 2). This is strictly different than “denoising diffusion models” because they corrupt data (as
opposed to generating) with a diffusion process and their σt2 (x) = σt2 is state-independent and usually fixed.

                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Illustration of Markov models trained with different KFE solutions for the same probability path.
The paths for individual samples are plotted across time in one plot. 2d histograms of generated samples are
plotted per time point. Although the individual sample paths look very different, the marginal probability path
(histogram) are the same up to approximation error (Geometric average ∼ example 1, mixture ∼ example 2).

6    G ENERATOR M ATCHING
We now discuss how to train a parameterized generator Lθt to approximate the “true” marginal generator Lt .
In practice, Lθt is linearly parameterized by a neural network Ftθ : S × [0, 1] → Ω where Ω ⊂ V is a convex
subset of some vector space V with inner product h·, ·i (see app. A.6 for details). Our goal is to approximate
the ground truth parameterization Ft : S × [0, 1] → Ω of Lt . For example, Ft = ut for flows, Ft = σt2
for diffusion, or Ft = Qt for jumps (see table 1). We train the neural network Ftθ to approximate Ft . As a
distance function on Ω, we consider Bregman divergences defined via a convex function φ : Ω → R as
                             D(a, b) = φ(a) − [φ(b) + ha − b, ∇φ(b)i], a, b ∈ Ω                               (15)
which are a general class of loss functions including many examples such as MSE or the KL-divergence (see
app. C.3.1). We use D to measure how well Ftθ approximates Ft via the Generator Matching loss defined as
                        def
               Lgm (θ) = Et∼Unif,x∼pt D(Ft (x), Ftθ (x))

                                                                           I Generator Matching               (16)
Unfortunately, the above training objective is intractable as we do not know the marginal generator Lt and
also no parameterization Ft of the marginal generator. To make training tractable, let us set Ftz to be a linear
parameterization of the conditional generator Lzt with data point z (see app. A.6). For clarity, we reiterate
that by construction, we know Ftθ , Ftz , pt (·|z), D as well as can draw data samples zR ∼ pdata but the shape of
Ft is unknown. By proposition 1, we can assume that Ft has the shape Ft (x) = Ftz (x)p1|t (dz|x). This
enables us to define the conditional Generator Matching loss as
              def
     Lcgm (θ) = Et∼Unif,z∼pdata ,x∼pt (·|z) D(Ftz (x), Ftθ (x))

                                                                     I Conditional Generator Matching         (17)
This objective is tractable and scalable. It turns out that we can use it to minimize the desired objective.
Proposition 2. For any Bregman divergence, the GM loss Lgm has the same gradients as the CGM loss Lcgm ,
i.e. ∇θ Lgm (θ) = ∇θ Lcgm (θ). Therefore, minimizing the CGM loss with Stochastic Gradient Descent will
also minimize the GM loss. Further, for this property to hold, D must necessarily be a Bregman divergence.
See app. C.3 for a proof. Note the significance of proposition 2: we can learn Lt with a scalable objective.
Further, we can universally characterize the space of loss functions, including unexplored and new loss
functions for diffusion models. In table 1, we list examples of several CGM loss functions. Often it is also
possible to derive losses that give lower bounds on the model log-likelihood (ELBO bounds, see app. D).

                Principle 4: Train Lθt by minimizing the CGM loss with a Bregman divergence.
With this, we arrived at the last principle of GM. In alg. 1, we summarize the Generator Matching recipe for
constructing generative models.

                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7     A PPLICATIONS OF GENERATIVE MATCHING THEORY
GM provides a unifying framework for many existing generative models (see sec. 8), as well as gives rise to
new models. Beyond that, the generality of GM in itself has several use cases that we discuss in this section.
7.1   C OMBINING MODELS
The generator is a linear operator and the KFE ∂t hpt , f i = hpt , Lt f i is a linear equation. These two
properties enable us to combine generative models for the same state space S in different ways.
Proposition 3 (Combining models). Let pt be a marginal probability path, then the following generators
solve the KFE for pt and consequently define a generative model with pt as marginal:
      1. Markov superposition: αt1 Lt + αt2 L0t , where Lt , L0t are two generators of Markov processes solving
         the KFE for pt , and αt1 , αt2 ≥ 0 satisfy αt1 + αt2 = 1. We call this a Markov superposition.
      2. Divergence-free components: Lt + βt Ldiv             div                              div
                                                   t , where Lt is a generator such that pt , Lt f = 0 for
                                               div
         all f ∈ T , and βt ≥ 0. We call such Lt divergence-free.
      3. Predictor-corrector: αt1 Lt + αt2 L̄t , where Lt is a generator solving the KFE for pt in forward-time
         and L̄t is a generator solving the KFE in backward time, and αt1 , αt2 ≥ 0 with αt1 − αt2 = 1.
A proof can be found in app. C.4. Markov superpositions can be used to combine generative models of
different classes, e.g., one could combine a flow and a jump model. These can be 2 networks trained separately
or we can train two models in one network simultaneously. We illustrate Markov superpositions in fig. 2. To
find divergence-free components, one can use existing Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) algorithms -
such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, Langevin dynamics, or approaches based on detailed balance - all of these
algorithms are general recipes to find divergence-free components.
7.2   M ULTIMODAL AND H IGH - DIMENSIONAL GENERATIVE MODELING

GM allows us to easily combine generative models from two state spaces S1 , S2 into the product space
S1 × S2 in a rigorous, principled, and simple manner. This has two advantages: (1) we can design a joint
multi-modal generative model easily and (2) we can often reduce solving the KFE in high dimensions to the
one-dimensional case. We state here the construction informally and provide a rigorous treatment in app. C.5.
Proposition 4 (Multimodal generative models - Informal version). Let qt1 (·|z1 ), qt2 (·|z2 ) be two conditional
probability paths on state spaces S1 , S2 . Define the conditional factorized path on S1 × S2 as pt (·|z1 , z2 ) =
qt1 (·|z1 )qt2 (·|z2 ). Let pt (dx) be its marginal path.
      1. Conditional generator: To find a solution to the KFE for the conditional factorized path, we only
         have to find solutions to the KFE for each S1 , S2 . We can combine them component-wise.
      2. Marginal generator: The marginal generator of pt (dx) can be parameterized as follows: (1)
         parameterize a generator on each Si but make it values depend on all dimensions; (2) During
         sampling, update each component independently as one would do for each Si in the unimodal case.
      3. Loss function: We can simply take the sum of loss functions for each Si .
As a concrete example, let us consider joint image-text generation with a joint flow and discrete Markov
model with S1 = Rd , S2 = {1, . . . , N }. To build a multimodal model, we can simply make the vector field
ut (x1t , x2t ) ∈ Rd depend on both modalities x1t , x2t but update the flow part via Xt+h
                                                                                       1
                                                                                           = Xt1 + hut (Xt1 , Xt2 ).
                                                  1      2
Similarly, the text updates depend on both (Xt , Xt ). In app. F, we give another example for jump models.

8     R ELATED W ORK
GM unifies a diversity of previous generative modeling approaches. We discuss here a selection for S = Rd
and S discrete. App. H includes an extended overview and models for other S (e.g. manifolds, multimodal).

                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Denoising Diffusion and Flows in Rd . From the perspective of GM, a “denoising diffusion model” is a
flow model that is learnt using the CGM loss with the mean squared error. During sampling, a divergence-
free component given via Langevin dynamics (Flow + SDE) can be be added for stochastic sampling (see
proposition 3). If we set the weight of that component to 0, we recover the probability flow ODE (Song et al.,
2020). To the best of our knowledge, it has not been explored in the literature yet whether one could learn
a state-dependent diffusion coefficient σt (x) as opposed to fixing it. Our framework allows for that as we
illustrate in fig. 2. Flow matching and rectified flows (Lipman et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) are immediate
instances of Generator Matching leveraging the flow-specific versions of the KFE given by the continuity
equation (see table 1). Stochastic interpolants (Albergo et al., 2023) extend general flow-based models by
learning an additional divergence-free Langevin dynamics component separately (see proposition 3 (b)) and
showcase the advantages of adding it both theoretically and practically.
Discrete models and LLMs. In discrete spaces, Generator Matching recovers generative modeling via
continuous-time Markov chains (Campbell et al., 2022; Santos et al., 2023; Gat et al., 2024), often coined
“discrete diffusion models”. These models use a version of proposition 4 using factorized probability paths to
make the generator (=rate matrix Qt ) update each dimension independently. SEDD (Lou et al., 2024b) use
the same Bregman divergence but with a different linear parameterization of the generator, namely via the
discrete score. Theoretically, by using auto-regressive probability paths and fixing the jump times via high
jump intensities, one can also recover common language model training as an edge case of GM.
Markov generative modeling. The most closely-related work to ours is Benton et al. (2024) that focus on
recovering existing denoising diffusion models into a common framework. Here, we try to fully characterize
the design space of Markov generative models as a whole and identify novel parts - e.g., by introducing jump
models on Rd , Markov superpositions, universal characterizations of the space of generators, novel solutions
to the KFE, Bregman divergence losses as the natural loss classes, among others.
9    E XPERIMENTS
The design space of the GM framework is extraordinarily large. At the same time, single classes of models
(e.g., diffusion and flows) have already been optimized over many previous works. Therefore, we choose to
focus on 3 aspects of GM: (i) Jump models as a novel class of models (ii) The ability of combining different
model classes into a single generative model (iii) The ability to design models for multiple data modalities.
New models - Jump model. We first study
jump models as a novel model class in Eu-
clidean space. We use the jump model de-           Method                         CIFAR10 ImageNet
fined in eq. (13) and extend it to multiple        DDPM (Ho et al., 2020)         3.17          6.99
dimensions using proposition 4. The jump           VP-SDE (Song et al., 2020) 3.01              6.84
kernel is parameterized with a U-Net archi-        EDM (Karras et al., 2022)      1.98          −
tecture (see app. F for details). We use the
                                                   Flow model (Euler)             2.94          4.58
loss from table 1. In app. D, we show that
                                                   Jump model (Euler)             4.23          7.66
this corresponds to an ELBO loss. We apply
                                                   Jump + Flow MS (Euler)         2.49          3.47
the model on CIFAR10 and the ImageNet32
(blurred faces) datasets. As jump models do        Flow  model   (2nd order)      2.48          3.59
not have yet an equivalent of classifier-free      Jump + Flow MS (mixed)         2.36          3.33
guidance, we focus on unconditional gener-
                                                Table 2: Experimental results for image generation. FID
ation. A challenge for a fair comparison is
                                                scores are listed. MS=Markov superposition. Euler: euler
that flow models can use higher-order ODE
                                                sampling. 2nd order: 2nd order ODE sampler. Mixed: Flow
samplers, while sampling for jump models in
  d                                             uses 2nd order sampler and jump uses Euler sampling.
R is only done with Euler sampling so far.
Hence, we ablate over this choice. As one can see in fig. 4, the jump model can generate realistic images of
high quality. In table 2, we show quantitative results. While lacking behind current state-of-the art models,
the jump model shows very promising results as a first version of an unexplored class of models.

                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Combining models - Markov superposition. Next, we train a flow and jump model in the same architecture.
We validate that the flow part achieves the state-of-the-art results as before. We then combine both models via
a Markov superposition. As one can see in table 2, a Markov superposition of a flow and jump model boosts
the performance of each other. For Euler sampling, we see significant improvements. We can also combine
2nd order samplers for flows with Euler sampling for jumps in a “mixed” sampling method (see table 2)
leading to improvements of the current SOTA by flow models. We anticipate that with further improvements
of the jump model, the increased performance via Markov superposition will be even more pronounced.
Multimodal state spaces - Pro-
tein experiments. GM allows                                                      Multimodal Unimodal
us to design models for arbitrary     Method                                     Div.    Nov. Div. Nov.
and complex state spaces. To il- RFdiffusion (Watson et al., 2023)                   N/A         0.4    0.37
lustrate this, we show that GM FrameFlow (Yim et al., 2024)                          N/A         0.39 0.39
allows to easily improve Multi- FoldFlow (Bose et al., 2023)                         N/A         0.24 0.32
Flow, a state-of-the-art model for Protpardelle (Chu et al., 2024)               0.1     0.4     0.12 0.41
joint protein structure and amino ProteinGenerator (Lisanza et al., 2023) 0.09 0.31 0.19 0.35
acid sequence generation (Camp- MultiFlow (Campbell et al., 2024b)               0.38 0.39 0.52 0.39
bell et al., 2024b), without even w/ SO(3) jumps (ours)                          0.48 0.41 0.63 0.41
re-training the model. Specifically, w/ SO(3) jumps + flow (ours)                0.47    0.4     0.59 0.40
we derive a novel solution Lzt to
the KFE on S = SO(3) with a Table 3: Protein generation results. Diversity (Div) is the share of unique
jump model (app. G.1). We then proteins passing a quality check called designability, Novelty (Nov) is
use proposition 4 to make it multi- the average inverse similarity of each protein passing designability.
dimensional and combine it with a
flow model on Rd and a discrete Markov model on {1, . . . , n}d for n = 20 (# amino acids), i.e. the state
space becomes S = Rd × SO(3)d × {1, . . . , 20}d . Using the pre-trained MultiFlow without any fine-tuning,
we “pseudo-marginalize” the conditional jumps by predicting x1 ∈ SE(3) and then taking a conditional step
with Lzt . In fig. 3, we can see examples of generated proteins. We benchmark our results following Yim
et al. (2023a). Table 3 shows our results of incorporating jumps with MultiFlow compared to baselines. In
multimodal setting, both sequence and structure state spaces are sampled jointly while in the unimodal setting
only the structure is sampled. We see that including a jump model results in state-of-the-art performance
while greatly increases the diversity metric. See App. G.4 for more results and experiment details.
Additional small-scale experiments. We include a systematic study of the design space of GM on toy data
in app. E. In app. I, we show that new Bregman divergences can improve existing flow and diffusion models.

10    D ISCUSSION
We introduced Generator Matching, a general framework for scalable generative modeling on arbitrary state
spaces via Markov generators. The generator abstraction offers key insights into the fundamental equations
governing Markov generative models: Generators are linear operators, the KFE is a linear equation, and
Bregman divergences are linear in the training target. Therefore, any minimization we do conditionally on a
data point, implicitly minimizes the training target marginalized across a distribution of data points. These
principles allowed us to unify a diversity of prior generative modeling methods such as diffusion models,
flow matching, or discrete diffusion models. Further, we could universally characterize the space of Markov
models and loss functions. GM allows us to combine generative models of different classes on the same state
space (Markov superpositions) and to easily build multimodal generative models. Future work could further
explore the design space of GM. For example, we showed how one can learn a diffusion coefficient σt of a
diffusion model. In addition, jump models on Euclidean space offer a large class of models that we could
only study here in its simple instances. In addition, future work can explore better samplers or distillation. To
conclude, Generator Matching provides both a rigorous theoretical foundation and opens up a large practical
design space to advance generative modeling across a diverse range of applications.

                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
P.H. would like to thank Yann Ollivier for his insightful comments and for sharing his mathematical expertise
throughout the project. Further, P.H. would like to thank Andreas Eberle for mathematical support and advice
as well as for sharing excellent teaching materials for Markov process theory. Further, we would like to
thank Maurice Weiler, Ishaan Chandratreya, Alexander Sauer, and Krunoslav Lehman Pavasovic for extensive
feedback on early drafts of the work. We also thank Anuroop Sriram and Daniel Severo for feedback and help
along the way. Finally, we would like to thank Heli Ben-Hamu for sharing code to implement Mises-Fisher
distributions.

R EFERENCES
Michael S Albergo and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Building normalizing flows with stochastic interpolants. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2209.15571, 2022.
Michael S Albergo, Nicholas M Boffi, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Stochastic interpolants: A unifying
 framework for flows and diffusions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08797, 2023.
Luigi Ambrosio. Transport equation and cauchy problem forbvvector fields. Inventiones mathematicae, 158
  (2), 2004.
Namrata Anand and Tudor Achim. Protein structure and sequence generation with equivariant denoising
  diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15019, 2022.
Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Applications,
  12(3):313–326, 1982.
Joe Benton, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Error bounds for flow matching methods. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16860, 2023.
Joe Benton, Yuyang Shi, Valentin De Bortoli, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. From denoising
  diffusions to denoising markov models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical
  Methodology, 86(2):286–301, 2024.
Helen M Berman, John Westbrook, Zukang Feng, Gary Gilliland, Talapady N Bhat, Helge Weissig, Ilya N
  Shindyalov, and Philip E Bourne. The protein data bank. Nucleic acids research, 28(1):235–242, 2000.
Andrea Bertazzi, Alain Oliviero-Durmus, Dario Shariatian, Umut Simsekli, and Eric Moulines. Piecewise
  deterministic generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19448, 2024.
Vladimir I Bogachev, Nicolai V Krylov, Michael Röckner, and Stanislav V Shaposhnikov. Fokker–
  Planck–Kolmogorov Equations, volume 207. American Mathematical Society, 2022.
Avishek Joey Bose, Tara Akhound-Sadegh, Guillaume Huguet, Kilian Fatras, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Cheng-
  Hao Liu, Andrei Cristian Nica, Maksym Korablyov, Michael Bronstein, and Alexander Tong. Se (3)-
  stochastic flow matching for protein backbone generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02391, 2023.
Andrew Campbell, Joe Benton, Valentin De Bortoli, Thomas Rainforth, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud
  Doucet. A continuous time framework for discrete denoising models. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 35:28266–28279, 2022.
Andrew Campbell, William Harvey, Christian Weilbach, Valentin De Bortoli, Thomas Rainforth, and
 Arnaud Doucet. Trans-dimensional generative modeling via jump diffusion models. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrew Campbell, Jason Yim, Regina Barzilay, Tom Rainforth, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generative flows on
  discrete state-spaces: Enabling multimodal flows with applications to protein co-design. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.04997, 2024b.
Ricky T. Q. Chen and Yaron Lipman. Flow matching on general geometries. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential
  equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Alexander E Chu, Jinho Kim, Lucy Cheng, Gina El Nesr, Minkai Xu, Richard W Shuai, and Po-Ssu
  Huang. An all-atom protein generative model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(27):
  e2311500121, 2024.
Philippe Courrege. Sur la forme intégro-différentielle des opérateurs de c∞
                                                                          k dans c satisfaisant au principe du
  maximum. Séminaire Brelot-Choquet-Deny. Théorie du Potentiel, 10(1):1–38, 1965.
Mark HA Davis. Piecewise-deterministic markov processes: A general class of non-diffusion stochastic
 models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 46(3):353–376, 1984.
Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Michael Hutchinson, James Thornton, Yee Whye Teh, and Arnaud
  Doucet. Riemannian score-based generative modelling. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:2406–2422, 2022.
Pierre Del Moral and Spiridon Penev. Stochastic Processes: From Applications to Theory. Chapman and
  Hall/CRC, 2017.
Ronald J DiPerna and Pierre-Louis Lions. Ordinary differential equations, transport theory and sobolev
  spaces. Inventiones mathematicae, 98(3):511–547, 1989.
Kenneth David Elworthy. Stochastic differential equations on manifolds. Springer, 1998.
Stewart N Ethier and Thomas G Kurtz. Markov processes: characterization and convergence. John Wiley &
  Sons, 2009.
William Feller. On second order differential operators. Annals of Mathematics, 61(1):90–105, 1955.
Alessio Figalli. Existence and uniqueness of martingale solutions for sdes with rough or degenerate coeffi-
  cients. Journal of Functional Analysis, 254(1):109–153, 2008.
Itai Gat, Tal Remez, Neta Shaul, Felix Kreuk, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Yaron
   Lipman. Discrete flow matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15595, 2024.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
  Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 27, 2014.
Alex Herbert and MJE Sternberg. MaxCluster: a tool for protein structure comparison and clustering. 2008.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Chin-Wei Huang, Milad Aghajohari, Joey Bose, Prakash Panangaden, and Aaron C Courville. Riemannian
  diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:2750–2761, 2022.
Jürgen Jost and Jeurgen Jost. Riemannian geometry and geometric analysis, volume 42005. Springer, 2008.

                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based
  generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26565–26577, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Thomas G Kurtz. Equivalence of stochastic equations and martingale problems. Stochastic analysis 2010, pp.
  113–130, 2011.
Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for
  generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.
Sidney Lyayuga Lisanza, Jake Merle Gershon, Sam Tipps, Lucas Arnoldt, Samuel Hendel, Jeremiah Nelson
  Sims, Xinting Li, and David Baker. Joint generation of protein sequence and structure with rosettafold
  sequence space diffusion. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–05, 2023.
Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data
  with rectified flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003, 2022.
Aaron Lou and Stefano Ermon. Reflected diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 22675–22701. PMLR, 2023.
Aaron Lou, Minkai Xu, Adam Farris, and Stefano Ermon. Scaling riemannian diffusion models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:80291–80305, 2023.
Aaron Lou, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Discrete diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the
  data distribution. stat, 1050:21, 2024a.
Aaron Lou, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Discrete diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the
  data distribution. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b.
Bálint Máté and François Fleuret. Learning interpolations between boltzmann densities. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.07388, 2023.
Bernt Oksendal. Stochastic differential equations: an introduction with applications. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2013.
Manfred Opper and Guido Sanguinetti. Variational inference for markov jump processes. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Amnon Pazy. Semigroups of linear operators and applications to partial differential equations, volume 44.
 Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Andrey Pilipenko. An introduction to stochastic differential equations with reflection, volume 1. Univer-
  sitätsverlag Potsdam, 2014.
Aram-Alexandre Pooladian, Heli Ben-Hamu, Carles Domingo-Enrich, Brandon Amos, Yaron Lipman, and
  Ricky T. Q. Chen. Multisample flow matching: Straightening flows with minibatch couplings. International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Gareth O Roberts and Richard L Tweedie. Exponential convergence of langevin distributions and their
  discrete approximations. Bernoulli 2(4): 341-363 (December 1996), 1996.
Leonard CG Rogers and David Williams. Diffusions, markov processes, and martingales: Volume 1,
  foundations. Cambridge university press, 2000.

                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ludger Rüschendorf, Alexander Schnurr, and Viktor Wolf. Comparison of time-inhomogeneous markov
  processes. Advances in Applied Probability, 48(4):1015–1044, 2016.
Javier E Santos, Zachary R Fox, Nicholas Lubbers, and Yen Ting Lin. Blackout diffusion: generative diffusion
  models in discrete-state spaces. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9034–9059. PMLR,
  2023.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning
  using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2256–2265.
  PMLR, 2015.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Alexander Tong, Nikolay Malkin, Guillaume Huguet, Yanlei Zhang, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Kilian Fatras,
  Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Improving and generalizing flow-based generative models with minibatch
  optimal transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00482, 2023.
Michel Van Kempen, Stephanie S Kim, Charlotte Tumescheit, Milot Mirdita, Jeongjae Lee, Cameron LM
 Gilchrist, Johannes Söding, and Martin Steinegger. Fast and accurate protein structure search with foldseek.
 Nature biotechnology, 42(2):243–246, 2024.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural computation, 23
  (7):1661–1674, 2011.
Wilhelm von Waldenfels. Fast positive operatoren. Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verwandte
 Gebiete, 4:159–174, 1965.
Joseph L Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R Bennett, Brian L Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E Eisenach, Woody
  Ahern, Andrew J Borst, Robert J Ragotte, Lukas F Milles, et al. De novo design of protein structure and
  function with rfdiffusion. Nature, 620(7976):1089–1100, 2023.
Jinrui Xu and Yang Zhang. How significant is a protein structure similarity with tm-score= 0.5? Bioinformatics,
   26(7):889–895, 2010.
Jason Yim, Andrew Campbell, Andrew YK Foong, Michael Gastegger, José Jiménez-Luna, Sarah Lewis,
  Victor Garcia Satorras, Bastiaan S Veeling, Regina Barzilay, Tommi Jaakkola, et al. Fast protein backbone
  generation with se (3) flow matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05297, 2023a.
Jason Yim, Brian L Trippe, Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Arnaud Doucet, Regina Barzilay, and
  Tommi Jaakkola. Se (3) diffusion model with application to protein backbone generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.02277, 2023b.
Jason Yim, Andrew Campbell, Emile Mathieu, Andrew YK Foong, Michael Gastegger, José Jiménez-Luna,
  Sarah Lewis, Victor Garcia Satorras, Bastiaan S Veeling, Frank Noé, et al. Improved motif-scaffolding
  with se (3) flow matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04082, 2024.
Eun Bi Yoon, Keehun Park, Sungwoong Kim, and Sungbin Lim. Score-based generative models with lévy
  processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:40694–40707, 2023.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Figure 4: . Examples of generated images on CIFAR10 (top) and ImageNet32 (bottom).


Figure 3: Examples of generated proteins with SO(3) jumps model and MultiFlow. Each protein passes the
designability filter check and is structurally unique.


Algorithm 1 Generator Matching                          Algorithm 2 Euler sampling for S = Rd
recipe for constructing Markov gen-                     Given: ut , σt , Qt , psimple , step size h > 0
erative model (theory in black, imple-                  Init: X0 ∼ psimple
mentation in brown)
                                                         1: for t in linspace(0, 1, 1/h) doR
Step 0: Choose prior psimple                             2:     Jump intensity λt (Xt ) = Qt (dy; Xt )
Step 1: Choose pt (dx|z) such that
                                                         3:     X̄t+h ∼ Qt (·; Xt )/λt (Xt )
marginal p0 = psimple and p1 = pdata
                                                         4:     m ∼ Bernoulli(hλt (Xt )), √      t ∼ N (0, 1)
Step 2: Find solution Lzt to KFE
Step 3: Choose Bregman div. as loss                      5:     X̃t+h = Xt + hut (Xt ) + hσt (Xt ) t
Step 4: Construct neural net Lθt                         6:     Xt+h = mX̄t+h + (1 − m)X̃t+h
Step 5: Minimize CGM loss using Lzt                      7: end for
Step 6: Sample using Algorithm 2.                       Return: X1



                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     OVERVIEW OF M ARKOV P ROCESSES AND THEIR GENERATORS
A.1     S ETUP AND D EFINITIONS

State space. Throughout this work, we assume (S, d) is a Polish metric space, i.e., S is a set and there is a
metric d : S × S → R≥0 defined on S such that (S, d) is complete (i.e., any Cauchy sequence converges)
and separable (i.e., it has a countable dense subset). We endow S with its Borel σ-algebra B(S) and consider
a set A ⊂ S as measurable if A ∈ B(S). Any function f : S → R considered in this work is assumed to
be measurable. Throughout this work, we assume that T is a set of functions f : S → R on S such two
probability measures µ1 , µ2 are equal if and only if Ex∼µ1 [f (x)] = Ex∼µ2 [f (x)] for all f ∈ T . We call
elements in T test functions. Throughout this work, ν denote a reference measure on S (e.g. the Lebesgue
                                                                         dp
measure on Rd or the count measure on discrete spaces). We write dν         (x) for a density of a probability
measure p with respect to the reference measure ν.
Markov process. Let (Ω, F, P) be a probability space. A Markov process (Xt )0≤t≤1 is a collection of
integrable random variables Xt : Ω → S such that
            Markov assumption: P[Xtn+1 ∈ A|Xt1 , Xt2 , . . . , Xtn ] = P[Xtn+1 ∈ A|Xtn ]                 (18)
                                   for all 0 ≤ t1 < t2 < · · · < tn < tn+1 ≤ 1, A ⊆ S measurable         (19)
We denote by kt+h|t (A|x) = E[Xt+h ∈ A|Xt = x] the transition kernel of Xt .

Semigroup. We define the action of marginals pt and of transition kernels kt+h|t on test functions f as in
the main paper via:
                            Z
                 hpt , f i = f (y)pt (dy) = E [f (Xt )]                      I marginal action        (20)
                            Z
         kt+h|t , f (x) = f (y)kt+h|t (dy|x) = E [f (Xt+h )|Xt = x]          I transition action      (21)

where the marginal action maps each test function f to a scalar hpt , f i ∈ R, while transition action maps a
real-valued function x 7→ f (x) to a another real-valued function x 7→ [ kt+h|t , f ](x). The tower property
implies that pt kt+h|t , f = hpt+h , f i. Considering kt+h|t as a linear operator as above, we know by the
Markov assumption and the tower property that there are two fundamental properties that hold:
               kt|t =Id,       ps|u , f = pt|u , ps|t , f   ,   0≤u<t<s≤1            I composition       (22)
      k ps|t , f k∞ ≤kf k∞ ,      0≤t<s≤1                                            I contraction       (23)
where k · k∞ describes the supremum norm.

A.1.1    D EFINITIONS FOR TIME - HOMOGENEOUS M ARKOV PROCESSES
A complication in the theory we develop here is that we (need to) consider time-inhomogeneous Markov
processes, while most of the mathematical theory and literature resolves around time-homogeneous Markov
processes. Therefore, we first give the definitions for time-homogeneous Markov processes and then explain
how this can be translated to the time-inhomogeneous case.
A time-homogeneous Markov process is a Markov process X̄t such that kt+h|t = kh|0 for all t, h ≥ 0 - i.e.
the evolution is constant in time. This implies the semigroup property
                                        kt|0 = Id,    ks|0 ◦ kt|0 = ks+t|0                               (24)
Let C0 (S) be the space of continuous functions f : S → R that vanish at infinity, i.e. for all   > 0 there
exists a compact set K ⊂ S such that |f (x)| <   for all x ∈ S \ K.

                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Feller process. We call X̄t a Feller process if it holds that
      1. Operators on continuous functions: For any f ∈ C0 (S) and t ≥ 0, also kt|0 f ∈ C0 (S).
      2. Strong continuity: For any f ∈ C0 (S):
                                                   lim kkt|0 f − f k∞ = 0                                (25)
                                                   t↓0


Generator. We define the generator L of a Feller process X̄t as follows: for any f ∈ C0 (S) such that the
limit
                                                   kt|0 f − f
                                              lim             → Lf                                        (26)
                                               t↓0       t
exists uniformly in S (i.e., in k · k∞ ) and we define Lf as the limit above. We define the core D(L) as all f
for which that limit exists. It holds that D(L) is a dense subspace of C0 (S) (Pazy, 2012) and L is a linear
operator.

A.1.2   D EFINITIONS FOR TIME - INHOMOGENEOUS M ARKOV PROCESSES
For a general time-inhomogeneous Markov process Xt , one can extend the definitions to a two-parameter
semigroup, see (Rüschendorf et al., 2016) for example. Another approach is to simply consider the corre-
sponding time-homogeneous Markov process X̄t = (Xt , t) on extended state space S × [0, 1]. The transition
kernel on extended state space is then given for A ⊂ S × [0, 1] via:
                     p̄h|0 (A, (x, t)) = kt+h|t (At+h |x),   At+h := {y|(y, t + h) ∈ A}                  (27)
and the action is given via
                                  p̄h|0 f (x, t) = E[f (Xt+h , t + h)|Xt = x]                            (28)

Feller process. The Feller assumption is equivalent to:
      1. Operators on continuous functions: For any f ∈ C0 (S × [0, 1]) and t ≥ 0, also kt|0 f ∈
         C0 (S × [0, 1]).
      2. Strong continuity: For any f ∈ C0 (S × [0, 1]):
                                                   lim kkt|0 f − f k∞ = 0                                (29)
                                                   t↓0

         where here the supremum norm k · k∞ is taken across S and time [0, 1].

Time-dependent generator. In the above case, we can reshape the generator via
                      E[f (Xt+h , t + h) − f (Xt , t)|Xt = x]
      Lf (x, t) = lim                                                                                    (30)
                  h→0                    h
                      E[f (Xt+h , t + h) − f (Xt , t + h) + f (Xt , t + h) − f (Xt , t)|Xt = x]
                = lim                                                                                    (31)
                  h→0                                     h

                        E[f (Xt+h , t + h) − f (Xt , t + h)|Xt = x             f (x, t + h) − f (x, t)
                = lim                                                  + lim                             (32)
                  h→0                        h                           h→0              h

                        E[f (Xt+h , t + h) − f (Xt , t + h)|Xt = x]
                = lim                                                   +∂t f (x, t)                     (33)
                  h→0                        h
                  |                       {z                          }
                                           =:Lt f t (x)
                        t
                 =Lt f (x) + ∂t f (x, t)                                                                 (34)


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where f t : S → R, x 7→ f (x, t) describes the restriction of f on S and we defined the time-dependent
generator Lt as an operator acting on spatial components, i.e. functions in C0 (S), via
                                                    E[g(Xt+h ) − g(Xt )|Xt = x]
                                 Lt g(x) := lim                                                                (35)
                                              h→0                h
for any g : S → R such that the limit exists. Note that however that when we define the time-dependent
generator Lt f , we also need to specify the direction operator ∂t (i.e. in what direction of time it goes). This is
always implicitly assumed. Further, we remark that in the above derivation, we have assumed that t 7→ Lt f t
is continuous (in supremum norm) in t for any function in the domain of Lt . We will state this now again.

A.2    R EGULARITY A SSUMPTIONS .

Throughout this work, we make the following regularity assumptions:

      1. Assumption on semigroup: The Markov process Xt is a Feller process in the sense defined in
         app. A.1.2.
      2. Assumption on sample paths: In every time interval [s, t], the expected number of discontinuities
         of t 7→ Xt is finite.
      3. Assumptions on test functions: There exists a subspace of test functions T that is dense in
         C0 (S) such that T ⊂ dom(Lt ) and the function t 7→ Lt f is continuous for any f ∈ T . Further,
         two probability distributions µ1 , µ2 on S are equal if and only if for all f ∈ T it holds that
         Ex∼µ1 [f (x)] = Ex∼µ2 [f (x)].
      4. Assumptions on probability path: Any probability path (pt )0≤t≤1 considered fulfils that the
         function t 7→ hpt , f i is continuous in t for all f ∈ T .
      5. KFE is sufficient to check probability path: Let (pt )0≤t≤1 be a probability path on S. Then:
                           X0 ∼p0                                    (start with right initial distribution)   (36)
                   ∂t hpt , f i = hpt , Lt f i for all f ∈ T         (fulfill KFE)                             (37)
                       ⇒ Xt ∼pt for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1                    (marginals of Xt are given by pt )        (38)
         i.e. if Xt is initialized with the right initial distribution, its marginals will be given by pt .

Remark regarding assumption 5. We note that assumption 5 is true under relatively weak assumptions
and there is a diversity of mathematical literature on showing uniqueness of the solution of the KFE in pt
for different settings. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no known result that states regularity
assumptions for general state spaces and Markov processes, which is why simply state it here as an assumption.
For the machine learning practitioner, this assumption holds for any state space of interest. To illustrate
this, we point the rich sources in the mathematical literature that show uniqueness that list the regularity
assumptions for specific spaces and classes of Markov processes:

      1. Flows in Rd and manifolds: (Villani et al., 2009, Mass conservation formula, page 15), (DiPerna &
         Lions, 1989), (Ambrosio, 2004)
      2. Diffusion in Rd and manifolds: (Villani et al., 2009, Diffusion theorem, page 16)
      3. General Ito-SDEs in Rd : (Figalli, 2008, Theorem 1.3 and 1.4), (Kurtz, 2011, Corollary 1.3),
         (Bogachev et al., 2022)
      4. Discrete state spaces: Here, the KFE is a linear ODE, which has a unique solution under the
         assumption that the coefficients are continuous.

                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark regarding assumption 1. In order for a generator of a Markov process to be defined, property 2 in
the definition of a Feller process must hold (see section A.1.2). Property 1 in the definition of a Feller process
(see section A.1.2), might not be stricly necessary. However, we use it because (i) most of the mathematical
literature (including the one we cite) uses it and (ii) any function on a computer is defined on a compact set.

Motivation for assumption 2. Our framework would not break necessarily if we allowed for infinite number
of discontinuities. We included this assumption because simulating an infinite number of discontinuities with
a finite number of simulation steps would necessarily induce uncontrollable simulation error upon sampling
and therefore most likely be not interesting for the purposes of generative modeling.

Motivation for assumption 4. As every probability path generated by a Feller process fulfils this assumption,
it is reasonable to only consider probability paths that have that property as well.

A.3    A DOINT KFE

The version of the KFE in eq. (11) determines the evolution of expectations of test functions f . This is
necessary if we use probability distributions that do not have a density. If a density exists, a more familiar
version of the KFE can be used that directly prescribe the change of the probability densities. To present it,
we introduce the adjoint generator L∗t , which acts on probability densities dp  dν (x) with respect to a reference
                                                                                   t

                       ∗
measure ν, namely [Lt pt ](x) is implicitly defined by the identity

                                 dpt                     dpt
                                     , Lt f     = L∗t         ,f     ,                      ∀f ∈ T             (39)
                                 dν           ν           dν       ν
                    Z                              Z
                       dpt                                 dpt
              ⇔            (x)Lt f (x)ν(dx) = L∗t               (x)f (x)ν(dx)               ∀f ∈ T             (40)
                        dν                                 dν
Now, equation 39 applied to the KFE (equation 11) we get
                                               Z
                                                     dpt
                                                  ∂t      (x)f (x)ν(dx)                                        (41)
                                                      dν
                                                 Z
                                                     dpt
                                            =∂t           (x)f (x)ν(dx)                                        (42)
                                                      dν
                                            =∂t hpt , f i                                                      (43)
                                            = hpt , Lt f i                                                     (44)

                                                 dpt
                                            =         , Lt f                                                   (45)
                                                 dν            ν

                                                     dpt
                                            = L∗t        ,f                                                    (46)
                                                     dν        ν
                                               Z
                                                       dpt
                                            = [L∗t         ](x)f (x)ν(dx)                                      (47)
                                                       dν
where "v(dx)" denotes the integration with respect to the reference measure ν on S. As this holds for all test
functions f , we can conclude that this is equivalent to
                            dpt              dpt
                         ∂t     (x) = [L∗t       ](x) for all x ∈ S        I Adjoint KFE                       (48)
                            dν               dν
which is an equivalent version of the KFE that we call adjoint KFE. In this form, the KFE generalizes many
famous equations used to develop generative models such as the Continuity Equation or the Fokker-Planck
Equation (Song et al., 2020; Lipman et al., 2022) (see table 1). Whenever a probability density exists, we use
the adjoint KFE. We will derive several examples of adjoint generators and adjoint KFEs in app. A.5.

                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4    T IME - REVERSAL

In diffusion models (Song et al., 2020), the notion of a time-reversal of a diffusion process plays a crucial
role in the construction of the generative model. We discuss here the idea of time-reversal of a stochastic
process and explain why we build our framework based on probability paths and solutions to the Kolmogorov
Forward Equation (KFE) and how this includes the diffusion construction.

Probability paths vs noising/forward process. In the context of diffusion models, one usually corrupts (or
"noises") data via a "forward process". With our time parameterization (where t = 1 corresponds to data),
this is represented by a Markov process (X̄t )0≤t≤1 running backwards in time. Every such Markov process
also defines a conditional probability path pt (·|z) = k̄t|1 (·|z) via its transition kernel k̄ and the marginal
probability pt corresponds to the marginals, i.e. Xt ∼ pt . Therefore, diffusion models specify a probability
path via the forward process/data corruption process. We use probability path as opposed to a noising
process because (1) it is often easier to define a probability path as opposed to a full transition kernel (2) it is
the only thing that is used during training (only the marginals of the probability path are used during training,
see eq. (17) - this includes diffusion model training as a special example). Further, we show in this work
how one probability path can have different Markov processes that generate the same probability path (see
fig. 2 for examples). However, an explicit data corruption process via a Markov process can be still a useful
heuristic to find good probability paths.

The notion of the time-reversal by Anderson (1982) is stronger than the one needed for generative
modeling. To explain this, we briefly define two notions of time-reversals. Let (Xt )0≤t≤1 be a Markov
process running in forward time and (X̄t )0≤t≤1 a Markov process running in backward time. The Markov
process Xt is called a time-reversal of X̄t if the joint distributions coincide, i.e. if
                          P[Xt1 ∈ A1 , . . . , Xtn ∈ An ] = P[X̄t1 ∈ A1 , . . . , X̄tn ∈ An ]                (49)
                                for all 0 ≤ t1 , . . . , tn ≤ 1, A1 , . . . , An ⊂ S measurable              (50)
A famous example is the time-reversal of stochastic differential equations by Anderson (1982). Next, we
introduce here the notion of a weak time-reversal. We call Xt a weak time-reversal of X̄t if the marginals
coincide, i.e. if
                          P[Xt ∈ A] = P[X̄t ∈ A] for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, A ⊂ S measurable                         (51)
Obviously, any strong time-reversal gives us a weak time-reversal but not vice versa necessarily. For the
purposes of generative modeling, we often only use the final point X1 of the Markov process (e.g. as a
generated image) and discard earlier time points. Therefore, whether a Markov process is a "true" time-
reversal or weak time-reversal does not matter for most applications. A famous example of a weak time
reversal that is not a "strong" time-reversal is the probability flow ODE in diffusion models (Song et al, 2020).
The probability flow ODE does not constitute a time-reversal of a diffusion process in the sense of Anderson
(1982) but it constitutes a weak time-reversal (i.e. it has the same marginals). As the probability flow ODE
is currently the state-of-the-art method for low NFEs, it illustrates that finding "true" time-reversals is a
harder mathematical problem to solve but (often) not necessary to solve for the purposes of generative
modeling and might give suboptimal results. Therefore, we restrict ourselves to weak time-reversals in this
work.

Using the KFE to find weak time-reversals. Let (X̄t )0≤t≤1 be a Markov process running in backward
time. How can we find or check whether a Markov process (Xt )0≤t≤1 running in forward time is a weak time
reversal of (X̄t )0≤t≤1 ? Let (pt )0≤t≤1 be the marginals of X̄t , then pt defines a probability path. Further, by
definition (Xt )0≤t≤1 is a weak time reversal of (X̄t )0≤t≤1 if and only if Xt generates the probability path
(pt )0≤t≤1 . By the KFE (see eq. (11)), this holds if and only if X0 ∼ p0 and
                       hpt , Lt f i =∂t hpt , f i = − pt , L̄t f   for all f ∈ T , 0 ≤ t ≤ 1                   (52)


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where in the second equation we use the KFE in reverse-time (we have to flip signs as time is running
backwards). Therefore, finding a time-reversal reduces to finding a generator Lt such that
                             hpt , Lt f i = − pt , L̄t f  for all f ∈ T , 0 ≤ t ≤ 1                         (53)
This allows us to find weak time-reversal for many Markov processes. We illustrate this in app. H.2 on the
example of diffusion processes. However, actual time-reversals like the one by Anderson (1982) can still
be helpful for our purposes as a way to find a solution to the KFE. If pt is a probability path given by the
marginals of a Markov a process X̄t , its strong time-reversal is also a weak time-reversal - so we can use it to
find a solution to the KFE. Therefore, finding time-reversals can of Markov processes can be a tool to find
solutions to the KFE. We avoid using time-reversal as it imposes additional mathematical complexity that is
not needed for the vanilla generative modeling task.

A.5     P ROPERTIES OF IMPORTANT M ARKOV PROCESSES ( DERIVATIONS FOR TABLE 1)

In this section, we include the definition of important classes of Markov processes and their properties
including their generators.

A.5.1    F LOWS
Definition. Let S = Rd and u : Rd × R → Rd , (x, t) 7→ ut (x) be a time-dependent vector field. Then a
flow φt,s (x) is the solution to the ODE:
                                    d
                                       φt,s (x) = ut (φt,s (x), t), φs,s (x) = x                                 (54)
                                    dt
It is clear that φt,s is a deterministic Markov transition kernel pt|s , i.e. pt|s (·; x) is a delta distribution for
every x ∈ Rd . Euler sampling of the ODE corresponds to
                                          Xt+h = Xt + hut (Xt ) + o(h)                                           (55)

Generator. Let T = Cc∞ (Rd ) be the space of infinitely differentiable and smooth functions with compact
support (test function in Rd ). Then we can compute the generator via
                                        E [f (Xt + hut (Xt ) + o(h))|Xt = x] − f (x)
                       [Lt f ](x) = lim                                                                  (56)
                                    h→0                       h
                                        h∇f (x)T ut (x) + o(h)
                                  = lim                         = ∇f (x)T ut (x),                        (57)
                                    h→0           h
where we used a first-order Taylor approximation and the limit is uniform by the fact that f is in Cc∞ (Rd ).

Adjoint and adjoint KFE. Let’s assume that pt has a density dp   dν (x) with respect to the Lebesgue measure
                                                                   t


that is bounded and continuously differentiable. In the following paragraph, we write pt (x) = dpdν (x) for its
                                                                                                   t

                                                        ∗
density. Then we can compute the adjoint generator Lt via
                                hpt , Lt f i =Ex∼pt [Lt f (x)]                                            (58)
                                              Z
                                             = Lt f (x)pt (x)dx                                           (59)
                                              Z
                                             = ∇f (x)T ut (x)pt (x)dx                                     (60)
                                              Z
                                             = f (x)[−∇ · [ut (x)pt (x)]]dx                               (61)
                                              Z
                                             = f (x)[L∗t pt ](x)dx                                        (62)


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by partial integration. Therefore, the adjoint generator is given by L∗t pt = −∇ · [ut (x)pt (x)]. Using the
adjoint KFE, we get the well-known continuity equation
                                          ∂t pt (x) = −∇ · [ut pt ](x)                                    (63)

A.5.2   D IFFUSION
Definition. Let S = Rd and σt : Rd × R → Rd×d , (x, t) 7→ σt (x) be a time-dependent function mapping
to symmetric positive semi-definite matrices σt in a continuous fashion. A diffusion process with diffusion
coefficient σt is defined via the infinitesimal sampling procedure:
                                                         √
                                           Xt+h = Xt + hσt (Xt ) t                                     (64)
where  t ∼ N (0, I). For a more formal definition, see (Oksendal, 2013).

Generator. Let T = Cc∞ (Rd ) be the space of infinitely differentiable and smooth functions with compact
support (test function in Rd ). Then we can compute the generator via
                              h          √                             i
                            E f (Xt + hσt (Xt ) t + o(h))|Xt = x − f (x)
           [Lt f ](x) = lim                                                                             (65)
                        h→0                           h
                                                √
                            E[f (x) + ∇f (x)T hσt (x) t + 12 h[σt (x) t ]T ∇2 f (x)[σt (x) t ] − f (x)]
                      = lim                                                                             (66)
                        h→0                                     h
                                     √
                            ∇f (x)T hσt (x)E[ t ] + E[ 12 h[σt (x) t ]T ∇2 f (x)[σt (x) t ]]
                      = lim                                                                             (67)
                        h→0                                  h
                        1
                      = E[ Tt [σt (x)]T ∇2 f (x)[σt (x)] t ]]                                           (68)
                        2
                        1
                      = Trace σt (x)T ∇2 f (x)σt (x)

                                                                                                        (69)
                        2
                        1
                      = Trace[σt (x)σt (x)T ∇2 f (x)]                                                   (70)
                        2
                        1
                      = σt2 (x) · ∇2 f (x)                                                              (71)
                        2
                                                                             √
where we used a 2nd order Taylor approximation (2nd order because E[k h t k2 ] ∝ h) and the symmetry of
σt2 . Further, we use A · B = trace(AB) to denote the matrix inner product.

Adjoint and adjoint KFE. Let’s assume that pt has a density dp   dν (x) with respect to the Lebesgue measure
                                                                   t


that is bounded and continuously differentiable. In the following paragraph, we write pt (x) = dpdν (x) for its
                                                                                                   t

                                                  ∗
density. We can compute the adjoint generator Lt via
                                  hpt , Lt f i =Ex∼pt [Lt f (x)]                                          (72)
                                                 Z
                                               = Lt f (x)pt (x)dx                                         (73)
                                                   Z
                                                 1
                                               =     σt2 (x) · ∇2 f (x)pt (x)dx                           (74)
                                                 2
                                                   Z
                                                 1
                                               =     f (x)∇2 · [σt2 pt ](x)dx                             (75)
                                                 2
                                                 Z
                                               = f (x)[L∗t pt ](x)dx                                      (76)


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by partial integration. Using the fact that this holds for all test functions, we can convert the KFE to the
adjoint KFE recovering the well-known Fokker-Planck equation
                                          ∂t pt (x) = ∇2 · [σt2 pt ](x)                                   (77)

A.5.3   J UMPS
Let us assume that we consider a jump process defined by a time-dependent kernel Qt (dy; x), i.e. for every
0 ≤ t ≤ 1 and every x ∈ S, Qt (dy; x) is a positive measure over S \ {x}. The idea of a jump process is that
the total volume assigned to S
                                                    Z
                                           λt (x) = Qt (dy; x)                                          (78)

gives the jump intensity, i.e. the infinitesimal likelihood of jumping. Further, if λt (x) > 0, we can assign a
jump distribution by normalizing Qt to a probability kernel
                                                          Qt (dy; x)
                                           Jt (dy; x) =                                                   (79)
                                                           λt (x)
The infinitesimal sampling procedure is as follows:

                                Xt              with probability 1 − hλt (Xt ) + o(h)
                     Xt+h =                                                                               (80)
                                ∼ Jt (dy; Xt ) with probability hλt (Xt ) + o(h)
We derive the generator here in an informal way. For a rigorous treatment of jump processes, see for example
(Davis, 1984). Up to o(h)-approximation error, the generator is then given by
                   E[f (Xt+h ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x]
    Lt f (x) = lim                                                                                        (81)
               h→0               h
                   E[f (Xt+h ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x, Jump in [t, t + h)]P[Jump in [t, t + h)]
             = lim                                                                                        (82)
               h→0                                  h
                     E[f (Xt+h ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x, No jump in [t, t + h)]P[No jump in [t, t + h)]
               + lim                                                                                      (83)
                 h→0
                     |                                    h
                                                          {z                                    }
                                                              =0
                   Ey∼Jt (dy;x) [f (y) − f (x)] hλt (x)
             = lim                                                                                        (84)
               h→0                   h
             =Ey∼Jt (dy;x) [f (y) − f (x)] λt (x)                                                         (85)
               Z
             = (f (y) − f (x))Qt (dy; x)                                                                  (86)

where we have used that if Xt does not jump in [t, t + h], then Xt+h = Xt .

Adjoint and adjoint KFE. Let’s assume that pt has a density dp   dν (x) with respect to the Lebesgue measure
                                                                   t


that is bounded and continuously differentiable. In the following paragraph, we write pt (x) = dpdν (x) for its
                                                                                                   t

density. Let’s assume that the jump measures Qt (dy; x) is given via a kernel Qt : S × S → R≥0 , (y, x) 7→
Qt (y; x) such that
                                 Z                    Z
                                   f (y)Qt (dy; x) = f (y)Qt (y; x)ν(dy)                                  (87)


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ν(dy) denotes the integration with respect to the reference measure ν on S. Then we can derive the
adjoint generator as follows:
                          Z Z
     hpt , Lt f i (x) =   (f (y) − f (x))Qt (y; x)ν(dy)pt (x)ν(dx)                                                      (88)
                      Z Z                                    Z Z
                    =     f (y)Qt (y; x)pt (x)ν(dy)ν(dx) −          f (x)Qt (y; x)pt (x)ν(dy)ν(dx)                      (89)
                      Z Z                                    Z Z
                    =     f (x)Qt (x; y)pt (y)ν(dy)ν(dx) −          f (x)Qt (y; x)pt (x)ν(dy)ν(dx)                      (90)
                      Z       Z
                    = f (x)      Qt (x; y)pt (y) − Qt (y; x)pt (x)ν(dy) ν(dx)                                           (91)
                             |                    {z                    }
                                                        =:L∗
                                                           t pt

                                                                                                                        (92)

where we have seen that L∗t describes the adjoint generator. With this, we get the jump continuity equation
as adjoint KFE
                                              Z
                                ∂t pt (x) =       Qt (x; y)pt (y) − Qt (y; x)pt (x) ν(dy)                               (93)
                                                  |     {z      } |       {z      }
                                                       inflow               =outflow



A.5.4   C ONTINUOUS - TIME M ARKOV CHAIN (CTMC)

Let us consider a continuous-time Markov chain Xt on a discrete space S with |S| < ∞. We define this to be
a jump process as defined in app. A.5.3. However, we can find a convenient parameterization for the jump
process. Specifically, we can convert integrals into sums and see that there is a jump kernel Qt ∈ RS×S
                                                                                                    ≥0 given
such that for all x ∈ S it holds that
                                   X                                    X
                      Lt f (x) =         [f (y) − f (x)]Qt (y; x) =           [f (y) − f (x)]Qt (y; x)                  (94)
                                   y∈S                                  y6=x

                                                                      P
A natural convention people follow is to set Qt (x; x) = −                  Qt (y; x). This gives us the rate of staying at x
                                                                     y6=x
(However, note that Qt (y; x) does not describe a kernel of a positive measure anymore.) With this constraint,
we get
                                                      X
                                         Lt f (x) =         f (y)Qt (y; x) = f T Qt                                     (95)
                                                      y∈S


where we consider f = (f (x))x∈S as a row vector. The adjoint is simply given by the adjoint multiplication
pt 7→ Qt pt and we get that the adjoint KFE is given by
                                                            X
                                              ∂t pt (x) =         Qt (x; y)pt (y)                                       (96)
                                                            y∈S



                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To sample the next time step given Xt = x, we get
                                  Qt (y;x)                     P
                           ∼ P Qt (y;x) with probability h
                                                                   Qt (y; x) + o(h)
                                y6=x                           y6=x
                  Xt+h =                                            P                                  (97)
                           x
                                           with probability 1 − h      Qt (y; x) + o(h)
                                                                             y6=x
                             
                             ∼ PQtQ(y;x)
                                                                      P
                                      (y;x)
                                        t
                                                 with probability h          Qt (y; x) + o(h)
                         =       y6=x                                 y6=x                             (98)
                           x              with probability 1 + hQt (x; x) + o(h)

                             y with probability hQt (y; x) + o(h) (for all y ∈ S)
                         =                                                                             (99)
                             x with probability 1 + hQt (x; x) + o(h)
                         ∼(I + hQt )(·; x)                                                            (100)
where we simply sample from the stochastic matrix I + hQt (a matrix whose columns sum to 1).

A.6   L INEAR PARAMETERIZATION OF GENERATORS

We describe here what we understand under a linear parameterization of a generator. This is the basis for
parameterizing a generator in a neural network that can be implemented in a computer. For simplicity, we
fix a t ∈ [0, 1]. As before, T be the space of test functions and B(S) be the space of bounded functions on
S. Then the space A(T ) := {L : T → B(S)|L is linear} of linear operators on T is itself again a vector
space. Let W ⊂ A(T ) be a subspace. Then a linear parameterization of W is given by 2 components: (1)
a convex closed set Ω ⊂ V that is a subset of a vector space with an inner product h·, ·iV and (2) a linear
operator K : T → C(S; V ) such that every Lt ∈ W can be written as
                                            Lt f (x) = hKf (x); Ft (x)iV                              (101)
for a continuous function Ft : S → Ω. We list several examples to make this abstract definition more
concrete.

      1. Flows in S = Rd : T = Cc∞ (Rd ) and Ω = V = Rd . Let W be the space of linear operators given
         via generators of flows, i.e.
                                              Lt f = ∇f T ut ,    ut : Rd → Rd                        (102)
         Setting Kf = ∇f and Ft = ut we recover the shape of eq. (101).
      2. Diffusion in S = Rd : T = Cc∞ (Rd ) and Ω = Sd++ ⊂ Rd×d = V , where Sd++ denotes the set of
         all positive semi-definite matrices. Let W is the space of linear operators given via generators of
         diffusion, i.e.
                                            Lt f = ∇2 f · σt2 ,   σt : Rd → Sd++                      (103)
         Setting Kf = ∇2 f and Ft = σt2 we recover the shape of eq. (101).
      3. Jumps in S = Rd : T = Cc∞ (Rd ) and Ω =R{a : Rd → R≥0 , a continuous} ⊂ C 1 (Rd , R) = V .
         On V , a dot product is defined via ha, biV = a(x)b(x)dx. Let W be the space of linear operators
         given via generators of jumps, i.e.
                                        Z
                            Lt f (x) = f (y) − f (x)Qt (y; x)dy = hDf (x), Qt (·; x)iV             (104)

         where we set Kf (x) as the function y 7→ f (y) − f (x). Setting Ft = Qt we recover the shape of
         eq. (101).

                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         4. Continuous-time Markov chains: Let S be discrete and Qt ∈ RS×S be a rate matrix of a
            continuous-time Markov chain. Then for any f ∈ RS
                                              Lt f (x) = f T Qt (·; x) = hf, Qt (·; x)iV                                (105)
            where V = RS and Df = f and h·, ·iV is the standard Euclidean dot product. With this, we recover
            the shape of eq. (101).

B       S AMPLING WITH UNIVERSAL REPRESENTATION ( ALG . 2)
In alg. 2, we summarize a sampling procedure to sample a generator for S = Rd with universal representation
described in theorem 1. We briefly want to derive that alg. 2 is in fact a method a sampling procedure that
simulates a Markov process with the correct generator up to o(h) approximation error. Let us assume that Xt
is a Markov process that is obtained by sampling as in alg. 2 (limit process for h → 0). Then its generator is
given via:
  Lt f (x)                                                                                              (106)
        1
= lim (E[f (Xt+h ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x])                                                                   (107)
   h→0 h
        E[f (Xt+h ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x, Jump in [t, t + h)]P[Jump in [t, t + h)]
= lim                                                                                                   (108)
   h→0                                    h
           E[f (Xt+h ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x, No jump in [t, t + h)]P[No jump in [t, t + h)]
   + lim                                                                                                (109)
     h→0
           |                                   h
                                               {z                                     }
                                                        =0
      Ey∼Qt (dy;x)/λt (x) [f (y) − f (x)]hλt (x)
= lim                                                                                               (110)
  h→0                      h
                                  √
        [E[f (Xt + hut (Xt ) + hσt (Xt ) t ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x, No jump in [t, t + h)]](1 − hλt (x))
  + lim
    h→0                                              h
                                                                                                    (111)
  Z
= (f (y) − f (x))Qt (dy; x)                                                                         (112)
                                  √
        E[f (Xt + hut (Xt ) + hσt (Xt ) t ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x, No jump in [t, t + h)]]
  + lim                                                                                             (113)
  Z
    h→0                                          h
=       (f (y) − f (x))Qt (dy; x)                                                                                       (114)
                                       √                                        √                                      √
              E[h∇f (x)T [ut (Xt ) +       hσt (Xt ) t )] + 12 h2 [ut (Xt ) +       hσt (Xt ) t )]T ∇2 f (x)[ut (Xt ) + hσt (Xt ) t )]]
    + lim
        h→0                                                               h
                                                                                                                        (115)
    Z
=       (f (y) − f (x))Qt (dy; x)                                                                                       (116)

                         E[ 1 [σt (Xt ) t )]T ∇2 f (x)[σt (Xt ) t )]]
 + ∇f (x)T ut (x) + lim 2                                                                                               (117)
 Z                  h→0                       h
                                                    1
= (f (y) − f (x))Qt (dy; x) + ∇f (x)T ut (x) + Trace σt (Xt )∇2 f (x)σt (Xt )

                                                                                                                        (118)
                                                    2
 Z
                                                    1
= (f (y) − f (x))Qt (dy; x) + ∇f (x)T ut (x) + σt2 (Xt ) · ∇2 f (x)                                                     (119)
                                                    2

                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This finishes the proof.

C     P ROOFS
C.1     P ROOF OF THEOREM 1

Let (Xt )0≤t≤1 be a continuous-time Markov process. For now, we assume that Xt is time-homogeneous. Let
L be the generator of Xt defined via
                                                  E[f (Xt+h ) − f (Xt )|Xt = x]
                                 Lf (x) = lim                                                                 (120)
                                            h→0                 h
We know that L has the following property:
                           f (x) = 0, f ≥ 0    ⇒      Lf (x) ≥ 0    (“almost positive”)                       (121)
An operator having the above property is called almost positive. The theory of almost positive operators is
well-established. Specifically, we can use universal representations of almost positive operators as established
in (von Waldenfels, 1965, Satz 1). Related theorems can be found in (Courrege, 1965) for characterizing
differential operators satisfying the absolute maximum principle (that is closely related to the almost positive
principle) and in weaker form for Markov processes (Feller, 1955). Here we use (von Waldenfels, 1965, Satz
1). Specifically, we know that L must have the form
                                                             1
                       Lf (x) = − c(x)f (x) + u(x)T ∇f (x) + σ 2 (x) · ∇2 f (x)                               (122)
                                   Z                         2
                                                        T

                                +      f (y) − f (x) − y ∇f (x)1ky−xk<1 Q(dy; x)                              (123)
                                    y6=x

where c(x) ≥ 0, u(x) ∈ Rd are continuous functions and σ 2 (x) is a positive semi-definite matrix continuous
in x. For every x, Q(dy; x) is a measure on Rd \ {x}. The term c(x) corresponds to a process that is “dying”.
As we assume that our process runs from t = 0 to t = 1, we can drop c(x). Further, using the assumption that
there only exists a finite number of discontinuities (see app.RA.2), we can discard the term y T ∇f (x)1ky−xk<1
(alternatively, one can redefine the drift to ū(x) = u(x) − y1ky−xk<1 Q(dy; x)). Therefore, we can rewrite
the above formula as:
                                                                  Z
                                             1
                    Lf =u(x)T ∇f (x) + σ 2 (x) · ∇2 f (x) +           (f (y) − f (x))Q(dy; x)              (124)
                                             2
                                                                 y6=x


C.1.1    T IME - INHOMOGENOUS CASE
Let (Xt )0≤t≤1 be a continuous-time Markov process. Now, we allow Xt to be time-inhomogenous. To
make it time-homogenous, we define X̄t = (Xt , t). Let L̄ be the generator of X̄t . Then for a test function
f : Rd × R → R we get
                                                                 Z
                                   1
     L̄f =ū(x, t)T ∇x,t f (x, t) + σ¯2 (x, t) · ∇2x,t f (x, t) + (f (y, s) − f (x, s))Q(dy, ds; x, t) (125)
                                   2
where ū, σ̄ 2 , Qt are operators over the extended space Rd × R, i.e. ū(x, t) = (ūx (x, t), ūt (x, t)) and

                                                     σ̄x,x (x, t) σ̄x,t (x, t)
                                        σ̄(x, t) =                                                             (126)
                                                     σ̄t,x (x, t) σ̄t,t (x, t)


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, note that since marginal process in t is deterministic and has derivative one, it must necessarily
hold (by uniqueness of the representation) that ūt (x, t) = 1 and σ̄ 2 (x, t)t,x = σ̄ 2 (x, t)x,t = σ̄ 2 (x, t)t,t = 0
and Q(·, ·; x, t) is supported over Rd × {t} - i.e. is a time-dependent kernel Qt (dy; x). Therefore, we can
rewrite the above equation as:
                                                                      Z
            ∂                                1
    L̄f = f (x, t) + ut (x)T ∇x f (x, t) + σt2 (x) · ∇2x f (x, t) + (f (y, t) − f (x, t))Qt (dy; x)               (127)
           ∂t                                2

Rewriting L̄ as a time-dependent generator Lt (see app. A.2), we get for a time-independent test function
f : Rd → R
                                                              Z
                             T           1 2        2
                 Lt f =ut (x) ∇x f (x) + σt (x) · ∇x f (x) + (f (y) − f (x))Qt (dy; x)              (128)
                                         2

This finishes the proof.

C.2    P ROOF OF PROPOSITION 1

Let kt+h|t (·|x, z) be the conditional transition kernel for the conditional Markov process Xtz with conditional
generator Lzt that solves the KFE for the conditional probability path pt (dx|z). Then we can compute for the
marginal probability path pt and a test function f that:

                             1
            ∂t hpt , f i = lim hpt+h , f i − hpt , f i                                                            (129)
                         h→0 h
                             1
                       = lim [Ez∼pdata ,x0 ∼pt+h (·|z) [f (x0 )] − Ez∼pdata ,x∼pt (·|z) [f (x)]]                  (130)
                         h→0 h
                             1
                       = lim [Ez∼pdata ,x∼pt (·|z),x0 ∼kt+h|t (·|x,z) [f (x0 )] − Ez∼pdata ,x∼pt (·|z) [f (x)]]   (131)
                         h→0 h
                             1
                       = lim [Ez∼pdata ,x∼pt (·|z),x0 ∼kt+h|t (·|x,z) [f (x0 ) − f (x)]]                          (132)
                         h→0 h
                             1            h               hh                                        iii
                       = lim Ex∼pt (x) Ez∼pt (dz|x) E[x0 ∼kt+h|t (·|x,z) [f (x0 )] − f (x)                        (133)
                         h→0 h
                                                                                                    i
                                                         1h
                       =Ex∼pt (x) Ez∼pt (dz|x) lim           E[x0 ∼kt+h|t (·|x,z) [f (x0 )] − f (x)               (134)
                                                   h→0 h

                       =Ex∼pt (x) [Ez∼pt (dz|x) [Lzt f (x)]]                                                      (135)
                                   |        {z            }
                                            =:Lt f (x)

                       =Ex∼pt [Lt f (x)]                                                                          (136)
                       = hpt , Lt f i                                                                             (137)

Therefore, we see that the marginal generator Lt defined as above solves the KFE for the marginal probability
path pt .

Proof that proposition 1 also holds for any linear parameterization of the generator. Let us assume
that the conditional generator has a linear parameterization in the sense defined in app. A.6 given via

                                            Lzt (x) = hKf (x); Ftz (x)iV                                          (138)


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for a function Ftz : S → V . The proof proceeds exactly as above to get
                          ∂t hpt , f i =Ex∼pt (x) [Ez∼pt (dz|x) [Lzt f (x)]                                              (139)
                                     =Ex∼pt (x) [Ez∼pt (dz|x) [hKf (x); Ftz (x)iV ]]                                     (140)
                                                       *                                       +
                                     =Ex∼pt (x) [ Kf (x); Ez∼pt (dz|x) [Ftz (x)] ]                                       (141)
                                                          |        {z          }
                                                                            =:Ft (x)

                                     = hpt , Lt f i                                                                      (142)
Therefore, we can see that also the marginal generator has linear parameterization given via Ft : S → Ω.
Note that it holds that Ft (x) ∈ Ω because Ω is convex and closed.

C.3     P ROOF OF PROPOSITION 2

C.3.1    E XAMPLE OF B REGMAN DIVERGENCES
We list two motivating examples of an illustration for Bregman divergences (see eq. (15)):

      1. Mean squared-error: Setting φ : Rd → R, x 7→ kxk2 leads to
                                      D(x, y) =φ(x) − φ(y) − hx − y, ∇φ(y)i                                              (143)
                                                            2          2
                                                 =kxk − kyk − hx − y, 2yi                                                (144)
                                                            2                       2
                                                 =kxk − 2 hx, yi + kyk                                                   (145)
                                                                 2
                                                 =kx − yk                                                                (146)
                                                                                                   d
      2. KL-divergence: Define the probability simplex as ∆d−1 = {x ∈ Rd≥0 |
                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                         x = 1}. Then define
                                                                                                   i=1
                                                                 d
                                                                 X
                                   φ :∆d−1 → R, x 7→                   xi log xi                                         (147)
                                                                 i=1
                     ⇒     D(x, y) =φ(x) − φ(y) − hx − y, ∇φ(y)i                                                         (148)
                                        d
                                        X                       d
                                                                X                   d
                                                                                    X
                                    =         xi log xi −             yi log yi −         (xi − yi )(1 + log xi )        (149)
                                        i=1                     i=1                 i=1
                                        d
                                        X              yi
                                    =         yi log                                                                     (150)
                                        i=1
                                                       xi

C.3.2    B REGMAN DIVERGENCE AS SUFFICIENT CONDITION FOR PROPOSITION 2
First, we show that ∇θ Lgm (θ) = ∇θ Lcgm (θ) for any Bregman divergence. Let V be an arbitrary vector space,
Ω ⊂ V be a convex subset, and D : Ω × Ω → R≥0 be a Bregman divergence on it defined via
                          D(a, b) = φ(a) − [φ(b) + ha − b, ∇φ(b)i],                     a, b ∈ Ω                         (151)
for a convex function φ : Ω → R. We rewrite D as
                                   D(a, b) = A(a) + ha, B(b)i + C(b)                                                     (152)
with functions A(a) = φ(a), B(b) = ∇φ(b), C(b) = −φ(b) + hb, ∇φ(b)i.

                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With this, we get:
   Lgm (θ) =Et∼Unif,x∼pt D(Ft (x), Ftθ (x))

                                                                                                          (153)
           =Et∼Unif,x∼pt A(Ft (x)) + Ft (x), B(Ftθ (x)) + C(Ftθ (x))

                                                                                                          (154)
                                       Z
           =Et∼Unif,x∼pt A(Ft (x)) +        Ftz (x)pt (dz|x), B(Ftθ (x)) + C(Ftθ (x))                     (155)
                                      Z
           =Et∼Unif,x∼pt A(Ft (x)) +       Ftz (x), B(Ftθ (x)) pt (dz|x) + C(Ftθ (x))                     (156)
                          Z
                             A(Ftz (x)) + Ftz (x), B(Ftθ (x)) + C(Ftθ (x)) pt (dz|x) + const

           =Et∼Unif,x∼pt                                                                                  (157)

            =Et∼Unif,x∼pt ,z∼pt (·|x) [D(Ftz (x), Ft (x))] + const                                        (158)
            =Et∼Unif,z∼pdata ,x∼pt (·|z) [D(Ftz (x), Ft (x))] + const                                     (159)
            =Lcgm (θ) + const                                                                             (160)
i.e. both losses only different by a constant in θ. Hence, their gradients with respect to θ are the same. This
proves proposition 2 for any Bregman divergence D eq. (162).

C.3.3    B REGMAN DIVERGENCE AS NECESSARY CONDITION FOR PROPOSITION 2
We now show that the Bregman divergence property is a necessary condition for ∇θ Lgm (θ) = ∇θ Lcgm (θ) to
hold for arbitrary probability paths and data distributions.
To do so, we first prove an equivalent characterization of Bregman divergences. For simplicity and because
any representation used in a computer will be finite-dimensional, we restrict ourselves here to fine-dimensional
vector spaces, i.e. we set V = Rk for some k ∈ N.
Lemma 1. Let Ω ⊂ Rk to be a convex closed subset such that its interior Ωo is convex and dense in Ω. Let
D : Ω × Ω → R≥0 be an arbitrary cost function, here defined as smooth function such that D(a, b) = 0 if
and only if a = b. Then the following statements are equivalent:

      1. Bregman divergence: The function D is a Bregman divergence, i.e. there exists a strictly convex
         function φ : Ω → R such that
                            D(a, b) = φ(a) − [φ(b) + ha − b, ∇φ(b)i],        for all a, b ∈ Ω             (161)

      2. Target-affine loss function: There exist functions A : Ω → R, B : Ω → Rk , C : Ω → R such that
                                          D(a, b) = A(a) + ha, B(b)i + C(b)                               (162)

      3. Gradient in second argument is linear: For every a1 , a2 ∈ Ω and λ1 , λ2 ≥ 0 such that λ1 + λ2 = 1
         it holds that
                               ∇b D(λ1 a1 + λ2 a2 , b) = λ1 ∇b D(a1 , b) + λ2 ∇b D(a2 , b)                (163)

Proof of (1) ⇒ (2). This is trivial. Define A(a) = φ(a), B(b) = ∇φ(b), C(b) = −φ(b) + hb, ∇φ(b)i.

Proof of (2) ⇒ (1). Let us assume we have
                                      D(a, b) =A(a) + ha, B(b)i + C(b)                                    (164)


                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The condition that D is a valid differentiable cost function implies that
                               arg min D(a, b) =b      for all b ∈ Ω                                       (165)
                                   a
                                            ⇒ 0 =∇a D(a, b)|a=b                                            (166)
                                                 =∇A(b) + B(b) for all b ∈ Ω                               (167)
This is equivalent to B = −∇A. Therefore, we get that
                                    D(a, b) = A(a) − ha, ∇A(b)i + C(b)                                     (168)
Further, we require that D(a, a) = 0 for all a, which implies that
                          0 =D(a, a) = A(a) − ha, ∇A(a)i + C(a) for all a ∈ Ω                              (169)
                  ⇒ C(a) = ha, ∇A(a)i − A(a) for all a ∈ Ω                                                 (170)
                  ⇒ D(a, b) =A(a) − ha, ∇A(b)i + hb, ∇A(b)i − A(b) for all a, b ∈ Ω                        (171)
                            =A(a) − A(b) − ha − b, ∇A(b)i for all a ∈ Ω                                    (172)
Finally, since D(a, b) ≥ 0 it must hold that
                               A(a) ≤ A(b) + ha − b, ∇A(b)i for all a, b ∈ Ω                               (173)
The above is equivalent to the fact that A is a convex function. Therefore, setting A(a) = φ(a), we get that
D is a Bregman divergence.

Proof of (2) ⇒ (3). Let us assume that
                                       D(a, b) =A(a) + ha, B(b)i + C(b)                                    (174)
Then:
        ∇b D(λ1 a1 + λ2 a2 , b) = hλ1 a1 + λ2 a2 , ∇b B(b)i + ∇b C(b)                                      (175)
                                =λ1 ha1 , ∇b B(b)i + λ2 ha2 , ∇b B(b)i + λ1 ∇b C(b) + λ2 ∇b C(b)           (176)
                                =λ1 ∇b D(a1 , b) + λ2 ∇b D(a2 , b)                                         (177)

Proof of (3) ⇒ (2). Let us assume that eq. (163) holds. Fix a b ∈ Ωo . We first show that eq. (163) implies
that the function a 7→ ∇b D(a, b) is an affine function. To see this, because of the required condition, the
function F = (F1 , . . . , Fd ) : a 7→ ∇b D(a, b) fulfills the condition that each Fi is both convex and concave.
In particular, ∇2 Fi and −∇2 Fi are both positive semi-definite. This implies that ∇2 Fi = 0. In turn, this
implies that ∇Fi is a constant function. In turn, this implies that the Jacobian ∇F is constant. This implies
that F is affine, i.e. that
                                          ∇b D(a, b) = B̃(b)a + C̃(b)                                      (178)
for a C̃ : Rk → Rk and B̃ : Rk → Rk × Rk . Further, since D is twice continuously differentiable
                                 ∇b ∇a D(a, b) = ∇a ∇b D(a, b)T = B̃(b)T                                   (179)
which implies that B̃(b)T = ∇b B(b) for the function B = ∇a D(a, b) : Ω → Rk . In turn, this implies that
C̃(b) = ∇b C(b) for the function C(b) = D(a, b) − ha, B(b)i. Then we get:
                           ∇b D(a, b) = ∇b [ha, B(b)i + C(b)] for all a, b ∈ Ω                             (180)
                          ⇒D(a, b) = A(a) + ha, B(b)i + C(b) for all a, b ∈ Ω                              (181)
for some function A : Ω → R. This finishes the proof.

                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Necessity of Bregman divergence property for proposition 2 to hold. We show the necessity of the
Bregman divergence property by giving a counterexample. Fix a 0 ≤ t < 1. Let us assume that the network
Ftθ is just a constant function given by a vector θ ∈ Ω. Now, let us suppose that D is not a Bregman
divergence. Then by lemma 1(c), there exist some a1 , a2 , b ∈ Ω and λ1 , λ2 ≥ 0 with λ1 + λ2 = 1 such that
                           ∇b D(λ1 a1 + λ2 a2 , b) 6= λ1 ∇b D(a1 , b) + λ2 ∇b D(a2 , b)                        (182)
Then define the data distribution as pdata = λ1 · δz1 + λ2 · δz2 and the conditional distribution at time t simply
as pt (·|z) = pdata , i.e. a distribution that just resamples independently from pdata . Then pt (dz|x) = pdata (dz).
Further, let there be a conditional KFE solution parameterized by Ftz such that Ftz1 (x) = a1 , Ftz2 (x) = a2
for all x (note that we can choose an arbitrary parameterization and we can choose pt0 (·|z) arbitrarily for any
t < t0 < 1). Finally, set θ = b. Then
                       Ft (x) = Ez∼pt (dz|x) [Ftz (x)] = Ez∼pdata [Ftz (x)] = λ1 a1 + λ2 a2                    (183)
and
                                ∇θ Lgm (θ) =∇θ E[D(Ft (z), Ftθ (z))]                                           (184)
                                           =∇θ D(λ1 a2 + λ2 a2 , θ)                                            (185)
                                           6=∇θ [λ1 D(a1 , θ) + λ2 D(a2 , θ)]                                  (186)
                                            =∇θ Ez∼pdata [D(Ftz (z), θ)]                                       (187)
                                            =∇θ Ez∼pdata ,x∼pt (·|z) [D(Ftz (x), θ)]                           (188)
                                             =∇θ Lcgm (θ)                                                      (189)
Therefore, the gradients are not the same and proposition 2 does not hold. This shows that the Bregman
divergence property is necessary if we want to desired property to hold for arbitrary data distributions,
probability paths, and network parameterizations.

C.4    P ROOF OF PROPOSITION 3

Let Lt , L0t be two generators of two Markov processes that solve the KFE for a probability path pt . Then for
αt1 , αt2 ∈ R with αt1 + αt2 = 1 it holds that:
                                              pt , (αt1 Lt + αt2 L0t )f                                        (190)
                                          =αt1 hpt , Lt f i + αt2 hpt , L0t f i                                (191)
                                          =αt1 ∂t hpt , f i + αt2 ∂t hpt , f i                                 (192)
                                          =(αt1 + αt2 )∂t hpt , f i                                            (193)
                                          =∂t hpt , f i                                                        (194)
i.e., αt1 Lt + αt2 L0t is again a solution of the KFE. A small but important detail is whether αt1 , αt2 are positive
or negative and whether Lt , L0t correspond to actual Markov processes - and if yes, in forward or backward
time. As explained in app. A.5, the generator of a time-inhomogeneous Markov process is given by a spatial
generator Lt operating on spatial components plus an associated time-derivative ∂t operator (as explained,
it is usually ignored but relevant here). Therefore, both the spatial components have to sum to 1 and the
time-derivative operators. Therefore, we have to add the time-derivative operators up (Markov superposition),
set their weight to zero (divergence-free components), or flip their sign (predictor-corrector) in order to make
the KFE hold. This leads to the 3 different use-cases described.

C.5    P ROOF OF PROPOSITION 4

First, we state a formal version of proposition 4. We assume that we have a setup where have a Generator
Matching model given for each state space S1 , S2 . Specifically, let qt1 (·|z1 ), qt2 (·|z2 ) be two conditional

                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


probability paths on state spaces S1 , S2 . Let L̄zt , L̃zt be solutions to the conditional KFE for qt1 (·|z1 ), qt2 (·|z2 ).
In the sense defined as in app. A.6, we assume that there are linear parameterizations F̄tz1 : S → Ω1 ⊂
V1 , F̃tz2 : S → Ω1 ⊂ V1 of L̄zt 1 , L̃zt 2 given such that
                                                                                D                        E
                L̄zt 1 f1 (x1 ) = K1 f1 (x1 ), F̄tz1 (x1 ) V1 , L̄zt 2 f (x2 ) = K2 f2 (x2 ), F̃tz2 (x2 )             (195)
                                                                                                                V2

for all test functions f1 : S1 → R, f2 : S2 → R and for two linear operators K1 , K2 . On the product space
V1 × V2 , we define an inner product via
                                h(a1 , b1 ), (a2 , b2 )iV1 ×V2 = ha1 , a2 iV1 + hb1 , b2 iV2                          (196)

Let Xt1 , Xt2 be two marginal Markov processes with corresponding marginal generators L̄t , L̃t with parame-
terization Ft1 , Ft2 . We assume that there is a simulation kernels T 1 , T 2 given that are independent for the
Markov process (e.g. Euler sampling in table 1 or an ODE solver), i.e. simulating the Markov process
                                              1      1
                                             Xt+h ∼ Tt+h|t (·|Xt1 , Ft1 (Xt1 ))                                       (197)
                                              2      2
                                             Xt+h ∼ Tt+h|t (·|Xt2 , Ft2 (Xt2 ))                                       (198)
leads to a valid simulation with the correct generators, i.e. for all test functions f :
                                             1
                         L̄t f (xt ) = lim       Ext+h ∼Tt+h|t
                                                         1     (·|Xt1 ,Ft1 (Xt1 )) [f (xt+h ) − f (xt )]              (199)
                                       h→0 h
                                             1
                         L̃t f (xt ) = lim       Ext+h ∼Tt+h|t
                                                         2     (·|Xt2 ,Ft2 (Xt2 )) [f (xt+h ) − f (xt )]              (200)
                                       h→0 h

Proposition 5 (Multimodal generative models - Formal version). Let there be a data distribution pdata
be given over S1 × S2 . Define the conditional factorized path as pt (·|z1 , z2 ) = qt1 (·|z1 )qt2 (·|z2 ) and the
marginal factorized path via E(z1 ,z2 )∼pdata [pt (dx|z1 , z2 )]. Then:

      1. Conditional generator: The conditional factorized path pt (·|z1 , z2 ) = qt1 (·|z1 )qt2 (·|z2 ) on S1 × S2
         admits a KFE solution given by a Markov process Xt = (Xt1 , Xt2 ) where Xt1 , Xt2 are independent
         Markov processes with marginals qt1 (·|z1 ), qt2 (·|z2 ) and generator
                               Lzt f (x1 , x2 ) = [L̄zt 1 f x2 ](x1 ) + [L̃zt 2 f x1 ](x2 ),   z = (z1 , z2 )         (201)
          where f x1 (y) = f (x1 , y) describes the restriction of a test function f : S1 × S2 → R on S2 . In
          particular, a linear parameterization of Lzt is given for x = (x1 , x2 ) ∈ S1 × S2 via
                      Lzt f (x1 , x2 ) = hKf (x), Ftz (x)iV1 ×V2 ,         Kf (x) = (K1 f x2 (x1 ), K2 f x1 (x2 ))    (202)
                             Ftz (x) =(Ftz1 (x1 ), Ftz2 (x2 ))                                                        (203)
          for all test functions f : S1 × S2 → R.
      2. Marginal generator: The marginal generator of a multimodal generative model (with conditional
         generator as in eq. (201)) is given by
                                Z                                 Z
               Lt f (x1 , x2 ) = L̄t f (x1 )p1|t (dz1 |x1 , x2 ) + L̃zt 2 f x1 (x2 )p1|t (dz2 |x1 , x2 )
                                    z1 x2
                                                                                                         (204)

                                =:L̄t f x2 (x1 , x2 ) + L̃t f x1 (x1 , x2 )                                           (205)
          In particular, the above generator can be linearly parameterized by
                         Lt f (x) = hKf (x), Ft (x)iV1 ×V2 ,            Kf (x) = (K1 f x2 (x1 ), K2 f x1 (x2 ))       (206)
          for a function Ft : S1 × S2 → Ω1 × Ω2 .

                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      3. Loss function: For two Bregman divergences D1 : Ω1 × Ω1 → R, D2 : Ω2 × Ω2 → R, the product

                       D((a1 , a2 ), (b1 , b2 )) = D(a1 , b1 ) + D(a2 , b2 ),         a1 , b1 ∈ Ω1 , a2 , b2 ∈ Ω2       (207)

         is again a Bregman divergence. To train a linear parameterization represented by a neural network
         Ftθ = (Ft,1
                   θ    θ
                     , Ft,2 ) : S1 × S2 → Ω1 × Ω2 we can train it with the sum of two CGM losses

           Et∼Unif,z∼pdata ,x1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) D1 (Ftz1 (x1 ), Ft,1
                                                                           θ
                                                                               (x1 , x2 )) + D2 (Ftz2 (x2 ), Ft,2
                                                                                                              θ

                                                                                                                  (x1 , x2 ))
                                                                                                                          (208)

      4. Sampling: A valid simulation procedure is given by updating each dimension independently, i.e.
                                                1
                                                 Xt+h
                                      Xt+h =       2                                               (209)
                                                 Xt+h
                                                1     1
                                               Xt+h ∼Tt+h|t (·|Xt1 , Ft,1
                                                                      θ
                                                                          (Xt1 , Xt2 ))                                 (210)
                                                2     2
                                               Xt+h ∼Tt+h|t (·|Xt2 , Ft,2
                                                                      θ
                                                                          (Xt1 , Xt2 ))                                 (211)

                 1      2
         where Xt+h  , Xt+h are sampled independently, i.e. the above procedure simulates a Markov process
                                                                          θ
         with generator as given in eq. (204) for h → 0 (note that each Ft,i depends on both modalities).

Note that there are several striking features about eq. (204) and eq. (206): (1) each summand depends only on
the marginal posterior p1|t (dzi |x1 , x2 ) per single modality (i = 1, 2). The dependency of the posterior across
modalities does not influence the marginal generator Lt . (2) The shape of Lt can be easily parameterized into
a neural network by taking the parameterizations per modality and making the input depend on all modalities
jointly (i.e. the dimension of the parameterization scales linearly with the dimension - if we parameterized a
transition kernels, it would scale exponentially).

Proof for conditional generator. It holds that:

        ∂t hpt (·|z1 , z2 ), f i                                                                                        (212)
       =∂t [Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) [f (x1 , x2 )]]                                                              (213)
              1
       = lim      Ex1 ∼pt+h (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt+h (·|z2 ) [f (x1 , x2 )] − Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) [f (x1 , x2 )]     (214)
         h→0 h
              1
       = lim (Ex1 ∼pt+h (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt+h (·|z2 ) [f (x1 , x2 )] − Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt+h (·|z2 ) [f (x1 , x2 )]       (215)
         h→0 h
         + Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt+h (·|z2 ) [f (x1 , x2 )] − Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) [f (x1 , x2 )])             (216)
              1
       = lim Ex2 ∼pt+h (·|z2 ) [Ex1 ∼pt+h (·|z1 ) [f x2 (x1 )] − Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ) [f x2 (x1 )]]                          (217)
         h→0 h

                                    1                        x1                              x1

         + Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ) lim           Ex2 ∼pt+h (·|z2 ) [f (x2 )] − Ex2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) [f (x2 )])                       (218)
                              h→0 h
                                                                            h                                 i
       =Ex2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ) [L0t f x2 (x1 )] + Ex1 ∼pt (·|z1 ) Ex2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) [L̃t f x1 (x2 )]

                                                                                                                        (219)
       = hpt (·|z1 , z2 ), Lt f i                                                                                       (220)

where Lt is defined as in eq. (201).

                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of marginal generator shape.                 To show statement 2, we can compute that
                            Z
      Lt f (x1 , x2 ) =         Lzt f (x1 , x2 )p1|t (dz1 , dz2 |x1 , x2 )                                             (221)
                            Z
                        =  L̄zt 1 f x2 (x1 ) + L̃zt 2 f x1 (x2 )p1|t (dz1 , dz2 |x1 , x2 )                             (222)
                         Z                                                 Z
                        = L̄zt 1 f x2 (x1 )p1|t (dz1 , dz2 |x1 , x2 ) + L̃zt 2 f x1 (x2 )p1|t (dz1 , dz2 |x1 , x2 )    (223)
                         Z                                           Z
                        = L̄t f (x1 )p1|t (dz1 |x1 , x2 ) + L̃zt 2 f x1 (x2 )p1|t (dz2 |x1 , x2 )
                              z 1 x2
                                                                                                                       (224)

where we used in the last equation that summand i = 1, 2 only depends on zi .

Proof of Loss shape We use the equivalent characterization of Bregman divergences as target-affine loss
functions (see lemma 1(2)). Let D1 (a, b), D2 (c, d) are two Bregman divergence functions on V1 , V2 for
a, b ∈ V1 , c, d ∈ V2 in shape

                                         D1 (a, b) = A1 (a) + ha, B1 (b)iV1 + C1 (b)                                   (225)
                                         D2 (c, d) = A2 (c) + hc, B2 (d)iV2 + C2 (d)                                   (226)
                                                                                                                       (227)

Then define:

       D((a, c), (b, d)) :=D1 (a, b) + D2 (c, d)                                                                       (228)
                          =[A1 (a) + A2 (c)] + h(a, c), (B1 (b), B2 (d))iV1 ×V2 + [C1 (b) + C2 (d)]                    (229)

where the last equation shows that D is again of the shape as outlined in lemma 1(b), i.e. it is again a Bregman
divergence. For a parameterization Ftθ (x1 , x2 ) = (Ft,1
                                                        θ              θ
                                                          (x1 , x2 ), Ft,2 (x1 , x2 )) ∈ V1 × V2 of the generator,
we therefore get the loss given by

   Lcgm (θ) =Et∼Unif,z∼pdata ,x1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) D(Ftz (x), Ftθ (x))

                                                                                                                       (230)
            =Et∼Unif,z∼pdata ,x1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) D((Ftz1 (x1 ), Ftz2 (x2 )), Ftθ (x))

                                                                                                                       (231)
            =Et∼Unif,z∼pdata ,x1 ∼pt (·|z1 ),x2 ∼pt (·|z2 ) D1 (Ftz1 (x1 ), Ft,1
                                                                             θ
                                                                                 (x)) + D2 (Ftz2 (x2 ), Ft,2
                                                                                                         θ

                                                                                                             (x))      (232)

where Ftz1 , Ftz2 describe the ground truth parameterizations of the conditional generators for each modality.
In app. F, we see a concrete example of this loss construction.

Sampling. For readability, we drop the parameter θ and write Ft1 , Ft2 for two general parameterizations
of Markov processes. We assume that eq. (199) and eq. (200) hold. Let Xt+h be a Markov process that is
simulated as specified in eq. (209). Our goal is to show that Xt+h has the desired shape of the generator, i.e.
that for a test function f : S1 × S2 → R it holds

                     1h                                                                                1      2
                                                                                                                                   i
Lt f (x1 , x2 ) = lim   Ex1t+h ∼T 1 (·|Xt1 ,Ft,1
                                             θ (X 1 ,X 2 )),x2   ∼T 2    (·|X 2 ,F θ (X 1 ,X 2 )) [f (xt+h , xt+h ) − f (x1 , x2 )]
                 h→0 h           t+h|t           t    t      t+h   t+h|t     t    t,2  t    t

                                                                                                                      (233)

                                                              35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We derive

        1h                                                                              1       2
                                                                                                                       i
      lim Ex1t+h ∼T 1 (·|Xt1 ,Ft,1
                               θ (X 1 ,X 2 )),x2     2         2   θ     1   2
                                               t+h ∼Tt+h|t (·|Xt ,Ft,2 (Xt ,Xt ))
                                                                                  [f (x t+h , x t+h ) − f (x 1 , x 2 )]
    h→0 h          t+h|t           t    t

                                                                                                                                 (234)
           1 h
                                                                                                     1     2           1
                                                                                                                                  i
 = lim         Ex1t+h ∼T 1 (·|Xt1 ,Ft,1θ (X 1 ,X 2 )),x2     ∼T  2    (·|X 2 ,F θ (X 1 ,X 2 )) [f (xt+h , xt+h ) − f (xt+h , x2 )]
   h→0 h                 t+h|t                t   t     t+h     t+h|t     t    t,2  t    t

                                                                                                                                 (235)
              1 h
                                                                1
                                                                                              i
   + lim          Ex1t+h ∼T 1 (·|Xt1 ,Ft,1 θ (X 1 ,X 2 )) [f (xt+h , x2 ) − f (x1 , x2 )]                                        (236)
       h→0 h                t+h|t               t    t

           1 h
                                                                                                  x1     2         x1
                                                                                                                              i
 = lim         Ex1t+h ∼T 1 (·|Xt1 ,Ft,1θ (X 1 ,X 2 )),x2         2         2    θ    1    2 [f t+h (xt+h ) − f t+h (x2 )]        (237)
   h→0 h                 t+h|t                t   t     t+h ∼Tt+h|t (·|Xt ,Ft,2 (Xt ,Xt ))

              1 h
                                                             x2
                                                                                         i
   + lim          Ex1t+h ∼T 1 (·|Xt1 ,Ft,1 θ (X 1 ,X 2 )) [f    (x1t+h ) − f x2 (x1 )]                                           (238)
       h→0 h                t+h|t               t    t


 =L̃xt 1 f x1 (x1 , x2 ) + L̄t f x2 (x1 , x2 )                                                                                   (239)
 =Lt f (x1 , x2 )                                                                                                                (240)

where we used eq. (199) and eq. (200) and the uniform continuity in both arguments x1t+h , x2t+h . The above
derivation shows that the sampling procedure as defined in eq. (209) leads to the correct generator.


D      KL- DIVERGENCE (ELBO) LOSSES FOR M ARKOV PROCESSES

In principle, proposition 2 shows that any Bregman divergence allows us to train a Generator Matching
model. However, while the minimum for all Bregman divergences is the same, different Bregman divergences
trade-off errors differently. Further, some Bregman divergences can be derived via first principles and have
theoretical properties that make it seem preferrable. Here, we consider an ELBO/KL-divergence loss and
derive it for jump models, the model that we implement in sec. 9.


D.1     PATH ELBO LOSS - G ENERAL CASE

For completeness, we give here a heuristic derivation of the continuous-time ELBO loss. A similar derivation
as below was already used by Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) to derive an ELBO loss to train a diffusion model
(for discrete time steps). Let us be given a reference Markov process (Xt )0≤t≤1 with transition kernel kt+h|t
and a parameterized Markov process (Xtθ )0≤t≤1 with transition kernel kt+h|t     θ
                                                                                     . Then let us discretize the
process in time and let’s define grid points ti = i/n for i = 0, 1 . . . , n and h = n1 . Here, we assume that all
considered probability measures are absolutely continuous with respect to a reference measure ν. Let p, pθ
denote the joint marginals of all grid points, i.e.
                                                                              Y
                      pθ (x1 , x n−1 , . . . , x n1 , x0 ) =p0 (x0 )                          θ
                                                                                             kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )                (241)
                                  n
                                                                       t=0,1/n,...,(n−1)/n
                                                                              Y
                       p(x1 , x n−1 , . . . , x n1 , x0 ) =p0 (x0 )                          kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )                (242)
                                  n
                                                                       t=0,1/n,...,(n−1)/n



                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we can bound the KL-divergence by using the data processing inequality and the chain rule for
KL-divergence to get

        DKL (pdata (x1 )||pθ1 (x1 ))                                                                          (243)
                                                          θ
      ≤DKL (p(x1 , x n−1 , . . . , x n1 , x0 )||p (x1 , x n−1 , . . . , x n1 , x0 ))                          (244)
                              n                                      n
                                            n−1
                                            X
      =DKL (p(x0 )||pθ (x0 )) +                   Exti ∼pti [DKL (kti+1 |ti (·|xti )||ktθi+1 |ti (·|xti ))]   (245)
                                            i=0
                                                  "                                                   #
              n−1
              X                                       DKL (kti+1 |ti (·|xti )||ktθi+1 |ti (·|xti ))
      =0 +          (ti+1 − ti )Exti ∼pti                                                                     (246)
              i=0
                                                                         ti+1 − ti
           Z1 Z
                                         ∂ h                           θ
                                                                                          i
      →           pdata (x1 )pt|x1 (xt |x1 ) DKL (kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )||kt+h|t (xt+h |xt ))        dxt dx1 dt   (247)
                                        ∂h                                                  |h=0
       0

                                       ∂ h                           θ
                                                                                      i
      =Et∼Unif,z∼pdata ,xt ∼pt (·|z)      DKL (kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )||kt+h|t (xt+h |xt ))                        (248)
                                       ∂h                                               |h=0

for n → ∞. The above shows that

                   DKL (pdata (x1 )||pθ1 (x1 ))                                                               (249)

                                                   ∂ h                          θ
                                                                                                   i
                  ≤Et∼Unif,z∼pdata ,xt ∼pt (·|z)      DKL (kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )||kt+h|t (xt+h |xt ))            (250)
                                                   ∂h                                                |h=0



D.2   ELBO LOSS FOR CONTINUOUS - TIME M ARKOV CHAIN (CTMC)

We work out an ELBO bound for the case of S discrete using the path ELBO bound given via eq. (249). Let
use assume that there are two CTMCs given with rate matrices Qt , Qθt and transition kernels kt+h|t , kt+h|t
                                                                                                       θ
                                                                                                             .
Then, it holds that:

                                      kt+h|t (xt+h |xt ) = δxt (xt+h ) + hQt (xt+h |xt ) + o(h)               (251)
                                       θ
                                      kt+h|t (xt+h |xt ) = δxt (xt+h ) + hQθt (xt+h |xt ) + o(h)              (252)

Further,
                                                θ
                   DKL (kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )||kt+h|t  (xt+h |xt ))                                              (253)
                    X                           kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )
                  =      kt+h|t (xt+h |xt ) log θ                  dxt+h                                      (254)
                    xt+h
                                                kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )
                                                            δx (xt+h ) + hQt (xt+h |xt ) + o(h)
                    Z
                  = [δxt (xt+h ) + hQt (xt+h |xt )] log t                                         dxt+h       (255)
                                                            δxt (xt+h ) + hQθt (xt+h |xt ) + o(h)
                                             1 + hQt (xt |xt ) + o(h)
                  =(1 + hQt (xt |xt )) log                                                                    (256)
                                             1 + hQθt (xt |xt ) + o(h)
                         X                          hQt (xt+h |xt ) + o(h)
                    +          hQt (xt+h |xt ) log                                                            (257)
                       x   6=x
                                                    hQθt (xt+h |xt ) + o(h)
                        t+h       t


                                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ignoring the o(h)-terms, we get:
                                            θ
                  DKL (kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )||kt+h|t (xt+h |xt ))                                                                 (258)
                                              1 + hQt (xt |xt )               X                              Qt (xt+h |xt )
                =(1 + hQt (xt |xt )) log                        +                      hQt (xt+h |xt ) log                     (259)
                                              1 + hQθt (xt |xt ) x                                           Qθt (xt+h |xt )
                                                                           t+h 6=xt

It holds that:
                         ∂     a + hy a + hx (a + hx)y − (a + hy)x
                           log         =                                                                                       (260)
                        ∂h     a + hx a + hy        (a + hx)2
                                            1 ay + hxya − xa − hyxa       a(y − x)
                                       =                            =                                                          (261)
                                         a + hy       a + hx          (a + hy)(a + hx)
                    ∂      a + hy        y−x
                       log             =                                                                                       (262)
                    ∂h     a + hx |h=0     a
And therefore,
     ∂                            θ
       DKL (kt+h|t (xt+h |xt )||kt+h|t  (xt+h |xt ))|h=0                                                  (263)
    ∂h
                                                                                    θ

                     1 + hQt (xt |xt )                             Qt (xt |xt ) − Qt (xt |xt )
  = Qt (xt |xt ) log         θ
                                       + (1 + hQt (xt |xt ))                                              (264)
                     1 + hQt (xt |xt )                       (1 + hQθt (xt |xt ))(1 + hQt (xt |xt )) |h=0
         X                       Qt (xt+h |xt )
    +          Qt (xt+h |xt ) log θ                                                                       (265)
       x   6=x
          t+h      t
                                 Q  t (xt+h |xt )

                                           X                               Qt (xt+h |xt )
  =Qt (xt |xt ) − Qθt (xt |xt ) +                    Qt (xt+h |xt ) log                                                        (266)
                                         xt+h 6=xt
                                                                           Qθt (xt+h |xt )
                             X
  = − Qθt (xt |xt ) −                  Qt (xt+h |xt ) log Qθt (xt+h |xt ) + C                                                  (267)
                           xt+h 6=xt
        X
  =               Qθt (xt+h |xt ) − Qt (xt+h |xt ) log Qθt (xt+h |xt ) + C                                                     (268)
      xt+h 6=xt
                                                                                P
where the last step assumes that Qt has been normalized to                             Qt (y|xt ) = −Qt (xt |xt ) and C is a constant
                                                                               y6=xt
in q. The above gives us a simple way of training the Qt -kernel. Plugging this into the Generator Matching
loss (see proposition 2) for a conditional rate matrix Qzt , this gives us the total loss of:
                       DKL (pdata (x1 )||pθ1 (x1 ))                                                                            (269)
                                                                                                                
                                                              X
                    ≤Ez∼pdata ,t∼Unif[0,1] ,xt ∼pt (·|z)            Qθt (x̃|xt ) − Qzt (x̃|xt ) log Qθt (x̃|xt ) + C         (270)
                                                            x̃6=xt

             =:L(θ)                                                                                  (271)
The above loss was also found previously in the literature (Opper & Sanguinetti, 2007, equation (3)) as an
ELBO bound of the KL-divergence of continuous-space jump processes.
Up to a constant in θ, we can frame the above as a conditional Generator Matching loss with a Bregman
                                                      |S|−1
divergence by defining the convex function φ on Ω = R≥0 via
                                                                       |S|−1
                                                                        X
                                           φ : Ω → R,         x 7→             xi log(xi ) − xi                                (272)
                                                                        i=1



                                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To see this, it holds that
                                    ∇φ(x) = log(x), ∇2 φ(x) = diag(1/x) ≥ 0                              (273)
which shows that φ is a convex function. Further, the corresponding Bregman divergence is given by
                  D(x, y) =φ(x) − φ(y) − hx − y, ∇φ(y)i                                                  (274)
                                 |S|−1
                                 X
                             =           −yi log(yi ) + xi log(xi ) − (xi − yi ) − (xi − yi ) log(yi )   (275)
                                 i=1
                                 |S|−1
                                 X
                             =           yi − xi log(yi ) + C                                            (276)
                                 i=1

where C is a constant in y. This recovers the above loss.


                                                         39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     S YSTEMATIC S TUDY OF P ROBABILITY PATHS AND M ARKOV M ODELS

In this section, we introduce and study several new Markov models for various probability
paths.    This results in a GM model for every combination of {mixture path, CondOT path} ×
{flow, diffusion, jump, Markov superposition} With this, we hope to provide a systematic study of the design
space of the Markov models constructed via generator matching (GM), in particular ablating the effect of the
probability path and the Markov model used.


E.1   OVERVIEW AND E MPIRICAL S TUDY

Deriving novel Markov models. In table 4, one can see an overview over various Markov models introduced
in this section for the two most prominent probability paths (mixtures and the CondOT path). For a given
probability path, the approach to find a new Markov model is as follows: (1) Define what class of Markov
process is used and (2) Find a generator for this Markov process that solves the KFE. If a density is available,
we use the adjoint KFE (see table 1). We illustrate this in several examples in this section. We note that
throughout this section, we derive equations in S = R because due to proposition 4, we can easily extend these
models to arbitary dimensions. We use standard Bregman divergences to train the model (see proposition 2).


Empirical study of probability paths and Markov models. We implemented the model on a 2d checker-
board pattern distribution (Lou et al., 2023; Lipman et al., 2022). As one can see, the performance varies for
different models depending of the probability path. From this experiments, we can extract several learnings:

      1. There is no single optimal probability path or Markov model: In fig. 5 and fig. 6, we plot the
         marginals generated by the trained Markov models. The flow model performs better on the CondOT
         path and the jump performs better on the mixture path. This shows that different probability
         paths are better or worse depending on the Markov model used and that there is no single best
         probability path. There is an intuitive explanation for our results: the CondOT path geometrically
         moves probability mass, while the mixture path only up- and down-weighs mass but does not move
         the support of the distribution. In turn, the flow model "transports" probability mass, while the jump
         model "teleports" probability mass due to its discontinuous evolution. Therefore, it is intuitive that
         a jump model would perform better on a mixture path while a flow model performs better on a
         CondOT path. This is also in line with existing result in optimal transport theory connecting the
         CondOT path with a flow (Ambrosio, 2004).

      2. Discretization error: In fig. 7 and fig. 8, we plot the final distribution for various number of
         function evaluations (NFEs) allowing us to study the discretization errors. The flow model is highly
         prone to discretization errors in the mixture model, while showing low discretization error for the
         CondOT path. For a jump model, the opposite is true. This can be explained by the high Lipschitz
         constant of the learned vector field necessary to learn the transport of mass via a flow in the mixture
         path. In the context of density sampling, this is a known problem (see e.g. (Máté & Fleuret, 2023)).
         For the jump model, many small changes/movement (like in the CondOT path) lead to discretization
         error, while larger movements of probability path ("teleportation") are easier to handle. This explains
         the difference in sensitivity in the discretization observed in our experiments.

Therefore, the role of the probability path is to determine determine the range of KFE solutions that exist.
This can, in fact, influence the performance heavily. However, note that there are many KFE solutions for the
same probability paths - even for the same Markov class.

                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Name                       Mixture                                            CondOT
  Formula     pt (·|z) = κt δz + (1 − κt )Unif[a1 ,a2 ]                 pt (x|z) = N (tz, (1 − t)2 )
                             (a2 −a1 )
   Flow       ut (x|z) = κ̇t(1−κ  t)
                                       (1x≤z − F0 (x))                        ut (x|z) = z−x
                                                                                         1−t
                                             + −G0 (x)))
 Diffusion    σt2 (x|z) = 2κ̇t(G0 (z)+[x−z]
                                   (1−κt )p0 (x)                          No KFE solution exists.
   Jump                    κ̇t
               λt (x|z) = 1−κ  t
                                 , Jt (dx0 ; x|z) = δz     λt (x|z) = [k(1−t)
                                                                        t (x|z)]+
                                                                              3 ,  Jt (x|z) ∝ [−kt (x|z)]+ pt (x)
    MS                Jump+Diffusion+Flow                                       Jump+Flow

Table 4: Systematic combinations of probability paths and KFE solutions introduced in this section. All
of these models are written as models on S = R but that can be extended to arbitary dimensions using
proposition 4. A "pure" diffusion solution to the CondOT path is theoretically impossible to exist - meaning a
solution with zero drift (we show this in app. E.6). Notation: kt (x|z) = x2 − (t + 1)xz − (1 − t)2 + tz 2 .
MS: Markov superposition. The derivations for table 4 can be found in the remainder of this section.


                                                     41


Figure 5: Illustration of Markov models in table 4 trained on a checkerboard pattern data distribution with a
mixture probability path. As one can see, the flow model does not perform well on this probability path (due
to the high Lipschitz constant), while the jump model performs very well because it can "teleport" mass due
to its discontinuity.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Illustration of Markov models in table 4 trained on a checkerboard pattern data distribution with
a CondOT probability path. As one can see, the flow model performs better than the jump model on this
probability path as suggested by optimal transport theory (Ambrosio, 2004), while the Markov superposition
(jump+flow) seems to perform best. We validate these differences in our experiments on CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet32 (see sec. 9).


                                                42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Results from sampling with a various number of NFEs for mixture path for various models. As one
can see, the jump model is least prone to discretization error for this probability path.


                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Results from sampling with a various number of NFEs for CondOT probability path for various
models. As one can see, the flow model is least prone to discretization error for this probability path.

E.2   D ERIVATION OF FLOW MODEL FOR MIXTURE PATH

Let p0 be an arbitrary distribution over S = R. Let σmin > 0 a noise parameter. Let’s consider a mixture
probability path in 1d of the shape:
                                                          2
                                     pt (·|z) = κt N (z, σmin ) + (1 − κt )p0
Let F0 be the cumulative distribution function of p0 and F0,σ be the cumulative distribution function of
          2
N (x; 0, σmin ). Then our goal is to find a vector field ut (x|z) ∈ R that satisfies the continuity equation, i.e.
                       ∂                            2
                          pt (x|z) =κ̇t (N (x; z, σmin  ) − p0 (x))
                       ∂t
                                         ∂
                                   =−       (κ̇t (F0 (x) − Fz,σmin (x)))
                                         ∂x
                                         ∂             κ̇t (F0 (x) − Fz,σmin (x))
                                   =−       (pt (x|z)                             )
                                         ∂x                      pt (x|z)
                                         ∂                   κ̇t (F0 (x) − Fz,σmin (x))
                                   =−       (pt (x|z)                 2 ) + (1 − κ )p (x) )
                                         ∂x             κt N (x; z, σmin            t 0
                                                       |                  {z            }
                                                                   =:ut (x|z)
                                        ∂
                                   =−      (pt (x|z)ut (x|z))
                                       ∂x
Therefore, we can see that ut (·|z) generates the above probability path.

                                                   44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Limit for σmin → 0. Note that for σmin → 0, the conditional vector field becomes:
                                                         
                                               κ̇t       0                  if x = x1
                            ut (x|x1 ) =                · F0 (x)             if x < x1
                                         (1 − κt )p0 (x) 
                                                           F0 (x) − 1        if x > x1

Uniform prior. Let p0 = Unif[a1 ,a2 ] . Then the vector field would become:

                                                κ̇t        (a2 − a1 )1x≤z − x + a1
                             ut (x|z) =                1
                                          (1 − κt ) a2 −a1
                                                                   a2 − a1
                                             κ̇t
                                      =             ((a2 − a1 )1x≤z − x + a1 )
                                          (1 − κt )

Note that the above vector field is not continuous. In particular, its Lipschitz-constant is infinite. However, it
still defines a valid flow.

Remark - Cross-entropy training. Beyond training a flow model, we could also train a binary classifier
model pθ (x) ≈ P[xt > x1 |xt = x]. The marginal vector field is then given via:

                                                  κ̇t
                                 ut (x) =                   · (F0,σ (x) − pθ (x))
                                            (1 − κt )p0 (x)

Learning pθ (xt ) can be done via cross-entropy for every dimension, a very different Bregman divergence and
generator parameterization (see app. A.6). We do not consider this possibility in this work but mention it an
interesting avenue for future work.


E.3   D ERIVATION OF DIFFUSION SOLUTION TO MIXTURE PATH

In this section, we would like to find a solution based on a forward diffusion process that solves for the
mixture probability path in R given by:

                                                                               2

                                                2                     ∼ N (z, σmin ) with prob κt
   pt (x|z) = (1 − κt ) · p0 (dx) + κt · N (z, σmin ) ⇔ xt ∼                                                (277)
                                                                      ∼ p0           with prob (1 − κt )

where σmin > 0 is a small value (we will later σmin → 0). Specifically, we search for KFE solutions given by
an SDE

                                            dXt = σ(Xt , t)dWt + dLt                                        (278)

where σ(Xt , t) is a diffusion coefficient controlling the amount of infinitesimal noise we add and dLt describes
                                       Rx Ry                                    Rx Ry            2
a reflection process. Let G0 (x) =            p0 (w)dwdy and Gz,σmin (x) =             N (w; z, σmin )dwdy. Then:
                                    −∞ −∞                                     −∞ −∞


                           ∂2                         2           ∂2
                               Gx ,σ (x) =N (x; x1 , σmin ),          G0 (x) = p0 (x)                       (279)
                          ∂ 2 x 1 min                             ∂2x

                                                   45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, for any at , bt ∈ R we get
                      ∂                           2
                         pt (x|z) =κ̇t (N (x; z, σmin Id ) − p0 (x))                                          (280)
                     ∂t
                                    ∂2
                                  = 2 (κ̇t (at + bt x + Gz,σmin (x) − G0 (x)))                                (281)
                                   ∂ x
                                    ∂2            κ̇t (at + bt x + Gz,σmin (x) − G0,σ (x))
                                  = 2 (pt (x|z)                                             )                 (282)
                                   ∂ x                               pt (x|z)
                                   1 ∂2               2κ̇t (at + bt x + Gz,σmin (x) − G0 (x))
                                  = 2 (pt (x|z)                       2 ) + (1 − κ )p (x) )                   (283)
                                   2∂ x                 κt N (x; z, σmin            t 0
                                                     |                    {z                 }
                                                                        =:σ̃t2 (x|z)
                                             2
                                     1 ∂
                                   =       (pt (x|z)σ̃t2 (x|z))                                                (284)
                                     2 ∂2x
Therefore, we can see that σ̃t2 (x|z) satisfies the Fokker-Planck equation. However, σ̃ 2 can be negative and
therefore it is not a valid diffusion coefficient in general. We have to pick at , bt such that σ̃t2 is non-negative.

Choice of at , bt .    Specifically, define at = ct + 12 z and bt = 0 for a value ct that we will define later. Then
we get that:
                  2κ̇t (at + bt x + Gz,σmin (x) − G0 (x))   2κ̇t (ct + 12 x + 12 (z − x) + Gz,σmin (x) − G0 (x))
   σ̃t2 (x|z) =                   2 ) + (1 − κ )p (x)     =                         2 ) + (1 − κ )p (x)
                    κt N (x; z, σmin            t 0                  κt N (x; z, σmin           t 0
                                                                                                              (285)
The value ct is chosen such that σ̃t2 (x|z) is non-negative (we will simply define it as the minimum of the
residual). For σmin → 0, it holds that Gz,σmin (x) → [x − z]+ and we have:
                                          2κ̇t (ct + 12 x + 12 (z − x) + Gz,σmin (x) − G0 (x))
                           σ̃t2 (x|z) =                           2 ) + (1 − κ )p (x)                         (286)
                                                   κt N (x; z, σmin           t 0
                                       2κ̇t (ct + 12 x + 12 (z − x) + [x − z]+ − G0 (x)))
                                    →                                                                         (287)
                                                            (1 − κt )p0 (x)
                                                   1      1
                                       2κ̇t (ct + 2 x + 2 |x − z| − G0 (x)))
                                     =                                                                        (288)
                                                    (1 − κt )p0 (x)
We can define
                                                                 1    1
                               ct := − min g(x),        g(x) =     x + |x − z| − G0 (x)                       (289)
                                          x∈R                    2    2
We know that
                                           g 0 (x) =1 − F0 (x) < 0,     (x ≥ z)                               (290)
                                             0
                                          g (x) = − F0 (x) < 0, (x ≤ z)                                  (291)
The above implies that the minimum of g(x) is obtained at z and it holds that:
                                                                  1
                                                    ct = G0 (z) − z                                      (292)
                                                                  2
This value can be computed numerically. The final function we get is:
                 2κ̇t (G0 (z) − 12 z + 12 x + 12 |x − z| − G0 (x)))   2κ̇t (G0 (z) + [x − z]+ − G0 (x)))
    σ̃t2 (x|z) =                                                    =                                    (293)
                                   (1 − κt )p0 (x)                               (1 − κt )p0 (x)
If the above prior p0 has no boundaries (i.e. support R) as for a Gaussian, then we are done here. For a prior
with compact support, we need to consider reflections.

                                                        46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Uniform prior. Let’s consider a uniform prior p0 = Unif[a1 ,a2 ] . Then the equation becomes
                                                                   2                           2
                                                     2κ̇t ( 12 (z−a 1)              1 (x−a1 )
                                                                a2 −a1 + [x − z]+ − 2 a2 −a1 ))
                            σ̃t2 (x|z) =(a2 − a1 )                                                                 (294)
                                                                       (1 − κt )
The above equation has non-zero boundaries:
                          κ̇t (z 2 − a21 − 2a1 [z − a1 ])   κ̇t (z 2 + a21 − 2a1 z)      κ̇t (z − a1 )2
           σ̃t2 (a1 |z) =                                 =                         =                              (295)
                                 (a2 − a1 )(1 − κt )         (a2 − a1 )(1 − κt )      (a2 − a1 )(1 − κt )
                                  2    2                           2     2
                          κ̇ t (z   − a2 + 2a  [a
                                              2 2  − z])    κ̇t (z   + a 2 − 2a2 z)      κ̇t (z − a2 )2
           σ̃t2 (a2 |z) =                                 =                         =                              (296)
                                 (a2 − a1 )(1 − κt )         (a2 − a1 )(1 − κt )      (a2 − a1 )(1 − κt )
Therefore, we need to consider a reflected SDE of the form
                                               dXt = σt (Xt )dWt + Lt
where Lt describes a reflection on the boundaries [a1 , a2 ]. We refer to (Pilipenko, 2014) for a rigorous
definition on reflected SDEs. Here, we simply note that one can imulate the reflected SDE up to o(h)-
approximation error with
                                                           √
                                   Xt+h = Ra1 ,a2 (Xt + hσt (Xt ))
where Ra1 ,a2 describes the reflection operator along the boundaries [a1 , a2 ]. Beyond satisfying the Fokker-
Planck equation, it must then also satisfy the Neumann boundary condition that (Pilipenko, 2014; Lou &
Ermon, 2023):
                                            ∂ 2
                                              [σ̃ (x|z)pt (x|z)]|x=a1 = 0                                          (297)
                                            ∂x t
                                            ∂ 2
                                              [σ̃ (x|z)pt (x|z)]|x=a2 = 0                                          (298)
                                            ∂x t
Note that here, pt (x|z) is a constant along the boundary (because the only place where it is not constant is
around z for σmin → 0). Therefore, the above reads as
                                                ∂ 2
                                                  [σ̃ (x|z)]|x=a1 = 0                                              (299)
                                                ∂x t
                                                ∂ 2
                                                  [σ̃ (x|z)]|x=a2 = 0                                              (300)
                                                ∂x t
That this is fulfilled can be easily seen. Therefore, in total, we have proven that a reflected Brownian motion
with a uniform initial distribution and σ̃t2 as defined as in eq. (294) generates the conditional mixture
path.

E.4   D ERIVATION OF JUMP MODEL FOR MIXTURE PATH

Let us consider again the mixture probability path given by:
                                             pt (·|z) = κt δz + (1 − κt )p0
We show here that the KFE is satisfied for a jump model with
                                                                             κ̇t
           Qt (dx0 ; x|z) = λt (x|z)Jt (dx0 ; x|z),           λt (x|z) =          ,   Jt (dx0 ; x|z) = δz (dx0 )
                                                                           1 − κt


                                                         47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To show this, we show that the above jump process fulfils the KFE. Using the form of the generator Lt derived
in app. A.5.3, we derive:


                            =Ex∼pt (·|z) [Lt f (x)]
                            =Ex∼pt (·|z) [λt (x|z)Ex0 ∼Jt (dx0 ;x|z) [f (x0 ) − f (x)]]
                                 κ̇t
                            =         Ex∼pt (·|z) [(f (z) − f (x))]
                              1 − κt
                                 κ̇t
                            =         [f (z) − Ex∼pt (x) [f (x)]]
                              1 − κt
                                 κ̇t
                            =         [f (z) − [(1 − κt )Ex∼p0 [f (x)] + κt f (z)]]
                              1 − κt
                            =κ̇t f (z) − κ̇t Ex∼p0 [f (x)]
                            =κ̇t f (z) − κ˙t Ex∼p0 [f (x)]
                            =∂t [κt f (z) + (1 − κt )Ex∼p0 [f (x)]]
                            =∂t Ex∼pt (x) [f (x)]
                            =∂t hpt (·|z), f i


i.e. we see that the process fulfils the KFE. Therefore, we have established jump model.


E.5   D ERIVATION OF FLOW SOLUTION TO C OND OT PATH


Next, we consider the CondOT probability path pt (·|z) = N (tz, (1 − t)2 ). We consider a Markov process
defined via a flow determined by the vector field


                                                              z−x
                                                 ut (x|z) =
                                                              1−t


as already introduced in (Lipman et al., 2022). For completeness, we show that this generates the probability
path (in (Lipman et al., 2022), this is done more generally for Gaussian probability paths). Specifically, one

                                                    48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


has to show that it fulfils the continuity equation (the adjoint KFE for flows, see table 1), i.e.

            ∂
               pt (x|z)
            ∂t "
                                                     #
                                          (x − tz)2

            ∂           1
          =                      exp −
                                          2(1 − t)2
                  p
            ∂t      2π(1 − t)2
               "                #
                                           (x − tz)2                                       (x − tz)2

            ∂           1                                          1        ∂
          =                        exp −                 +p                     exp −
                                            2(1 − t)2                                      2(1 − t)2
                  p
            ∂t      2π(1 − t)2                                 2π(1 − t)2 ∂t
                                               (x − tz)2                                  (x − tz)2

            ∂           −1      −1/2                                             2 ∂
          = [(1 − t) ](2π)            exp −                  − N (x; tz, (1 − t) )
            ∂t                                 2(1 − t)2                            ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                                                  2
                                                                                   (x − tz)2

                    −2      −1/2 N (x; tz, (1 − t) )                       2 ∂
          =(1 − t) (2π)                               − N (x; tz, (1 − t) )
                                  (2π(1 − t)2 )−1/2                          ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                                        2
                                                                         (x − tz)2

                    −2 N (x; tz, (1 − t) )                      2 ∂
          =(1 − t)                          − N (x; tz, (1 − t) )
                           (1 − t)−1                                ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                                                                   ∂ (x − tz)2

          =(1 − t)−1 N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) − N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )
                                                                   ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                                                 ∂ (x − tz)2

          =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −
                                                ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                                                2(1 − t)2 2(x − tz)(−z) − (x − tz)2 4(1 − t)(−1)

          =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −
                                                                       4(1 − t)4
                                                −(1 − t)(x − tz)z + (x − tz)2

          =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −
                                                             (1 − t)3

                                                (x − tz)
          =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −               (−(1  −  t)z +  (x − tz))
                                                (1 − t)3

                                                (x − tz)
          =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −               (x −  z)
                                                (1 − t)3

                1              z−x              x − tz
          =         pt (x|z) +        pt (x|z)
              1−t               1−t            (1 − t)2
          =[−∂x ut (x|z)pt (x|z) − ut (x|z)∂x pt (x|z)]
          = − ∂x [ut (x|z)pt (x|z)]



where derive the last identity in app. E.7. This proves that ut (x|z) satisfies the continuity equation. Therefore,
the corresponding flow generates the CondOT probability path.


E.6   D ERIVATION OF DIFFUSION SOLUTION TO C OND OT PATH

In this section, we show that there is no KFE solution to the CondOT path given by a Markov process that
is "purely" defined via a diffusion process, i.e. via an SDE dXt = σt (Xt )dWt with zero drift. Using the

                                                   49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


derivation of ∂t pt (x|z) in the previous paragraph, we can compute:


 ∂                                              (x − tz)
    pt (x|z) =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −            (x − z)    (See previous section)
 ∂t                                             (1 − t)3
                                  Zx Zy
                                                                                                
               ∂2 

                                                                          (z − tz)
             = 2     at + bt x +         N (z; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −          (z − z) dzdy 
              ∂ x                                                         (1 − t)3
                                 −∞ −∞
                                  Zx y−tz
                                                                                                    
                 2                    Z
               ∂                                                             z
             = 2 at + bt x +             N (z; 0, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −          (z + tz − z) dzdy 
              ∂ x                                                         (1 − t)3
                                   −∞ −∞
                                       y−tz                                                                
                  2                Zx Z1−t
                ∂                                                                  z
            =       at + bt x +             (1 − t)N (z; 0, 1) (1 − t)−1 −               (z + tz − z) dzdy 
                                                                                                            
                ∂2x                                                              (1 − t)3
                                   −∞ −∞
                                       y−tz                                        
                  2                Zx Z1−t                      2

                ∂                                             z + z(t − 1)z
            =       at + bt x +               N (z; 0, 1) 1 −                 dzdy 
                                                                                    
                ∂2x                                               (1 − t)2
                                   −∞ −∞
                                  x−tz
                                                                                              
                                   (1−t)          Zy
                ∂2                                                    z 2 + z(t − 1)z
                                    Z
                                                                                              
            =       at + bt x +        (1 − t)        N (z; 0, 1) 1 −                   dzdy 
                ∂2x                                                       (1 − t) 2          
                                   −∞            −∞

                  2

              ∂                              x − tz        1       x − tz             x − tz
            = 2 at + bt x + (1 − t)G                   −      K             + zL
             ∂ x                              1−t        1−t        1−t                1−t
                                                                                                         
                                                 x−tz              x−tz      1        x−tz          x−tz
              ∂ 2                     ã t +  b̃t 1−t + (1 − t)G    1−t   − 1−t K      1−t   + zL    1−t
            = 2 N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )                                                                     
             ∂ x                                               N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )
                                                                                                      
                                                                                1
                ∂2                   2
                                          ãt + b̃t φ(x) + (1 − t)G (φ(x)) − 1−t   K (φ(x)) + zL (φ(x)) 
            =        N (x; tz, (1 − t)  )
                                                                                                       
                ∂2x                                             N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                        
                                          |                              {z                           }
                                                                        =:σt2 (x̃)


where φ(x) = (x − tz)/(1 − t) and at , bt , ãt , b̃t are arbitrary constants (in x) - this characterizes the space
of solutions to the Fokker-Planck equation fully. However, these constants have to be chosen such that σ is

                                                       50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


non-negative, which is - as we will show now - impossible. Specifically,
                                                    Zx Zy
                                          G(x) =            N (z; 0, 1)dzdy
                                                   −∞ −∞
                                                    Zx Zy
                                          L(x) =            zN (z; 0, 1)dzdy
                                                   −∞ −∞
                                                    Zx Zy
                                          K(x) =            z 2 N (z; 0, 1)dzdy
                                                   −∞ −∞

For very large y, it holds that
                          Zy
                                                                   G(x)
                               N (z; 0, 1)dz ≈ 1     ⇒       lim        = 1, lim G(x) = 0
                                                            x→∞     x       x→−∞
                         −∞
                          Zy
                               zN (z; 0, 1)dz ≈ 0     ⇒       lim L(x) = 0, lim L(x) = 0
                                                             x→∞               x→−∞
                       −∞
                     Zy
                                                                   K(x)
                          z 2 N (z; 0, 1)dz ≈ 1      ⇒      lim         = 1, lim K(x) = 0
                                                            x→∞     x       x→−∞
                    −∞

Therefore, the asymptotic limit of the numerator is
                                                              1
                          ãt + b̃t φ(x) + (1 − t)G (φ(x)) − 1−t K (φ(x)) + zL (φ(x))
                   lim
                  x→∞                                   x
                                                              1
                          ãt + b̃t φ(x) + (1 − t)G (φ(x)) − 1−t K (φ(x)) + zL (φ(x)) φ(x)
                = lim
                  x→∞                                      φ(x)                          x
                                       1      1
                =(b̃t + (1 − t) −         )
                                     1 − t (1 − t)
                                  1
                =b̃t + 1 −
                               (1 − t)2
                                                               1
                           ãt + b̃t φ(x) + (1 − t)G (φ(x)) − 1−t K (φ(x)) + zL (φ(x))
                    lim
                  x→−∞                                   x
                                                               1
                           ãt + b̃t φ(x) + (1 − t)G (φ(x)) − 1−t K (φ(x)) + zL (φ(x)) φ(x)
                = lim
                  x→−∞                                      φ(x)                             x
                                    −1
                =(b̃t + 0 + 0 + 0)
                                   1−t
                       b̃t
                =−
                      1−t
The above poses a problem: we cannot choose b̃t such that the asymptotics are both ≥ 0 for x → ±∞.
The reason for that is that 1/(1 − t)2 > 1 for all 0 < t < 1. Hence, the above cannot have a solution with
non-negative z. This shows that there is no "pure diffusion" solution to the CondOT path.

                                                      51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.7   D ERIVATION OF JUMP SOLUTION TO C OND OT PATH

The CondOT probability path in 1d with a Gaussian prior is given via:
                                           pt (·|z) = N (tz, (1 − t)2 )                                    (301)
for z ∈ R, 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. With a slight abuse of notation, we write pt (x|z) for its density. The jump continuity
equation (see app. A.5.3 for derivation) describes the adjoint KFE in this case given via
                                          Z
                           ∂
                               pt (x|z) = Qt (x; y)pt (y|z) − Qt (y; x)pt (x|z)dy                       (302)
                           ∂t
where we omit the dependency of Qt on z for conciseness and readability. Setting λzt (x) = Qt (y; x)dy ≥ 0
                                                                                            R
and Jt (y; x) = Qt (y; x)/λt (x) (similarly, dropping dependency on z for readability), we get
                                         Z
                          ∂
                              pt (x|z) = λt (y)Jt (x; y)pt (y|z)dy − λt (x)pt (x|z)                     (303)
                          ∂t

                ∂
Time-derivative ∂t pt . Let’s compute the left-hand side first:
         ∂
            pt (x|z)                                                                                       (304)
         ∂t "
                                                   #
                                       (x − tz)2

         ∂           1
       =                      exp −                                                                        (305)
                                       2(1 − t)2
               p
         ∂t      2π(1 − t)2
            "                #
                                         (x − tz)2                                        (x − tz)2

         ∂           1                                           1         ∂
       =                        exp −                 +                        exp     −                   (306)
                                         2(1 − t)2                                        2(1 − t)2
               p                                          p
         ∂t      2π(1 − t)2                                  2π(1 − t)2 ∂t
                                            (x − tz)2                                    (x − tz)2

         ∂                                                                       2 ∂
       = [(1 − t)−1 ](2π)−1/2 exp −                       −  N  (x; tz, (1 −  t)  )                        (307)
         ∂t                                 2(1 − t)2                               ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                              N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )                                (x − tz)2

                                                                         2 ∂
       =(1 − t)−2 (2π)−1/2                         −  N  (x; tz, (1 −  t)  )                               (308)
                               (2π(1 − t)2 )−1/2                             ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                    N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )                               (x − tz)2

                                                              2 ∂
       =(1 − t)−2                        −  N (x; tz, (1 − t)  )                                           (309)
                        (1 − t)−1                                ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                                                                 ∂ (x − tz)2

       =(1 − t)−1 N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) − N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )                                              (310)
                                                                 ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                                             ∂ (x − tz)2

       =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −                                                                   (311)
                                             ∂t 2(1 − t)2
                                             2(1 − t)2 2(x − tz)(−z) − (x − tz)2 4(1 − t)(−1)

       =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −                                                                   (312)
                                                                     4(1 − t)4
                                             −(1 − t)(x − tz)z + (x − tz)2

                          2           −1
       =N (x; tz, (1 − t) ) (1 − t) −                                                                      (313)
                                                          (1 − t)3

                          2           −1     (x − tz)
       =N (x; tz, (1 − t) ) (1 − t) −                  (−(1 − t)z + (x − tz))                              (314)
                                             (1 − t)3

                                             (x − tz)
       =N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) (1 − t)−1 −               (x −   z)                                           (315)
                                             (1 − t)3


                                                    52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let’s assume that Jt (x|z) = Jt (x) for a state-independent jump distribution Jt (x). Further, let’s set
λ̃t (x) = λt (x)(1 − t). Then jump continuity equation becomes:


                                 (x − tz)(x − z)
                                                                         Z
      N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) 1 −                      + λ̃ t (x)   =Jt (x)   λ̃t (x̃)N (x̃; tz, (1 − t)2 )dx̃   (316)
                                      (1 − t)2
                                h                             i
          N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) 1 − (x−tz)(x−z)
                                           (1−t)2   + λ̃ t (x)
                    R                                            =Jt (x)                                      (317)
                                                 2
                      λ̃t (x̃)N (x̃; tz, (1 − t) )dx̃


To be a valid probability distribution, Jt must fulfill:


                                                         (x − tz)(x − z)
                          Jt (x) ≥0 ⇔ λ̃t (x) ≥ max                         −  1, 0                           (318)
                                                             (1 − t)2
                                  Z
                               1 = Jt (x)dx                                                                   (319)

                                                                (x − tz)(x − z)
                                  Z
                                                       2
                           ⇔ 0 = N (x; tz, (1 − t) ) 1 −                              dx                      (320)
                                                                    (1 − t)2
                                                              (x − tz)(x − z)
                                      Z
                           ⇔ 0 =1 − N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )                        dx                            (321)
                                                                  (1 − t)2
                                                              x2 − (t + 1)zx + tz 2
                                      Z
                           ⇔ 0 =1 − N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )                               dx                     (322)
                                                                     (1 − t)2
                                       (1 − t)2 + t2 z 2 − (t + 1)z 2 t + tz 2
                           ⇔ 0 =1 −                                                                           (323)
                                                     (1 − t)2
                                  t z − (t + 1)z t + tz 2
                                   2 2             2
                           ⇔0=                                                                                (324)
                                           (1 − t)2
                                  −z t + tz 2
                                     2
                           ⇔0=                                                                                (325)
                                    (1 − t)2
                           ⇔ 0 =0                                                                             (326)


                                                     53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence, we can see that Jt (x) is indeed a valid probability distribution. Using that λ̃t (x) = λt (x)(1 − t), we
get the following result:


                                        (x−tz)(x−z)
                              max          (1−t)2   − 1, 0
                   λt (x) =                                                                               (327)
                                   1−t

                           max (x − tz)(x − z) − (1 − t)2 , 0
                         =                                                                                (328)
                                       (1 − t)3

                            max x2 − (t + 1)xz − (1 − t)2 + tz 2 , 0
                          =                                                                               (329)
                                               (1 − t)3
                                                h                                       i
                            N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 ) 1 − (x−tz)(x−z)
                                                           (1−t)2    +   (1 −  t)λt (x)
                   Jt (x) =                  R
                                                                          2
                                                                                                          (330)
                                    (1 − t) λt (x̃)N (x̃; tz, (1 − t) )dx̃
                              h                   i
                                    (x−tz)(x−z)
                                1 − (1−t)2            N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )
                                                    +
                          =R h                   i                                                        (331)
                               1 − (x̃−tz)(x̃−z)
                                       (1−t)2         N (x̃; tz, (1 − t)2 )dx̃
                                                   +

                               (1 − t)2 − (x − tz)(x − z) + N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )
                          =R                                                                              (332)
                             [(1 − t)2 − (x̃ − tz)(x̃ − z)]+ N (x̃; tz, (1 − t)2 )dx̃
                               2
                               −x + (t + 1)xz + (1 − t)2 − tz 2 + N (x; tz, (1 − t)2 )
                          =R                                                                              (333)
                             [−x2 + (t + 1)xz + (1 − t)2 − tz 2 ]+ N (x̃; tz, (1 − t)2 )dx̃


Let’s study the 2nd degree polynomial that is used here:


                       kt (x) =x2 − (t + 1)xz − (1 − t)2 + tz 2                                           (334)
                                           p
                                (t + 1)z ± (t + 1)2 z 2 + 4(1 − t)2 − 4tz 2
                        x1,2 =                                                                            (335)
                                           p           2
                                (t + 1)z ± (t + 2t + 1)z 2 + 4 − 8t + 4t2 − 4tz 2
                                               2
                              =                                                                           (336)
                                           p              2
                                (t + 1)z ± (t2 − 2t + 1)z 2 + 4 − 8t + 4t2
                              =                                                                           (337)
                                           p           2
                                (t + 1)z ± (1 − t)2 z 2 + 4(1 − t)2
                              =                                                                           (338)
                                                  2√
                                (t + 1)z ± |1 − t| z 2 + 4
                              =                                                                           (339)
                                             2 r
                                tz + z              z2
                              =        ± |1 − t|        +1                                                (340)
                                   2                4

The above says intuitively that the jump intensity is “most negative” around the area at the arithmetic of
the currrent mean tz and the final mean z. Note that for t ≈ 1, it holds that only x with x close to z have
p(x) < 0, all others must jump.

                                                      54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As an aside, the above allows to know the support of the marginal Jt apriori:


                                     r                          r
                     tz + z            z2        t+1              c2
                            ± |1 − t|     + 1 ≤c      + (1 − t)      +1                                (341)
                        2              4        " 2 r         # 4r
                                                  c    c2             c2     c
                                              =     −      +1 t+         +1+                           (342)
                                                  2     4             4      2
                                                r
                                                  c2       c
                                              ≤      +1+                                               (343)
                                                   4       2


where c is the upper boundary of the support of the data. A reverse inequality for holds the lower boundary.



Summary. The CondOT probability path is generated by a jump process with jump intensity λt (x) and
state-independent jump distribution Jt given by:


                                                   [kt (x)]+
                                        λt (x) =                                                       (344)
                                                   (1 − t)3
                           Jt (x; x̃) = Jt (x) ∝[−kt (x)]+ N (x, tz, (1 − t)2 )                        (345)
                                                    2                      2      2
                              where      kt (x) =x − (t + 1)xz − (1 − t) + tz                          (346)
                                      Qt (y; x) =λt (x)Jt (y; x)                                       (347)


Intuitively, we jump at xt only if k(xt ) has a positive value. If we jump, we jump to a region of negative
kt (x) proportional to kt (x) multiplied with the desired density.


F    D ETAILS FOR E UCLIDEAN J UMP M ODEL


We use a jump model with Qt (y; x) = λt (x)Jt (y; x) where λt , Jt are described in eqs. (345) and (347).



Sampling. For sampling, we can use the fact that λt (x) = [kt (x)]+ /(1 − t)3 factorizes in a part that is
relatively constant across time and a part that is relatively time-dependent. Specifically, we can set:


                                                  [kt (x)]+
                                   λt+s (x) ≈                   0≤s<h                                  (348)
                                                (1 − t − s)3


                                                    55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Which gives:
                                                      Zh
                P[No Jump in [t, t + h)] = exp(−           λt+s (x)ds)                                   (349)
                                                       0
                                                                Zh
                                                                          1
                                          ≈ exp(−[kt (x)]+                        ds)                    (350)
                                                                     (1 − t − s)3
                                                                0
                                                              1
                                         = exp(−[kt (x)]+ [ (1 − t − s)−2 ]h0 )                          (351)
                                                              2
                                                     [kt (x)]+         1               1
                                         = exp −                               −                         (352)
                                                          2      (1 − t − h)2      (1 − t)2

                                                  [kt (x)]+       1               1
                                         = exp                           −                               (353)
                                                        2      (1 − t)2     (1 − t − h)2
                                                   [kt (x)]+                           !
                                                                          (1 − t)3

                                                        2
                                         = exp                 1−t−                                      (354)
                                                  (1 − t)3             (1 − t − h)2
                                                                            (1 − t)2

                                                  1
                                         = exp      λt (x)(1 − t) 1 −                                    (355)
                                                  2                      (1 − t − h)2
                                         =:Rt,t+h (λt (x))                                               (356)
Therefore, the above gives us a valid scheduler to decide whether to jump in a time-interval [t, t + h) or not.
For us, this modification made a significant difference in the image generation results (e.g. FID 12 vs 4.5 on
CIFAR-10).

Extension to multi-dimensional case. We assume our data is multi-dimensional and lies in Rd and we can
use proposition 4 to extend the model from 1d to multiple dimensions. Specifically, for x ∈ Rd our model is
given via
                                        λdt (x) =(λ1t (x), . . . , λdt (x))                              (357)
                                        Jtd (x) =(Jt1 (x), . . . , Jtd (x))                              (358)
where λit (x) ≥ 0 and Jti (x) is a categorical distribution (using softmax) over a fixed set of bins in [−1, 1]
(support of normalized images). On images, we implement this by using a U-Net architecture with b + 1
channels where b describes the number of bins. During sampling, for each time update t 7→ t + h, updates
happen independently per dimension. Specifically,
                                           1              d
                                   Xt+h =(Xt+h , . . . , Xt+h )                                          (359)
                                     mi ∼Bernoulli(1 − Rt,t+h (λt (x)))                                  (360)

                                    i       Xt         if m = 0
                                   Xt+h =      i                                                         (361)
                                            ∼ Jt (Xt ) if m = 1

Loss function. As a loss function, we use an infinitesimal KL-divergence in 1d via
                                 Qt (y; x) =Jt (y; x)λt (x), Qθt (y; x) = Jt (y; x)λθt (x)               (362)
                                              X
                   D(Qt (y; x), Qθt (y; x)) =    Qθt (y; x) − Qt (y; x) log Qθt (y; x)                   (363)
                                              y6=x



                                                  56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the sum of y’s is here over regularly spaced bin values in [−1, 1]. We extend the above loss to the
multi-dimensional case via
                            Qit (y i ; x) =Jti (y i ; x)λit (x),   Qθ,i i        θ,i i     θ,i
                                                                    t (y ; x) = Jt (y ; x)λt (x)   (364)
                                            d
                                            X
               D(Qt (y; x), Qθt (y; x)) =         D0 (Qit (y i ; x), Qθ,i i
                                                                      t (y ; x))                   (365)
                                            i=1


                                                     57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     D ETAILS FOR PROTEIN JUMP MODEL
G.1   J UMP SOLUTION TO THE KFE

We first derive a general jump solution to the jump continuity equation. The jump model described in app. F
will be a special case of the same construction. Let pt (x) be a probability density for every 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 on S -
where S is an arbitrary state space. For a jump intensity λt (x) and jump kernel Jt (x̃; x), the jump continuity
equation is given by:
                                                   Z
                                     ∂
                                        pt (x) = λt (x̃)Jt (x; x̃)pt (x̃)dx̃ − pt (x)λt (x)                (366)
                                     ∂t
                                                                 Z
                                      ∂
                        ⇔ pt (x)[ log pt (x) + λt (x)] = λt (x̃)Jt (x; x̃)pt (x̃)dx̃                       (367)
                                      ∂t
Making Jt (x; x̃) = Jt (x) state-independent, we get:
                                                                        Z
                                        ∂
                                pt (x)[ log pt (x) + λt (x)] =Jt (x) λt (x̃)pt (x̃)dx̃                     (368)
                                        ∂t
                                        ∂
                                pt (x)[ ∂t log pt (x) + λt (x)]
                          ⇔            R                        =Jt (x)                                    (369)
                                         λt (x̃)pt (x̃)dx̃
We require Jt (x) to be a probability density and λt (x) ≥ 0. Therefore, we get the two necessary constraints:
                                                        ∂
                                           λt (x) ≥[− log pt (x)]+                                         (370)
                                                     Z ∂t
                                             1=     Jt (x)dx                                          (371)
                            Z                   Z
                                                              ∂
                      ⇔        λt (x)pt (x)dx = pt (x)           log pt (x) + λt (x) dx               (372)
                                                              ∂t                     +
                                                Z
                                                     ∂
                                      ⇔ 0=              pt (x)dx                                      (373)
                                                     ∂t
                                                    Z
                                                 ∂
                                      ⇔ 0=              pt (x)dx                                      (374)
                                                ∂t
                                                    Z
                                                 ∂
                                      ⇔ 0=              1dx                                           (375)
                                                ∂t
                                      ⇔ 0 =0                                                          (376)
Therefore, λt (x) and Jt (x) defined as above are always a solution to the jump continuity equation for any
state space. For minimal jump intensity λt , we get:
                                                ∂
                                    λt (x) =[− log pt (x)]+                                           (377)
                                                ∂t
                                             [− ∂ pt (x)]+
                                           = ∂t                                                       (378)
                                                 pt (x)
                                                           ∂
                                                   pt (x)[ ∂t log pt (x)]+
                                     Jt (x) = R      ∂
                                                                                                          (379)
                                                  [− ∂t log pt (x̃)]+ pt (x̃)dx̃
                                                    ∂
                                                  [ ∂t pt (x)]+
                                           =R       ∂
                                                                                                          (380)
                                                  [ ∂t pt (x̃)]+ dx̃
                                                                                                          (381)


                                                     58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The above equations are illustrated in app. G.1 for a sphere in R3 . The above in fact represents a general
solution to arbitrary state spaces.


Figure 9: Illustration of jump model on manifolds. Left: Illustration of conditional probability Rpt (dx|z) on
sphere with z = (0, 0, 1)T (North pole). Top: density
                                                   R pt (x|z). Middle: jump intensity λt (x) = Qt (dy; x).
Bottom: Jump distribution Jt (dy; x) = Qt (dy; x)/ Qt (dy; x).


G.2   P ROBABILITY PATHS AND COMPUTING λt , Jt

We consider the quaternion model for SO(3), namely, each element of SO(3) is represented by a unit vector
x ∈ S 3 ⊂ R4 , where
                                       S 3 = x ∈ R4 kxk = 1

                                                                                                    (382)
with kxk = 1. We consider a probability path of Fisher-von-Mises distributions given by
                                       pt (x|x1 ) = Cp (κt ) exp(κt xT1 x)                                (383)
for a scheduler κt such that κ0 = 0 and κ1 >> 0 and normalization constant Cp (κt ). We use a custom
implementation of the Fisher-von-Mises distribution in a way that makes pt (x|x1 ) differentiable with respect
to t. We then use automatic differentiation to compute ∂t pt (x|x1 ). This allows us to compute λt and Jt (see
previous section). To parameterize λt on SO(3), we simply consider a function on SO(3). To parameterize
Jt on SO(3) we place uniform bins over SO(3) and make each bin represent a rotation. We note that the
probability path that FrameFlow was trained on is not the probability path above. Rather, it is a probability
path constructed via geodesic interpolation of a uniform to a delta function. Computing λt , Jt on this path was
numerically unstable for us (because of sharp boundaries introduced by the uniform distribution). Therefore,
we choose a Fisher-von-Mises path as above but selected the scheduler κt to optimally approximate the
geodesic path. This ensured numerical stability and an (approximately) faithful recovery of the probability
path. The Fisher-von-Mises path is more numerically stable as its support is all of SO(3) for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1.

G.3   S AMPLING

The FrameFlow model predicts a data point z given a state xt at time 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, i.e. it predicts the conditional
expectation Ez∼pt (dz|x) [z]. The marginal jump rate kernel is given by
                                     Qt (y; xt ) = Ez∼pt (dz|xt ) [Qzt (y; xt )]                          (384)
In order to repurpose the flow model, we make the simplifying assumption that
                                                                       E           [z]
                       Qt (y; xt ) = Ez∼pt (dz|xt ) [Qzt (y; xt )] ≈ Qt z∼pt (dz|xt ) (y; xt )            (385)
Assuming that the distribution pt (dz|x) is unimodal, this corresponds to high temperature sampling of z. We
do not employ any temperature to sample from Jt or λt but use plain Euler sampling as described in table 1.

                                                    59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.4    E XPERIMENT DETAILS

We based our implementation off https://github.com/jasonkyuyim/multiflow and down-
loaded pre-trained weights from the same repository. We use Euler-Maruyama integrator and 100 discretiza-
tion steps for all sampling runs. Each sample uses 100 neural network function evaluations (NFEs). Neural
network architecture details can be found in Campbell et al. (2024b). The size of the model is 17.4 million
parameters. All MultiFlow hyperparameters, except those for the jump model, use the default ones provided
in in the open source code. We found increasing the number of SO(3) jumps bins to improve results and use
2056 bins in our experiments. For our metrics, we deviate slightly from (Yim et al., 2023a) by only reporting
diversity and novelty and exclude designability. As noted in (Yim et al., 2024), designability can be artificially
high if the generative model samples the same protein repeatedly. Nevertheles, using designability to filter bad
samples is still important since protein generative models are prone to hallucination and producing proteins
that would never be real. A detailed description of designability can be found in (Yim et al., 2023b). Our
metrics already take designability into account by first filtering the sampled proteins to only be the designable
proteins then clustering the protein structures to compute diversity and searching against protein datasets to
measure novelty. Following the widely adopted benchmark in Watson et al. (2023), we sample 100 proteins
for each length 70, 100, 200, 300 for a total of n = 400 samples then compute each metric as follows:

      1. Diversity (Div): Taking only the samples passing the designability filter, we use MaxCluster (Herbert
         & Sternberg, 2008) to compute the number of clusters nc . We report nn /n which is the proportion of
         designable clusters to number of total samples. The higher this value, the more diverse the generated
         samples are after the designability filter. Diversity is important in protein design where it is ideal
         to test many diverse protein candidates in the hopes of having many shots to make a new drug or
         medicine for instance.
      2. Novelty (Nov): Taking only the samples passing the designability filter, we use FoldSeek (Van Kem-
         pen et al., 2024) to compute the similarity of each sample to the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman
         et al., 2000). The similarity score is given as a protein structure alignment score called the TM-score
         (Xu & Zhang, 2010) where a value of 0.5 or less means the two structures are likely to be distinct.
         The probability of the two structures being similar with the same biological function increases as the
         score goes to 1.0. Therefore, the dissimilarity is 1 - (TM-score). We report the average dissimilarity
         of the outputs of FoldSeek as the novelty since this describes how “novel” the designable samples
         are on average compared to the known protein structures.

For baselines, we follow the ones described in Campbell et al. (2024b) with the addition of FoldFlow (Bose
et al., 2023) since it was recently open sourced. Our full results are provided in Table 5 whereas a truncated
version is presented in the main text Table 3. We remove mention of Des. in the main text since this metric
can be misleading – it can easily be hacked and achieve 100% if the method repeatedly samples the same
designable protein. As we see, our jump modifications lead to the best results in all categories. The ensemble
model of jumps and flows performs similarly as the pure jump model.


                                                   60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Method                              Co-design 1 (multi-modal)         PMPNN 8 (unimodal)
                                             Des Div          Nov              Des Div      Nov
         RFdiffusion                                                           0.87    0.4     0.37
         FrameFlow                                                             0.86   0.39     0.39
         FoldFlow                                                              0.81   0.24     0.32
         Protpardelle                        0.63    0.10        0.40          0.90   0.12     0.41
         ProteinGenerator                    0.37    0.09        0.31          0.89   0.19     0.35
         MultiFlow                           0.86    0.38        0.39          0.99   0.52     0.39
         w/ SO(3) jumps (ours)               0.76    0.48        0.41          0.96   0.63     0.41
         w/ SO(3) jumps + flow (ours)        0.78    0.47        0.40          0.96   0.59     0.40

                                   Table 5: Full protein generation results.


H     E XTENDED DISCUSSION OF RELATED WORKS

H.1   F LOW MATCHING

Flow matching and rectified flows (Lipman et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) are immediate instances of Generator
Matching leveraging the flow-specific versions of the KFE given by the continuity equation (see table 1 and
app. A.5.1 for a derivation). We briefly describe here how one can map the propositions from this work to
their work. Specifically, flow matching restricts itself to generators of the form Lθt f (x) = ∇f (x)T uθt (x)
for a vector field uθt (x) parameterized by a neural network with parameters θ. Given a conditional vector
field ut (x|z) and a probability path pt (x|z), the corresponding marginal vector field in flow matching (see
(Lipman et al., 2022, equation (8))) is given by
                                              Z
                                                          pt (x|z)pdata (z)
                                     ut (x) = ut (x|z)                      dz                          (386)
                                                               pt (x)
and corresponds to the marginal generator (see proposition 1). The Bregman divergence used is the mean
squared error (MSE) obtained by choosing φ(x) = kxk2 in eq. (15). The conditional flow matching loss
(Lipman et al., 2022, Theorem 2 ) is a special case of proposition 2. Therefore, Generator Matching can be
seen as a generalization of the principles of flow matching to the space of Markov process generators for
arbitrary state spaces.

H.2   D ENOISING DIFFUSION MODELS

From the perspective of Generator Matching, denoising diffusion models (Song et al., 2020) are flow models
with two conceptual differences to flow matching: (1) They allow for stochastic sampling via SDEs by adding
a divergence-free Langevin component (see proposition 3) and (2) A probability path is defined via forward
noising process and a time-reversal of that process serves a solution to the KFE. We explain both differences
below.

Time-reversal to find solutions to the KFE. First, let’s discuss the idea of time-reversal. In diffusion
models, a probability path pt (dx|z) is constructed via a forward diffusion process that noises data (i.e. here,
not only the marginals are specified but a full distribution across all time points). The conceptual idea of
time-reversal allows to find solutions to the KFE. We illustrate this here. We derived this already in app. H.2
for general Markov processes and illustrate it here for diffusion models. Specifically, let’s consider a Markov
noising process X̄t given by a variance-exploding SDE dX̄t = σt dW̄t that goes from t = 1 to t = 0

                                                    61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


backwards in time1 . Then we know that the KFE holds in reverse time
        ∂t pt f = − pt , L̄t f                                      I KFE in reverse time                            (387)
                               σ2
                    Z
                = − pt (x) t ∆f (x)dx                               I generator for diffusions, see table 1          (388)
                               2
                               σt2
                    Z
                = − pt (x) ∇ · ∇f (x)dx                             I definition of Laplacian                        (389)
                               2
                                σ2
                  Z
                = ∇pt (x)T t ∇f (x)dx                               I partial integration                            (390)
                                 2
                  Z                  2
                                    σt
                = pt (x) ∇f (x)T       ∇ log pt (x) dx              I derivative of log                              (391)
                                     2
                           |          {z           }
                                      =:Lt f (x)

               = hpt , Lt f i                                                                                        (392)
                                                 2
                                              T σt
As we can see, the operator Lt f = ∇f       2 ∇ log pt fulfils the KFE in forward time. Further, Lt corresponds
                                        σt2
to a generator of a flow with vector 2 ∇ log pt . We can see that the corresponding flow must generate
the probability path pt . This flow is commonly called the probability flow ODE (Song et al., 2020). The
conditional Generator Matching loss with a mean squared error then leads to the denoising score matching
loss (Vincent, 2011)
                                 Ez∼pdata ,t∼Unif,x∼pt (·|z) [k∇ log pt (x|z) − sθ (x, t)k2 ]                        (393)

for a neural network sθ : Rd × [0, 1] → Rd approximating the score vector field. We remark that mathe-
matically there is also a stronger notion of time-reversal that also requires the joint distribution (across time
points) to the be same - as opposed to just the marginals.

Stochastic sampling by adding a divergence component. Second, let’s discuss stochastic sampling. For a
general probability path pt with density pt (x), a general divergence-free component is given
                                                                                        √ via the Langevin
generator corresponding to an SDE with drift σt2 ∇ log pt (x) and diffusion coefficient 2σt

                                 LLangevin
                                  t        f (x) = σt2 ∇f (x)T ∇ log pt (x) + σt2 ∆f (x),                            (394)
This fact is widely applied in statistical physics and Markov chain Monte Carlo methods in the form of
Langevin dynamics (Roberts & Tweedie, 1996). To see that this is divergence-free (in the sense as defined in
proposition 3), we can simply use partial integration
         D                  E
           pt , LLangevin
                 t        f                                                                            (395)
         Z                                     Z
       = pt (x)σt2 ∇f (x)T ∇ log pt (x)dx + pt (x)σt2 ∆f (x)dx           I by definition               (396)
         Z                           Z
       = σt2 ∇f (x)T ∇pt (x)dx + pt (x)σt2 ∆f (x)dx                      I derivative of log           (397)
            Z                       Z
       = − σt2 ∆f (x)pt (x)dx + pt (x)σt2 ∆f (x)]dx                      I partial integration         (398)

          =0                                                                                                         (399)
   1
       Note that in (Song et al., 2020) t = 0 corresponds to data, while we keep the convention here that t = 1 corresponds
data


                                                        62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In (Song et al., 2020), they fix a specific weighting and run several iterations of a Langevin sampling iteration
at every time step, there called a predictor-corrector scheme (see (Song et al., 2020, Algorithm 1-3)). However,
by proposition 3 any positive weighting of the above Langevin component leads to a valid sampling procedure.
This observation was already made by Karras et al. (2022, section 4) where the optimal weighting of the
divergence-free Langevin component is studied experimentally in more detail.
Finally, we note that many denoising diffusion models use formulations in discrete time (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020). While these formulations do not incur a time discretization error during sampling,
they incur an error in the loss formulation. The reason for that is that a similar proposition as in proposition 2
does not hold for discrete time steps (i.e. the linearization only holds for the generator and not the transition
kernel). Therefore, a formulation with discrete time steps can only us an approximate loss via an ELBO lower
bound using parameterized family of distributions such as a Gaussian (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015).

H.3    S TOCHASTIC I NTERPOLANTS

Stochastic interpolants (Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Albergo et al., 2023) is a framework for generative
modelling that shares many similarities with diffusion models and flow matching. We explain conceptual
differences by placing its findings within the Generator Matching framework.

General flow solution based on interpolant. A difference in the perspective of stochastic interpolants is
that they take a sample-based perspective, i.e. they specific an initial distribution x0 ∼ p0 and a probability
path xt ∼ pt (dx) is constructed implicitly via a simulator function I (see (Albergo et al., 2023, definition
2.1))
                                    xt := Φ(t, x0 , z,  ) := I(t, x0 , z) + γ(t)                           (400)
where   ∼ N (0, Id ) and we impose the condition that I(0, x0 , z) = x0 , I(1, x0 , z) = z and γ(0) = 0, γ(1) =
0. A general flow-based solution can be derived by using the KFE (see (Albergo et al., 2023, theorem 2.6)):
                 ∂
                    hpt , f i = ∂t E[f (Φ(t, x0 , z,  ))] =E[∇f (Φ(t, x0 , z,  ))T ∂t Φ(t, x0 , z,  )]     (401)
                 ∂t
                                                          =Ext ∼pt [∇f (xt )T E[∂t Φ(t, x0 , z,  )|xt ]]   (402)
                                                                    |              {z                }
                                                                            =:Lt f (xt )

                                                        =Ext ∼pt [Lt f (xt )]                                (403)
The operator Lt f is a generator of a flow with vector field given by the conditional expectation of the velocity
u(xt , t) = E[∂t Φ(t, x0 , z,  )|xt ]. Hence, we see that the above vector field generates the probability path pt .
This can be trained in the same way with a mean-squared error as for denoising diffusion models and flow
matching.

Stochastic sampling. Another difference of stochastic interpolants is a generalization of the stochastic
sampling procedure for denoising diffusion models (see app. H.2). One advantage of denoising diffusion
models is that one gets - informally - "2 advantages for 1": Specifically, both for learning a flow-based
solution to the KFE and for stochastic sampling, we only need to learn the function ∇ log pt commonly
called the score function (see app. H.2). This works because the process is constructed as a diffusion process.
However, in the general case, one can still learn the score ∇ log pt separately from the flow and then add a
divergence-free Langevin component during sampling (see eq. (394)). As pointed out in (Albergo et al., 2023,
theorem 2.8), the special shape of the stochastic interpolant (see eq. (400)) allows to derive a simple denoising
score matching loss. In (Albergo et al., 2023, theorem 2.23), it is further shown that adding stochastic
sampling leads to the ability to control the KL-divergence between the target distribution and the distribution
generated by the model. This highlights an advantage of adding a noise (SDE) term because bounding the
KL-divergence is in general not possible with a pure flow model (although bounds in Wasserstein distance
exist for flow models, see (Benton et al., 2023)).

                                                    63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.4    D ISCRETE S PACES VIA C ONTINUOUS -T IME M ARKOV C HAINS ("D ISCRETE D IFFUSION ")

For discrete state spaces S, the generator of a Markov process Xt ∈ S is given by a rate transition matrix
Qt ∈ RS×S (see app. A.5.4 for derivations). Therefore, if we restrict ourselves to generators on discrete state
spaces, we recover the framework developed by (Campbell et al., 2022) as an instance of Generator Matching.
Proposition 1 in Campbell et al. (2022) corresponds to proposition 1 showing that the marginal generator/rate
matrix corresponds a conditional generator weighted by the posterior. Proposition 2 in Campbell et al. (2022)
shows that a continuous-time ELBO can be derived via a Bregman divergence. We derive a similar, slightly
simpler, Bregman divergence loss in app. D.2 that also corresponds to an ELBO lower bound. Further, they
use a predictor-corrector scheme (see Campbell et al. (2022, Proposition 4)) as outlined here for the general
case in proposition 3. In the discrete setting, this leads to significant improvements (Gat et al., 2024).
In many applications such as language modelling, the state space decomposes into dimensions, i.e. is given
via S = {1, . . . , N }d =: [N ]d where N is the vocabulary size. This state space is usually too large that
one cannot store a full rate transition matrix Qt (and not even a single row of it) in a computer. However,
using a factorized probability path, we can use proposition 4 to see that we can learn a rates Qt that update
each dimension independently (i.e. it has a block structure). This reduces the dimension significantly. This
was shown for discrete spaces also in Campbell et al. (2022, Proposition 3) and has since then the de facto
standard for discrete diffusion models (Lou et al., 2024a; Gat et al., 2024). Instead of parameterizing the
generator directly, proposition 4 also shows that one can also only learns the marginals pt (zi |x) for each
z = (z1 , . . . , zn ) ∈ [N ]d independently. One can then train the marginals of the posterior pt (zi |x) via the
cross-entropy loss (Gat et al., 2024; Campbell et al., 2024b).
Campbell et al. (2022) adapt the idea of time-reversal from diffusion models to find solutions of the KFE
for a given probability path. Specifically, the time-reversal Qt of a process with rate matrix Q̄t running in
backwards-time is given via
                                                                   pt (x)
                                          Qt (x; y) = Q̄t (y; x)                                            (404)
                                                                   pt (y)
In more recent works (Lou et al., 2024a), it has been shown that parmeterizing the generator by the ratio
p(y)/p(x) that is needed to time-reverse the process - called the "discrete score" - leads to improved results.
As this is a linear parameterization of the generator, they can use the same Bregman divergence as we derive
in app. D.2 to train the discrete score.

Blackout diffusion. As another example of a discrete Markov model, we discuss blackout diffusion (Santos
et al., 2023). This model also considers a model on discrete state spaces S with rate matrix Qt (there, denoted
as Lmm0 ). The KFE in discrete spaces corresponds to (Santos et al., 2023, Equation (2)). A probability path is
constructed via a "forward process" or noising process that allows for transitions to neighboring states, in the
specific case for the blackout diffusion characterization by a decay process representing by m → m − 1 (see
app. A.4 for a discussion of how probability paths and time-reversal relate). The loss function in (Santos et al.,
2023, Equation (11) and (12)) correspond to the ELBO likelihood loss derived in app. D.2 (up to constants).
Further, Santos et al. (2023) show that this design of the probability path allows to simplify several equations
during training (Santos et al., 2023, Algorithm 1) and allows to make finite-time approximations reducing the
discretization error during sampling (Santos et al., 2023, Algorithm 2).

H.5    G EOMETRIC DATA AND M ANIFOLDS

We next describe how Generator Matching generalizes models on Riemannian manifolds. In the following,
let S = M be aFsmooth Riemannian manifold with metric g. For x ∈ M, let Tx M be the tangent space of x
and let T M = x∈M Tx M be the tangent bundle.

                                                   64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Riemannian Flow Matching (Chen & Lipman, 2024). First, we consider flows on M showing how we
can recover Riemannian Flow Matching (Chen & Lipman, 2024). A flow on M is defined via a vector field
u : M × [0, 1] → T M such that ut (x) ∈ Tx M for all x ∈ M. As every tangent space is a vector space, the
space of vector fields is a vector space again. Every vector fields defines a flow φt|s that fulfils

                                   φt|t (x) =x for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1                                            (405)
                                d
                                   φt|s (x) =ut (φt|s (x)) for all 0 ≤ s ≤ t ≤ 1                            (406)
                                dt
Next, we derive the generator. Let f : M → R be a smooth function. Then the generator is given via
                                          f (φt+h|t (x)) − f (x)
                          Lt f (x) = lim                         = h∇f (x), ut (x)ig                        (407)
                                      h→0            h
where h·, ·ig describes the dot product defining the Riemannian metric g and ∇f describes the gradient of
f with respect to g. This coincides with the Lie derivative of a function (Jost & Jost, 2008), a fundamental
concept in differential geometry. Therefore, we see that ut (x) is a linear parameterization of the generator.
We can then use an arbitrary Bregman divergence on Tx M, e.g. the mean-squared error. The CGM loss then
recovers the Riemannian Conditional Flow Matching loss (see (Chen & Lipman, 2024, equation (8))). This
shows that Riemannian Flow Matching is a specific instance of Generator Matching with Markov processes
on manifolds restricted to flows.

Diffusion models on manifolds (De Bortoli et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). Riemannian score-based
generative modeling can equally be seen as an instance of GM. Similar to Euclidean diffusion models,
a probability path is constructed via a forward noising process and a solution to the KFE is found via a
time-reversal of the process (see app. H.2 as an example on Euclidean space). Specifically, a forward-time
SDE that generates data is obtained via time-reversal (see (De Bortoli et al., 2022, theorem 3.1.)) and has the
shape

                                  dYt =[−b(Yt ) + ∇ log pt (Yt )]dt + dBtM                                  (408)

where b : M → T M describes a drift, ∇ log pt : M → T M describe the score vector field and BtM
describes a Brownian motion on M. The generator of the above SDE is given via
                                                                            1
                    Lt f (x) = − hb(x), ∇f (x)ig + h∇f (x), ∇ log pt (x)ig + ∆M f (x)                       (409)
                                                                            2
where ∆g f describes the Laplace-Beltrami operator on manifolds (Elworthy, 1998). Note that b is fixed as a
hyperparameter. Therefore, like in the Euclidean case, a linear parameterization of the generator is again given
via a score network sθ : M × [0, 1] → T M. Choosing the mean squared error as a Bregman divergence,
one recovers Riemannian denoising score matching (see (De Bortoli et al., 2022, section 3.2)). However, the
fact that the noising process is not analytically tractable does not give us an analytically tractable formula for
pt (x|z), i.e. in GM language the conditional solution to the KFE is not known analytically. Therefore, this
approach requires iterative simulation of a noising process during training even for geometries with analytic
geodesic formulas and requires approximations of score functions as a training target (see (De Bortoli et al.,
2022, table 2)).

H.6    M ULTIMODAL SPACES

Markovian multimodal generative models have been previously described for specific spaces and model
classes (Anand & Achim, 2022; Campbell et al., 2024b).

                                                   65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


MultiFlow (Campbell et al., 2024b). As an example, we illustrate here how the work by Campbell et al.
(2024b) for multimodal protein generation fits into the GM framework. Campbell et al. (2024b) first construct
a generative model on discrete spaces representing amino acids of a protein using the recipe outlined in
(Campbell et al., 2022) (see app. H.4 for explanations how this fits into GM framework). Further, they use a
Euclidean flow model (Lipman et al., 2022) for the translation components of the protein and a Riemannian
Flow model (Yim et al., 2024) is used for frames represented via elements on SO(3). Using a factorized
probability, one can use the recipe outlined in proposition 4 to build a multimodal generative model. This
corresponds to Proposition 4.1. and Proposition 4.2. in (Campbell et al., 2024b). As outlined in proposition 4,
loss functions for individual modalities can be summed up, as done in (Campbell et al., 2024b, equation (16)).
Therefore, the work by Campbell et al. (2024b) is a direct example of the power of the recipe outlined in
proposition 4 to build a Markovian generative model.

H.7    J UMP M ODELS ON NON - DISCRETE STATE SPACES

We discuss a selection of models relying on (and including) jump models. In app. H.4, we discussed already
continuous-time Markov processes, which are jump models on discrete state spaces. Hence, we focus here on
other state spaces.

Piecewise deterministic generative models (Bertazzi et al., 2024). The combination of a flow and jump
Markov process is commonly called a piecewise-deterministic Markov process (PDMP) (Davis, 1984;
Del Moral & Penev, 2017). Recently, PDMPs have been applied by Bertazzi et al. (2024) for generative
modeling in the form of "piecewise-deterministic generative models". Specifically, they consider models
in phase space, i.e. where the states is given via a tuple (x, v) of a location x and a velocity v. Similar to
diffusion models, they construct a probability path via a forward/noising process and use its time-reversal
as a solution to the KFE of the corresponding probability path. The jump intensity and jump kernels of the
time-reversal can be linearly parameterized via likelihood ratios (see (Bertazzi et al., 2024, Equation (4) and
(5))) - this corresponds to a linear parameterization of the generator (see app. A.6) and is related to the linear
parameterization used by (Lou et al., 2024a) on discrete state spaces.

Score-based generative models with Levy Processes (Yoon et al., 2023). A general class of stochastic
processes is given by Lévy processes that are characterized by independent and stationary increments. Lévy
processes include certain flows, diffusion, and jump processes and were recently used for generative modeling
purposes by Yoon et al. (2023). Here, Yoon et al. (2023) construct SDEs driven by Lévy processes as a
forward process - implicitly definining a probability path (see app. A.4) - and the time-reversal is giving a
solution to the KFE (see app. A.4). There, the time-reversal depends on the fractional score function that
determines the flow component of the backwards process (the other parts are hyperparameters and don’t have
to be learned). The fractional score serves as a linear parameterization of the generator (see app. A.6). To
learn this vector field, we can employ the conditional Generator Matching loss with the Bregman divergence
given by the MSE - this recovers the fractional denoising score matching loss (i.e. (Yoon et al., 2023, Theorem
4.3.) directly corresponds to proposition 2). While Lévy processes in principle include jump processes (and
also their SDEs), we note that the work by (Yoon et al., 2023) only consider learning the flow component of
the Markov processes (the rest are hyperparameters), while here we show how to also learn the jump kernel
or the diffusion coefficient.

Trans-dimensional jump diffusion (Campbell et al., 2024a). Recently, jump processes have recently
been leveraged to model generative modeling tasks over state-spaces that includes a various numbers of
dimensions (Campbell et al., 2024a). From the perspective of GM, we can consider this to be on state space
S = ∪dk=1 {d} × Rd . A conditional probability path is constructed via a forward noising process and a
time-reversal serve as a solution to the KFE ((Campbell et al., 2024a, Proposition 1)). The loss in (Campbell
et al., 2024a, Proposition 2) corresponds to a combined loss of two Bregman divergences: (1) A mean-squared

                                                   66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


error and (2) The Bregman divergence considered in app. D.2 (the jump measure Qt is denoted there as
the product λt (x)Aθt (y; x) and uses the fact that log(λt (x)Aθt (y; x)) = log(λt (x)) + log(Aθt (y; x))). The
second term has an additional time-reversal step similar to (Campbell et al., 2022).

I   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON L OSS F UNCTIONS
To illustrate the utility of Bregman divergences for GM models, we ran additional experiments using a flow
model on image generation. Specifically, we use the following two functions φ : R → R:
                       exp(αx) + exp(−αx)
                φ(x) =                    = cosh(αx)                           I Cosh
                                2
                φ(x) = exp(αx)                                                 I Exponential
We construct Bregman divergences with these where we give weight 0.5 to the MSE and weight 0.5 to the
above φ(x). We then train a flow model on CIFAR-10 using the resulting Bregman divergences. We ablate
over a few options of α ∈ R. In fig. 10, one can see the training dynamics are significantly more stable and
the final results are better by modifying the Bregman divergence loss function. For example, the MSE model
achieves an FID score of 2.62 (existing flow matching or diffusion models), while the Bregman divergence
achieves a score of 2.54. Note that this was achieved by modifying one line in an existing codebase. Note
that the results slightly differ from fig. 4 because those were obtained with a joint flow and jump model
trained together. Of course, further exploration in the future is needed to explore the design space of Bregman
divergences. Here, this shows the practical utility of the space of loss functions given by Bregman
divergences.

                                       6
                                                           MSE
                                                           Cosh
                                       5                   Exponential

                                       4
                                 FID


                                       3

                                       2
                                           0     1000 2000            3000
                                                     Epoch

Figure 10: Training evolution of a flow model trained on CIFAR-10 with different Bregman divergences. As
one can see, using Bregman divergences other than the MSE leads to improved training stability and final
performance (achieved with changing a single line of code). Results are reported using a dopri5 sampler.


                                                  67
