Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DYNAMIC -SUPERB P HASE -2: A C OLLABORATIVELY
E XPANDING B ENCHMARK FOR M EASURING THE C A -
PABILITIES OF S POKEN L ANGUAGE M ODELS WITH
180 TASKS
 Chien-yu Huang1 , Wei-Chih Chen1 , Shu-wen Yang1 , Andy T. Liu1 , Chen-An Li1 ,
 Yu-Xiang Lin1 , Wei-Cheng Tseng2 , Anuj Diwan2 , Yi-Jen Shih2 , Jiatong Shi3 , William Chen3 ,
 Chih-Kai Yang1 , Xuanjun Chen1 , Chi-Yuan Hsiao1 , Puyuan Peng2 , Shih-Heng Wang1 ,
 Chun-Yi Kuan1 , Ke-Han Lu1 , Kai-Wei Chang1 , Fabian Ritter-Gutierrez4 , Kuan-Po Huang1 ,
 Siddhant Arora3 , You-Kuan Lin1 , Ming To Chuang1 , Eunjung Yeo3 , Kalvin Chang3 ,
 Chung-Ming Chien5 , Kwanghee Choi3 , Cheng-Hsiu Hsieh1 , Yi-Cheng Lin1 , Chee-En Yu1 ,
 I-Hsiang Chiu1 , Heitor R. Guimarães6 , Jionghao Han3 , Tzu-Quan Lin1 , Tzu-Yuan Lin7 ,
 Homu Chang1 , Ting-Wu Chang1 , Chun Wei Chen1 , Shou-Jen Chen1 , Yu-Hua Chen1 ,
 Hsi-Chun Cheng1 , Kunal Dhawan8 , Jia-Lin Fang1 , Shi-Xin Fang1 , Kuan-Yu Fang Chiang1 ,
 Chi An Fu1 , Hsien-Fu Hsiao1 , Ching Yu Hsu1 , Shao-Syuan Huang1 , Lee Chen Wei1 ,
 Hsi-Che Lin1 , Hsuan-Hao Lin1 , Hsuan-Ting Lin1 , Jian-Ren Lin1 , Ting-Chun Liu1 ,
 Li-Chun Lu1 , Tsung-Min Pai1 , Ankita Pasad5 , Shih-Yun Shan Kuan1 , Suwon Shon9 ,
 Yuxun Tang10 , Yun-Shao Tsai1 , Jui-Chiang Wei1 , Tzu-Chieh Wei1 , Chengxi Wu1 ,
 Dien-Ruei Wu1 , Chao-Han Huck Yang8 , Chieh-Chi Yang1 , Jia Qi Yip4 , Shao-Xiang Yuan1 ,
 Haibin Wu1 , Karen Livescu5 , David Harwath2 , Shinji Watanabe3 , Hung-yi Lee1
 1
   National Taiwan University 2 University of Texas at Austin 3 Carnegie Mellon University
 4
   Nanyang Technological University 5 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
 6
   Université du Québec (INRS-EMT) 7 Independent Researcher 8 NVIDIA 9 ASAPP
 10
    Renmin University of China



                                          A BSTRACT
        Multimodal foundation models, such as Gemini and ChatGPT, have revolution-
        ized human-machine interactions by seamlessly integrating various forms of data.
        Developing a universal spoken language model that comprehends a wide range
        of natural language instructions is critical for bridging communication gaps and
        facilitating more intuitive interactions. However, the absence of a comprehen-
        sive evaluation benchmark poses a significant challenge. We present Dynamic-
        SUPERB Phase-2, an open and evolving benchmark for the comprehensive eval-
        uation of instruction-based universal speech models. Building upon the first
        generation, this second version incorporates 125 new tasks contributed collab-
        oratively by the global research community, expanding the benchmark to a to-
        tal of 180 tasks, making it the largest benchmark for speech and audio evalu-
        ation. While the first generation of Dynamic-SUPERB was limited to classifi-
        cation tasks, Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 broadens its evaluation capabilities by
        introducing a wide array of novel and diverse tasks, including regression and se-
        quence generation, across speech, music, and environmental audio. Evaluation
        results show that no model performed well universally. SALMONN-13B excelled
        in English ASR and Qwen2-Audio-7B-Instruct showed high accuracy in emo-
        tion recognition, but current models still require further innovations to handle a
        broader range of tasks. We open-source all task data and the evaluation pipeline
        at https://github.com/dynamic-superb/dynamic-superb.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have accelerated the development of natural
language processing (NLP) (Touvron et al., 2023a; Achiam et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b; Anthropic,


                                                1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023; Bai et al., 2023). These models can follow natural language instructions, making users quickly
adopt them for a variety of applications. They have been integrated into commercial products, such
as ChatGPT (Achiam et al., 2023) and Claude (Anthropic, 2023), as well as in the open-source
research community, including the LLaMA series (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Dubey et al., 2024).
Yet, they are primarily text-based models, meaning they cannot process speech or audio, which are
essential for more natural ways of communication and interaction with the real world.
Compared to written text, spoken language has always been a more natural and convenient way for
humans to communicate. Spoken language conveys a wealth of information, including semantics,
prosody, emotion, and speaker characteristics, while text is limited to representing semantic infor-
mation, which can sometimes even depend on the prosodic cues present in spoken language (Lin
et al., 2024). This highlights the need for universal speech models and explains why automatic
speech recognition (ASR) systems using text-based language models are not optimal. Several at-
tempts have been made to develop instruction-based universal speech or audio models capable of
performing various tasks, such as LTU-AS (Gong et al., 2023), SALMONN (Tang et al., 2024a),
Qwen-Audio (Chu et al., 2023; 2024), and WavLLM (Hu et al., 2024).
Despite significant research in universal speech models, evaluating them effectively and compre-
hensively remains a major challenge. In NLP, benchmarks for text LLMs include a large number of
tasks. CrossFit (Ye et al., 2021) includes 160 tasks, BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2022) comprises
204 tasks, and Natural-Instructions (Mishra et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022) provides 1,616 tasks.
For universal speech models, several benchmarks have been proposed but with a fixed and limited
set of tasks (typically around a dozen) to evaluate specific capabilities of models (Yang et al., 2021;
Dunbar et al., 2022; Maimon et al., 2024). This is insufficient for evaluating a universal model, as
we aim to investigate whether models can handle a broader range of tasks beyond fixed benchmarks.
There is a strong demand for a benchmark that can evaluate these models across various aspects with
a wide range of speech tasks, which led to the creation of Dynamic-SUPERB (Huang et al., 2024a).
Dynamic-SUPERB is the first benchmark for evaluating universal instruction-based speech and au-
dio models. As models advance, we dynamically expand the benchmark by adding new tasks to
provide better guidance for researchers in model development. We have designed a well-structured
pipeline that harnesses the collective efforts of the community to gather diverse challenging, novel,
and creative tasks. The first generation of Dynamic-SUPERB consists of 55 tasks, covering var-
ious aspects of speech (e.g., semantics, speakers, etc.), making it the speech benchmark with the
most tasks. However, this is not sufficient to pave the way for developing universal speech models,
especially given the complexity and richness of the information conveyed by spoken language.
This paper presents the Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2. We expanded it to 180 tasks, more than dou-
ble the size of its first iteration, with contributions from the global research community. They cover
a broad range of types, and some tasks present novel challenges that have not been explored in any
previous research. Besides, previous speech research has typically treated music and environmental
audio as background noise to be ignored. However, these sounds contain rich information and share
overlapping elements that complement each other. Thus, in Dynamic-SUPERB, we also introduced
preliminary music and audio tasks from established music and audio benchmarks (Yuan et al., 2023;
Turian et al., 2022). We define the core tasks by reformulating the SUPERB (Yang et al., 2021)
(speech), MARBLE (Yuan et al., 2023) (music), and HEAR (Turian et al., 2022) (audio) bench-
marks for quick-round research experiments. One challenge of evaluating with such a large-scale
benchmark is deriving concrete and useful insights from hundreds of evaluation results. We provide
a taxonomy for every task in Dynamic-SUPERB, where tasks are clustered by the specific model
capabilities they probe. Researchers can follow this taxonomy to develop or reinforce specific ca-
pabilities of the models they build. To our knowledge, Dynamic-SUPERB is the largest benchmark
and the first to provide such a detailed task taxonomy in speech processing.
We conducted a comprehensive evaluation of several models using Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2. To
handle the diverse output formats of these models, we propose an automated LLM-based pipeline
for general evaluation across tasks. The evaluation results show that these models perform well
only on a limited range of tasks. For example, SALMONN-13B performed well on English ASR,
while Qwen2-Audio-7B-Instruct achieved high accuracy in emotion recognition. However, they
do not generalize well to a much broader range of tasks in speech recognition and paralinguistics.
Notably, training on diverse data, even with significant differences in signal-level characteristics,
can enhance performance across domains. We observed that spoken language models outperformed


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


music models in certain music tasks. This highlights the potential for developing unified models for
speech, music, and general audio. We have open-sourced all materials to support reproducibility and
further research. We invite researchers to help expand Dynamic-SUPERB, making it more diverse
and comprehensive to advance universal spoken language models.

2     R ELATED WORKS
2.1   I NSTRUCTION - FOLLOWING UNIVERSAL SPEECH MODELS

LLMs have shown strong natural language processing abilities and are used in speech, audio, and
music applications. Recent frameworks integrate a pre-trained speech encoder with an LLM through
fine-tuning techniques such as LoRA (Hu et al., 2021). LTU-AS (Gong et al., 2023) combines
Whisper (Radford et al., 2023) with LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a), and it is fine-tuned on open-
ended speech and audio question-answering. SALMONN adopts a window-level Q-former (Li et al.,
2023a) to generate soft prompts fusing representations from the speech and audio encoders. Qwen-
Audio (Chu et al., 2023) introduces task-specific tags into Qwen to encourage knowledge sharing
and prevent interference across diverse tasks, and it supports multi-turn dialogues for both audio and
text inputs. WavLLM (Hu et al., 2024) uses curriculum learning to prevent overfitting on specific
tasks while maintaining the LLM’s original capabilities. All these models accept speech, audio, and
text as input but output only text, focusing on understanding rather than generation in speech and
audio. Several attempts have also used prompts for speech, music, and audio generation (Guo et al.,
2023; Agostinelli et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a). However, to our knowledge, there is no universal
model capable of handling both generation and understanding tasks. Moreover, these models have
not been comprehensively evaluated on a benchmark, which hinders fair comparisons between them.

2.2   E VALUATION BENCHMARKS

Several benchmarks have been developed to evaluate speech models. SUPERB (Yang et al., 2021) is
the most widely used benchmark for assessing the performance of speech foundation models across
various tasks that cover different aspects of speech. On the other hand, SLUE (Shon et al., 2022;
2023) focuses more specifically on spoken language understanding. Yet, they are primarily limited
to English. LeBenchmark (Evain et al., 2021; Parcollet et al., 2023) evaluates speech foundation
models specifically for French, while IndicSUPERB (Javed et al., 2023) is dedicated to Indian lan-
guages. ML-SUPERB (Shi et al., 2023; 2024b) offers ASR and language identification tasks in 100+
languages. Aside from speech, MARBLE (Yuan et al., 2023) and HEAR (Turian et al., 2022) offer
platforms for evaluating various music and a wide range of audio tasks. Using these benchmarks,
researchers build a specialized model for each task. Thus, the number of tasks is limited due to the
growing costs associated with adding more tasks. Conversely, universal models are expected to do
various tasks without fine-tuning for each one, allowing users to engage in far more diverse appli-
cations and enabling benchmark developers to include more tasks for comprehensive evaluation. In
NLP and CV, benchmarks have been developed to evaluate models across a much broader range of
tasks (Bitton et al., 2023; Srivastava et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2022). However, in speech, we lack
a benchmark of comparable scale. Dynamic-SUPERB (Huang et al., 2024a) is the first benchmark
for instruction-based universal speech models. While its first version includes far more tasks than
all other speech benchmarks, they are all classification tasks. AIR-bench (Yang et al., 2024b), on
the other hand, includes tasks from speech, music, and audio, and expands beyond classification,
although the number of tasks available for evaluating universal models remains limited (19 tasks in
foundation track). Thus, there remains a critical need for a comprehensive benchmark that evaluates
universal models across a broader range of tasks to fully assess their capabilities. Consequently, we
developed Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2, substantially upgrading the first generation with a detailed
taxonomy and establishing community contribution protocols to facilitate continual task integration.

3     DYNAMIC -SUPERB P HASE -2
3.1   OVERVIEW

Figure 1 depicts the framework of Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2. Our goal is to evaluate universal
models that meet the following criteria: (1) The model can accept speech, music, or other audio as

                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Figure 1: An overview of Dynamic-SUPERB.

input. (2) The model can perform specific tasks without requiring fine-tuning. (3) The model follows
natural language instructions to execute the corresponding tasks. To comprehensively evaluate these
universal models, we have collected hundreds of tasks and developed a task taxonomy to better
guide benchmark users (Figure 1a). All tasks in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 are intended solely for
testing purposes; we do not provide training data for two main reasons. First, current models are
trained on large-scale, open-source, or proprietary datasets, making it challenging to ensure that all
models are trained under consistent conditions. Second, we aim to evaluate universal models that
do not require fine-tuning for downstream tasks.
The Dynamic-SUPERB project is designed to evolve dynamically with research advancements by
incorporating novel tasks from the research community (Figure 1b). With the first call for tasks,
Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 has grown from its first generation, expanding from 55 to 180 tasks.
Table 1 compares several benchmarks used in speech, music, and audio research, demonstrating that
Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 is the largest benchmark covering all three areas. It provides a more
fine-grained evaluation than any other benchmark.

                    Table 1: Comparison of popular benchmarks with Dynamic-SUPERB.

                                                                    Dynamic-       Dynamic-
      Benchmark SUPERB SLUE HEAR MARBLE AIR-Bench
                                                                 SUPERB Phase-1 SUPERB Phase-2
       # of tasks       13      7     19      13        19∗            55               180
        Speech          ✓      ✓                         ✓             ✓                 ✓
        Music                                 ✓          ✓             ✓                 ✓
        Audio                         ✓                  ✓             ✓                 ✓
∗
    foundation track

3.2     TASK FORMULATION

As Figure 1c depicts, in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2, each task is structured to include: (1) Text
instruction: A natural language instruction that guides the model on the task to perform. Each
task has multiple different instructions to evaluate the model’s ability to understand instructions.
(2) Audio component: At least one audio element, which can be in the input, the output, or both.
(3) (Optional) Text component: Text elements (other than instruction) that may serve as inputs or
outputs. The number of audio elements in the inputs or outputs may vary depending on the task. For
example, in speaker verification, two utterances are used to determine whether they were produced
by the same speaker (green blocks in Figure 1c). Besides, text inputs are not always required; for
instance, ASR does not involve any text inputs. We use text format for instructions instead of spoken
format. Spoken instructions involve varying content, speaker characteristics, and prosody, making
them more complex. Text instructions act as an intermediary, bridging text and spoken universal
models. These designs ensure consistency and simplify the model’s understanding and processing
of diverse tasks while maintaining the benchmark’s extendibility with minimal constraints.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Another problem in evaluating universal models is the format of classification and regression tasks.
Generally, a task-specialized model generates predicted labels (soft distributions or hard labels)
within a pre-defined set of labels for classification or numeric values for regression within a pre-
defined range. However, a universal model does not necessarily have access to this information, and
thus it is hard to evaluate them in the same way, especially using it to perform several different tasks.
To address this, we believe that a universal speech model should produce outputs in natural language
for all tasks (model outputs in Figure 1c). Therefore, in Dynamic-SUPERB, all classification labels
are represented as text. For regression tasks with specific formats (e.g., scalars, JSON, or Python-
style lists), we can parse the natural language outputs using a post-processing pipeline (Section 4.2).

3.3   C ALL FOR TASKS

Dynamic-SUPERB fosters community collaboration, encouraging the addition of innovative tasks to
remain relevant in this rapidly changing field. In Phase-2, we initiated a call for tasks in March 2024
to invite contributions from the research community. We established an organized and transparent
submission process on our GitHub portal, where we organize members who serve as editors to
guide contributors. Contributors propose tasks by providing relevant information on GitHub. Each
proposal is assigned to an editor who checks for major issues and prevents duplicated efforts. Then,
task proposers upload their data to our Huggingface space in specified formats, using only datasets
with proper licenses. They complete submissions by opening a pull request on GitHub with the
necessary files. Afterward, editors review submissions on a rolling basis, offering suggestions for
refinement rather than immediate acceptance or rejection. After iterative improvements, accepted
tasks are merged into the repository. Between March and July 2024, we received more than 140 task
proposals and accepted over 120 new tasks. Tasks still under review are not included here but will
be featured in the next phase. For details, please refer to Appendix F.

3.4   TASK TAXONOMY


       (a) Task Taxonomy for speech tasks.                   (b) Task Taxonomy for audio and music tasks.

                            Figure 2: Task taxonomy in Dynamic-SUPERB.

One primary challenge in building a large-scale benchmark is offering valuable insights to its users.
To address this, we developed a task taxonomy1 that helps researchers interpret performance results
across various tasks. Researchers can leverage this taxonomy to select specific tasks for model
development instead of evaluating every task in the benchmark.
Figures 2 shows the high-level task taxonomy in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2. Due to the space
limitation, we only show some representative tasks. Each leaf node includes at least one task and
   1
     We developed the taxonomy by referencing sessions from the INTERSPEECH conference and EDICS of
IEEE SPS. Though not identical, they have a very similar structure (please refer to Appendix A for comparison).


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


may be further categorized into more fine-grained sub-domains, which are not shown here due to
space constraints. For example, within ‘Speaker & Language/Speaker’, we have two categories:
‘Speaker Characteristics’ and ‘Speaker Identification’, each containing several tasks. Please refer to
Appendix B for the complete task list. We first categorize tasks into two primary fields: (I) speech
and (II) music & audio, which are generally distinguished by the source of the sound. For instance,
speech is produced by human vocal cords, music is created using instruments, and audio includes
sounds generated by other creatures, materials, or natural phenomena. We then split each field into
several domains based on the key attributes and challenges that the tasks within them present.

3.4.1   S PEECH
As Figure 2a shows, there are 8 domains within the speech field. Speech Recognition focuses on
converting spoken language into text. This includes tackling various challenges like multilingual
and code-switching ASR, as well as spontaneous ASR which is very different from audiobook-
style ones. It also contains specialized tasks such as command recognition and keyword spotting.
Speaker and Language addresses the analysis of speaker characteristics and languages, covering
tasks such as speaker verification, diarization, and language identification. Spoken Language Un-
derstanding deals with understanding and analysis of the content and semantics of spoken language.
It covers tasks like sentiment analysis and speech translation. Phonetics, Phonology, and Prosody
focuses on the sound structure of speech, including phoneme recognition, pronunciation evaluation,
and prosodic features like stress and accent classification. Paralinguistics explores non-verbal as-
pects of speech, such as emotion recognition and vocal event detection, which can capture nuances
like screaming or coughing. Speech Enhancement aims to improve speech quality by detecting and
mitigating noise, reverberation, and other degradations, but currently, we only have understanding
tasks. Speech, Voice, and Hearing Disorders is dedicated to identifying and classifying disorders
such as stuttering and so on. Safety and Security focuses on detecting synthetic or manipulated
speech, addressing tasks like spoof detection and recognizing deepfake voices.

3.4.2   AUDIO & M USIC
The audio and music field includes a wide range of tasks that focus on various attributes of sound
beyond speech, such as musical elements, environmental sounds, and advanced sound analysis.
This field is divided into 9 domains, each addressing a specific aspect of audio or music process-
ing. Music Classification tasks focus on categorizing musical elements such as instruments, genres,
and emotions, providing a foundation for recognizing and analyzing different types of musical con-
tent. Pitch Analysis delves into identifying the pitch and harmony within music, including tasks
like pitch extraction, chord classification, and key detection. Rhythm Analysis involves tasks such
as beat tracking, which is critical for understanding the temporal structure of music. In Singing
Analysis, tasks address both lyric recognition and translation, as well as the classification of vocal
techniques used in singing. Quality Assessment evaluates the perceived quality of singing, includ-
ing automated predictions of Mean Opinion Scores (MOS). The Sound Event domain is broader,
covering various sound sources such as animals, the environment, and human activities. Tasks range
from animal sound classification to emergency traffic detection and even advanced tasks like multi-
channel sound event understanding. Safety domain includes detecting deepfakes in singing voices
and identifying manipulated audio files, ensuring sound authenticity and integrity. Spatial Audio
covers all tasks related to understanding spatial information, such as estimating the distance or posi-
tion of sounds in the real world. Finally, Signal Characteristics Analysis domain addresses general
signal-level characteristics of audio, including sound effect detection, and duration prediction.

3.4.3   C ORE TASKS
While our task taxonomy provides a comprehensive, hierarchical, and systematic approach for
benchmark users to easily get started with Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2, evaluating all tasks with
limited resources remains a challenge. To address this, alongside the task taxonomy, we have se-
lected core tasks for speech, music, and audio. These core tasks are reduced subsets of essential
tasks that have been widely used or studied within the research community. We include tasks from
three popular benchmarks: SUPERB (speech), MARBLE (music), and HEAR (audio). The three
benchmarks were originally designed for evaluating encoders, not for an instruction-following uni-
versal model, so modifications are required. We crafted instructions for each task, reduced the data


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


size, and reformulated them into the Dynamic-SUPERB format. Besides, we replaced the datasets
in some tasks to address licensing issues. Since the core task set is much smaller than the full bench-
mark, researchers can more efficiently evaluate their models across a reasonable range of domains.

4     E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS
4.1   M ODELS

We evaluated several publicly-available models on Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2: SALMONN, LTU-
AS, Qwen-Audio-Chat, Qwen2-Audio-7B-Instruct, WavLLM, MU-LLaMA (Liu et al., 2024),
GAMA (Ghosh et al., 2024). SALMONN is further categorized into 7B and 13B versions based
on the size of its LLM component. All of these models are publicly available, and we utilized
their official implementations for inference without any modifications. The first five models are
instruction-based speech models, each also trained with audio understanding capabilities. However,
as they were not trained on music data, we do not expect them to perform well on music-related
tasks. Hence, we further included MU-LLaMA and GAMA. MU-LLaMA is specifically designed
for various music-understanding tasks, and GAMA is trained with both general audio data and a mu-
sic corpus. Similar to the speech models, MU-LLaMA and GAMA adopt an LLM-based framework.
They use a music or audio encoder, such as MERT (LI et al., 2024) or Q-former, to convert music
or audio into features, which the LLM then uses as prompts for subsequent reasoning. The sam-
pling strategies used for generating outputs from the LLMs were retained as defined in their official
implementations. Finally, we implemented a cascaded system baseline called Whisper-LLaMA.
The system first transcribes audio using Whisper-v3-large, and then LLaMA3.1-8B processes the
transcriptions to perform various tasks based on the provided instructions.
When evaluating models on these diverse tasks, several challenges inevitably arise. One challenge
was testing the baseline models on tasks involving multiple audio inputs. For example, in speaker
verification, a model determines whether two utterances are produced by the same speaker. Among
the evaluated models, only Qwen-Audio and Qwen2-Audio provide interfaces that allow inputting
multiple audio files. For the remaining models, we concatenated all audio files, separated by 0.5
seconds of silence, and used the concatenated file as input.
Last, different models have their own maximum supported audio durations. Models using Whisper
to encode speech face an inherent limitation: Whisper can process audio files of up to 30 seconds,
and some models are restricted to handling even shorter durations. Consequently, we retained the
original model settings and did not modify the model architecture to accommodate longer audio
clips. A preliminary analysis of all audio (Appendix G) in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 shows that
only a small proportion (around 6.57%) exceeds 30 seconds in length. Hence, we believe our settings
do not largely impact the evaluation results and ensure reasonable inference efficiency.

4.2   E VALUATION METRICS

The outputs of universal speech models are natural language sentences, making it difficult to assess
their correctness using conventional metrics. For classification tasks, such as emotion recognition,
a task-specific model outputs a label from predefined emotions in the dataset, while a universal
model generates sentences like “The speaker sounds happy.” In this case, we can easily assess
the correctness of the former by comparing labels, but this approach does not apply to the latter.
Similarly, in regression tasks, a natural language response like “Using MOS scoring criteria, I give
the audio a score of 3 out of 5” makes it difficult to directly use metrics such as mean square error.
In evaluation, we categorize tasks into three types: (1) classification, (2) regression, and (3) se-
quence generation. For each type, we use different pipelines to evaluate the models’ outputs. For
classification tasks, we utilize external LLMs (GPT-4o) as referees, with the temperature set to
be zero for evaluation consistency, to evaluate whether the outputs from speech or music models2
match the ground truth. This approach has been widely adopted in the NLP community (Wang
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Chiang & Lee, 2023), and we extend its application to speech re-
search. We design a prompt that includes the task instructions, the model’s output to be evaluated,
    2
      To avoid ambiguity, unless specified otherwise, the terms “output” or “model output” in this section refer
to the results generated by the models in Sec. 4.1.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the corresponding ground truth. The LLM judge gets this prompt and determines if the output
aligns with the ground truth using a chain-of-thought reasoning process. By leveraging the strong
instruction-following capabilities of these LLMs, we constrain them to provide the final decision in
a fixed format, allowing us to extract the answer using simple methods such as regular expressions3 .
We then define accuracy as the percentage of outputs that the LLM judge considers aligned with
the ground truth. Please refer to Appendix E for details on the prompts and the alignment between
LLMs and humans. Importantly, although we used GPT-4o for evaluation in the main text,
to support reproducibility we have also included comprehensive evaluation results using the
open-source LLM (LLaMA3.1-8b-Instruct) in Appendix C.
For regression tasks, the above method cannot be applied because performance is not assessed us-
ing hard labels. Instead, we use LLMs (GPT-4o) as a post-processor to transform natural language
responses into a format compatible with the original metrics used in these tasks. Specifically, we
developed a prompt that directs the LLMs to extract essential information from the output and con-
vert it into the same format as the ground truth. If the output lacks correct or relevant information
that can be converted to match the ground truth format, the LLM returns “N/A” to mark it as invalid.
Since conventional metrics cannot accommodate “N/A” and setting a default value is unreasonable
due to the variability of metrics, we also calculate the N/A rate for each regression task, defined as
the percentage of invalid outputs within a task. A higher N/A rate indicates that the model struggles
with following instructions, which may indirectly affect its performance on the task.
For sequence generation tasks such as ASR and captioning, we apply their original metrics directly
to the raw outputs from baseline models. This is because identifying redundant prefixes or sections
unrelated to the task objectives is highly challenging in sequence generation, even with human in-
volvement. Besides, our review of the original evaluation results reported by these baseline models
revealed no explicit mention of post-processing procedures. Therefore, we base our evaluations
solely on the unprocessed outputs, ensuring consistency and objectivity across all models.

5    R ESULTS


Figure 3: Domain-level relative-score-based performance comparison across different models. We
exclude tasks where the models have a 100% NA rate or where Whisper-LLaMA scores zero, as
these make it impossible to average their scores with other tasks.

   3
     We have tried to ask the speech universal models to directly output their decisions in a fixed format, but
they do not always follow the instructions. Therefore, the evaluation pipeline described here is necessary.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1   D OMAIN -L EVEL P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON IN TAXONOMY

Here, we analyze the results based on the taxonomy. Due to space limitations, we can only report and
compare the results of different models at the domain level in this subsection. Since different metrics
are used across tasks, we adopted a relative-score-based method to summarize task performance.
For each task, we calculated the relative improvement of each model compared to the cascaded
system baseline (Whisper + LLaMA) and then obtained the domain-level scores by averaging all
its improvements across the tasks within each domain. For regression tasks, we introduced the N/A
rate to measure how well a model meets the task requirements. The original task metric was only
computed on instances that followed the task format (after post-processing by the LLM). To account
for whether a model can follow instructions, we incorporated the N/A rate into the reported scores.
Accordingly, we calculated the improvement based on scaled values. For metrics where a higher
value indicates better performance (such as the F1 score), we multiplied the metric value by (1 –
N/A rate). Conversely, for metrics where a lower value indicates better performance (such as word
error rate), we divided the metric value by (1 – N/A rate).
Figure 3 presents a domain-level comparison of relative scores across different models. Whisper-
LLaMA consistently has zero scores throughout all domains, serving as the reference baseline for
evaluating other models. In speech domains, no model outperforms Whisper-LLaMA in speech
recognition and spoken language understanding. This shows that using ASR remains a strong
baseline for language understanding, as text more explicitly represents semantic information than
speech. However, Whisper-LLaMA lags behind SALMONN in phoneme recognition, a task for
which SALMONN is explicitly trained, indicating that task-specific training still provides superior
performance in specialized domains.
Conversely, in the speaker and paralinguistics domains, all models surpass the baseline. This im-
provement occurs because the ASR process in the cascaded system tends to discard critical informa-
tion from the speech signal, such as speaker characteristics, pitch, and emotion. In contrast, other
models utilize soft representations that retain more speech information, giving them the potential to
learn beyond ASR, and some of these models were also trained to perform specific tasks within cer-
tain domains 4 . Additionally, music-specific large language models like GAMA-IT and Mu-LLaMA
perform poorly on speech recognition and understanding tasks, which is expected since they were
primarily designed for music understanding. Nevertheless, they surprisingly achieved scores com-
parable to the speech models in speaker and paralinguistics.
Turning to audio and music domains, where ASR models cannot transcribe non-speech informa-
tion into text, most models outperform the baseline in several areas, such as music classification
and sound event detection. Surprisingly, spoken language models primarily trained on speech data
(Qwen models, SALMONN, WavLLM)5 outperform the two music models (GAMA-IT and Mu-
LLaMA) in various music-related domains such as harmony and pitch, music classification, and
rhythm analysis. We speculate that training on diverse data, even with significant differences in
signal-level characteristics, enhances performance across domains, emphasizing the importance of
developing unified models for speech, music, and general audio processing.
Lastly, we observe some outliers with significantly higher or lower values in the figure, typically
resulting from unbounded evaluation metrics. For instance, in the phonetics and prosody domain,
WavLLM and LTU-AS exhibit poor scores due to their erroneous outputs in phone/phoneme seg-
ment counting tasks, predicting thousands of segments in utterances lasting only seconds and result-
ing in an excessively high mean square error. While the relative score-based approach effectively
summarizes model performance, domain-level scores can be distorted by specific tasks within a do-
main. Thus, we encourage researchers aiming to develop model performance in specific domains to
comprehensively report task-level scores to more accurately reflect their models’ capabilities.

5.2   C ORE TASKS RESULTS

We tested the performance of the models on core tasks that are widely studied and commonly used.
Table 2 presents the detailed results of the models on SUPERB tasks, displaying each task’s perfor-
  4
    Although the models have been trained on some tasks in the same domains, the training tasks of these
models generally do not use the same instructions as Dynamic-SUPERB and do not offer as broad coverage.
  5
    Qwen and SALMONN are trained on a mixture of speech (dominant component), music, and audio data.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Evaluation on SUPERB tasks. A “*” indicates that the metric is scaled with NA rate, and a
“-” means a model has a 100% NA rate.
                             PR      KS      IC      ER      ASR     QbE             SF           SV       SD
                           PER ↓    Acc ↑   Acc ↑   Acc ↑   WER ↓    Acc ↑   F1∗ ↑    CER∗ ↓     Acc ↑   DER∗ ↓
      Whisper-LLaMA         100.1    36.5    36.5    12.5     34.0    46.5    53.6        51.3    45.0    1068.7
      SALMONN-7B             25.4    30.5    21.0    12.1     15.1    49.0    61.6        61.5    45.0         -
      SALMONN-13B            24.6     2.0     5.5    12.5      2.8    51.5    29.6       106.3    51.0         -
     Qwen-Audio-Chat        100.6    60.5    26.5    70.4     69.4    48.0    42.2        90.1    49.0    8852.2
    Qwen2-Audio-7B-Inst.    101.0    47.0    26.0    75.8     36.7    53.5    42.4        55.7    51.0    4664.4
         WavLLM             100.0    43.0    28.0    12.1      6.9    49.5    50.8        84.9    49.0    3621.2
         LTU-AS             102.8     1.0     0.1    25.8     96.3    45.0    10.2       559.3    44.0   14923.3
        GAMA-IT             100.4     2.0     1.0     0.0    116.7     2.5     2.7      4750.0    45.0     187.6
        Mu-LLaMA            110.3     4.0     3.5    12.9    103.7    51.0     1.0    15869.6     44.0         -
PR: Phoneme Recognition, KS: Keyword Spotting, IC: Intent Classification, ER: Emotion Recognition, QbE:
Query-by-Example, SF: Slot Filling, SV: Speaker Verification, SD: Speaker Diarization

mance in its own metric rather than relative scores. Please refer to Appendix D for results on HEAR
and MARBLE. It is worth noting that these tasks have been adapted to the Dynamic-SUPERB
framework. Therefore, the results are not directly comparable to previous studies that tested on the
original SUPERB. However, they indicate current performance levels on these tasks.
No single model excels across all tasks. In phoneme recognition (PR), the SALMONN models
were the only ones to achieve a relatively lower phoneme error rate (PER) compared to the others.
For keyword spotting (KS), Qwen-Audio-Chat was the only model to perform slightly better than
a random guess (50%). Whisper-LLaMA surpassed all other models in intent classification (IC).
Regarding emotion recognition (ER), Qwen-Audio-Chat and Qwen2-Audio-7B-Instruct stood out,
with the latter even achieving about 75% accuracy. In ASR, SALMONN-13B and WavLLM are
the only two models that achieved a word error rate (WER) lower than 10%. Query-by-example
(QbE) appears to be very challenging for all models, as none performed better than a random guess
(50%). Slot-filling (SF) is evaluated using two metrics: F1 for slot type and CER for slot value.
While Whisper-LLaMA and SALMONN-7B are the top two in this task, their results are still far
from ideal. In speaker verification (SV), all models performed badly, as even the best ones achieved
results close to random guessing (50%). In speaker diarization (SD), results were similarly poor,
with some even reaching a 100% N/A rate. Comparing Figure 3 and Table 2, we observed that per-
formance on core tasks sometimes deviates from trends observed at the domain level. For example,
although SALMONN-13B outperforms other models in ASR, it lags behind Whisper-LLaMA in the
speech recognition domain, revealing its limited capabilities and highlighting the need to enhance
its generalizability. In summary, among tested models, some excel in specific tasks, while others
perform poorly across the board, and none dominate across all tasks. We believe these findings
provide valuable insights for researchers aiming to improve models, starting from core tasks and
progressively tackling each domain in the benchmark for broader applicability.

6      C ONCLUSIONS

This paper presents Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2, the largest benchmark for evaluating instruction-
based universal spoken language models, building upon collaborative efforts across the research
community. Dynamic-SUPERB covers a wide range of diverse tasks and offers a fine-grained task
taxonomy. The recent models show good performance on specific tasks but poor generalization
across common tasks like those in SUPERB, highlighting the need for further research on universal
models. All materials are made openly available to facilitate reproduction and benchmarking. We
sincerely invite researchers to join our vibrant community and collaborate to advance the field.
Limitations: Although Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 is the largest and most comprehensive bench-
mark, we acknowledge its limitations. It lacks comprehensive speech-generation tasks, as Phase-2
focused on understanding tasks due to the few universal generation models. Despite our efforts to
develop the task taxonomy scientifically, new domains may emerge as the benchmark grows, and
tasks can be categorized in various ways. While our automatic evaluation pipeline using LLMs
correlates well with human evaluations (Appendix E) for current tasks, it may not generalize to all
future tasks. Upholding the core spirit of the Dynamic-SUPERB project, we are striving to address
these issues and enhance the benchmark for the next phase.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   E THICS S TATEMENT

Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 includes several datasets, and we asked contributors to describe how
they used them. Most contributors derived task data by uniformly sampling from the origi-
nal datasets without applying any special processing. Therefore, Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 in-
evitably inherits the biases present in these datasets across tasks. Additionally, we asked all
contributors to provide the necessary license information to ensure that we can include them in
the benchmark properly. More specifically, all task data in Dynamic-SUPERB are derived from
datasets with licenses that permit remixing and redistribution. As we expect the benchmark
to grow dynamically in the future, we maintain a complete list of dataset licenses on our offi-
cial GitHub page (https://github.com/dynamic-superb/dynamic-superb/blob/
main/docs/dataset_license.md), which will be updated as new tasks are introduced. If
there are any changes to the dataset license in the future, we may adjust the benchmark task accord-
ingly.


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We open-source all task data and the evaluation pipeline at https://github.com/
dynamic-superb/dynamic-superb. For LLM-based evaluation, we set GPT-4o’s tempera-
ture to 0 to ensure a stable evaluation process. However, we acknowledge that GPT-4o’s behavior
may change with future updates. Therefore, we provide a comprehensive set of evaluation results
using LLaMA-3.1-8b-Instruct in Appendix C (Table 6). Additionally, in Appendix E, we present a
preliminary study on using open-source LLMs for evaluation, demonstrating promising correlations
with human annotations. We encourage researchers to use these open-source LLMs when evaluating
their own models to support reproducibility.


R EFERENCES
Librispeech word. https://huggingface.co/datasets/speech31/Librispeech_
  word. Accessed: 2024-10-02.

Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Eneko Agirre, Daniel Cer, Mona Diab, and Aitor Gonzalez-Agirre. SemEval-2012 task 6: A pilot on
  semantic textual similarity. In Eneko Agirre, Johan Bos, Mona Diab, Suresh Manandhar, Yuval
  Marton, and Deniz Yuret (eds.), *SEM 2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Com-
  putational Semantics – Volume 1: Proceedings of the main conference and the shared task, and
  Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
  2012), pp. 385–393, Montréal, Canada, 7-8 June 2012. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. URL https://aclanthology.org/S12-1051.

Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon,
  Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, et al. Musiclm: Generating
  music from text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11325, 2023.

Afroz Ahamad, Ankit Anand, and Pranesh Bhargava. Accentdb: A database of non-native english
  accents to assist neural speech recognition. In Proceedings of The 12th Language Resources
  and Evaluation Conference, pp. 5353–5360, Marseille, France, May 2020. European Language
  Resources Association. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.lrec-1.
  659.

Anna Aljanaki, Frans Wiering, and Remco C. Veltkamp. Studying emotion induced by mu-
  sic through a crowdsourcing game. Information Processing & Management, 52(1):115–128,
  2016. ISSN 0306-4573. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2015.03.004. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306457315000424. Emotion and
  Sentiment in Social and Expressive Media.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Akshay Anantapadmanabhan, Ashwin Bellur, and Hema A Murthy. Modal analysis and transcrip-
  tion of strokes of the mridangam using non-negative matrix factorization. In 2013 IEEE interna-
  tional conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing, pp. 181–185. IEEE, 2013.
Xavier Anguera, Luis-J. Rodriguez-Fuentes, Andi Buzo, Florian Metze, Igor Szöke, and Mikel Pe-
  nagarikano. Quesst2014: Evaluating query-by-example speech search in a zero-resource setting
  with real-life queries. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5833–5837, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2015.7179090.
Anthropic. Claude. https://www.anthropic.com, 2023. Large language model.
Rosana Ardila, Megan Branson, Kelly Davis, Michael Kohler, Josh Meyer, Michael Henretty,
  Reuben Morais, Lindsay Saunders, Francis Tyers, and Gregor Weber. Common voice: A
  massively-multilingual speech corpus. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and
  Evaluation Conference, pp. 4218–4222, 2020.
Muhammad Asif, Muhammad Usaid, Munaf Rashid, Tabarka Rajab, Samreen Hussain, and Sarwar
 Wasi. Large-scale audio dataset for emergency vehicle sirens and road noises. Scientific data, 9
 (1):599, 2022.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
Jon Barker, Shinji Watanabe, Emmanuel Vincent, and Jan Trmal. The Fifth ’CHiME’ Speech Sep-
  aration and Recognition Challenge: Dataset, Task and Baselines. In Proc. Interspeech 2018, pp.
  1561–1565, 2018. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2018-1768.
Emanuele Bastianelli, Andrea Vanzo, Pawel Swietojanski, and Verena Rieser. SLURP: A Spoken
  Language Understanding Resource Package. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020.
Sören Becker, Johanna Vielhaben, Marcel Ackermann, Klaus-Robert Müller, Sebastian Lapuschkin,
   and Wojciech Samek. Audiomnist: Exploring explainable artificial intelligence for audio analysis
   on a simple benchmark. Journal of the Franklin Institute, 361(1):418–428, 2024.
Jordan J Bird and Ahmad Lotfi. Real-time detection of ai-generated speech for deepfake voice
  conversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12734, 2023.
Yonatan Bitton, Hritik Bansal, Jack Hessel, Rulin Shao, Wanrong Zhu, Anas Awadalla, Josh Gard-
  ner, Rohan Taori, and Ludwig Schimdt. Visit-bench: a benchmark for vision-language instruction
  following inspired by real-world use. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 26898–26922, 2023.
Dmitry Bogdanov, Minz Won, Philip Tovstogan, Alastair Porter, and Xavier Serra. The mtg-jamendo
 dataset for automatic music tagging. ICML, 2019.
P. Cano, N. Wack, and P. Herrera. ISMIR04 Genre Identification task dataset (1.0), 2018. URL
   https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1302992.
Houwei Cao, David G. Cooper, Michael K. Keutmann, Ruben C. Gur, Ani Nenkova, and Ragini
  Verma. Crema-d: Crowd-sourced emotional multimodal actors dataset. IEEE Transactions on
  Affective Computing, 5(4):377–390, 2014. doi: 10.1109/TAFFC.2014.2336244.
Jean Carletta, Simone Ashby, Sebastien Bourban, Mike Flynn, Mael Guillemot, Thomas Hain,
  Jaroslav Kadlec, Vasilis Karaiskos, Wessel Kraaij, Melissa Kronenthal, et al. The ami meet-
  ing corpus: A pre-announcement. In International workshop on machine learning for multimodal
  interaction, pp. 28–39. Springer, 2005.
Santiago Castro, Devamanyu Hazarika, Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Roger Zimmermann, Rada Mihal-
  cea, and Soujanya Poria. Towards multimodal sarcasm detection (an Obviously perfect pa-
  per). In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4619–4629, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1455. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1455.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CEEC. High school english listening exam. https://www.ceec.edu.tw/. Accessed: 2024-
  11-08.
Liang-Yu CHEN and Jyh-Shing Roger JANG. Stress detection of english words for a capt sys-
  tem using word-length dependent gmm-based bayesian classifiers. Interdisciplinary Information
  Sciences, 18(2):65–70, 2012. doi: 10.4036/iis.2012.65.
Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-Yi Lee. Can large language models be an alternative to human eval-
  uations? In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15607–15631, 2023.
Eleanor Chodroff, Blaž Pažon, Annie Baker, and Steven Moran. Phonetic segmentation of the UCLA
  phonetics lab archive. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique Hoste, Alessandro Lenci,
  Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference
  on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pp.
  12724–12733, Torino, Italia, May 2024. ELRA and ICCL. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2024.lrec-main.1114.
Soonbeom Choi, Won Il Kim, Sae Byul Park, Sangeon Yong, and Juhan Nam. Children’s song
  dataset for singing voice research. In The 21th International Society for Music Information Re-
  trieval Conference (ISMIR). International Society for Music Information Retrieval, 2020.
Yunfei Chu, Jin Xu, Xiaohuan Zhou, Qian Yang, Shiliang Zhang, Zhijie Yan, Chang Zhou, and
  Jingren Zhou. Qwen-audio: Advancing universal audio understanding via unified large-scale
  audio-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07919, 2023.
Yunfei Chu, Jin Xu, Qian Yang, Haojie Wei, Xipin Wei, Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yuanjun Lv,
  Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen2-audio technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10759,
  2024.
Joris Cosentino, Manuel Pariente, Samuele Cornell, Antoine Deleforge, and Emmanuel Vincent.
  Librimix: An open-source dataset for generalizable speech separation, 2020.
Maureen de Seyssel, Marvin Lavechin, Hadrien Titeux, Arthur Thomas, Gwendal Virlet, An-
 drea Santos Revilla, Guillaume Wisniewski, Bogdan Ludusan, and Emmanuel Dupoux. Prosaudit,
 a prosodic benchmark for self-supervised speech models. In INTERSPEECH 2023, pp. 2963–
 2967, 2023. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2023-438.
DeepContractor.       Musical  instrument chord      classification, 2024.
  URL              https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/deepcontractor/
  musical-instrument-chord-classification. Accessed: 2024-10-01.
Michaël Defferrard, Kirell Benzi, Pierre Vandergheynst, and Xavier Bresson. Fma: A dataset for
 music analysis. In 18th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference, 2017.
Héctor Delgado, Massimiliano Todisco, Md Sahidullah, Nicholas Evans, Tomi Kinnunen, Kong Aik
  Lee, and Junichi Yamagishi. Asvspoof 2017 version 2.0: meta-data analysis and baseline en-
  hancements. In The Speaker and Language Recognition Workshop (Odyssey 2018), pp. 296–303,
  2018. doi: 10.21437/Odyssey.2018-42.
Konstantinos Drossos, Samuel Lipping, and Tuomas Virtanen. Clotho: an audio captioning dataset.
  In ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-
  ing (ICASSP), pp. 736–740, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP40776.2020.9052990.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Ewan Dunbar, Mathieu Bernard, Nicolas Hamilakis, Tu Anh Nguyen, Maureen de Seyssel, Pa-
  tricia Rozé, Morgane Rivière, Eugene Kharitonov, and Emmanuel Dupoux. The Zero Re-
  source Speech Challenge 2021: Spoken Language Modelling. In INTERSPEECH 2021. doi:
  10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1755.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ewan Dunbar, Nicolas Hamilakis, and Emmanuel Dupoux. Self-supervised language learning from
  raw audio: Lessons from the zero resource speech challenge. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
  Signal Processing, 16(6):1211–1226, 2022.

Jesse Engel, Cinjon Resnick, Adam Roberts, Sander Dieleman, Mohammad Norouzi, Douglas Eck,
  and Karen Simonyan. Neural audio synthesis of musical notes with wavenet autoencoders. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1068–1077. PMLR, 2017.

Solène Evain, Ha Nguyen, Hang Le, Marcely Zanon Boito, Salima Mdhaffar, Sina Alisamir, Ziyi
  Tong, Natalia Tomashenko, Marco Dinarelli, Titouan Parcollet, Alexandre Allauzen, Yannick
  Estève, Benjamin Lecouteux, François Portet, Solange Rossato, Fabien Ringeval, Didier Schwab,
  and Laurent Besacier. Lebenchmark: A reproducible framework for assessing self-supervised
  representation learning from speech. In Interspeech 2021, pp. 1439–1443, 2021. doi: 10.21437/
  Interspeech.2021-556.

Francesco Foscarin, Andrew McLeod, Philippe Rigaux, Florent Jacquemard, and Masahiko Sakai.
  ASAP: a dataset of aligned scores and performances for piano transcription. In International
  Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), pp. 534–541, 2020.

Joel Frank and Lea Schönherr. Wavefake: A data set to facilitate audio deepfake detection. In
  Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track (Round 2).

Daniel Galvez, Greg Diamos, Juan Torres, Keith Achorn, Juan Cerón, Anjali Gopi, David
  Kanter, Max Lam, Mark Mazumder, and Vijay Janapa Reddi.         The people’s speech:
  A large-scale diverse english speech recognition dataset for commercial usage.    In
  J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung (eds.), Proceedings of the Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, volume 1, 2021.         URL https:
  //datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2021/file/202cb962ac59075b964b07152d234b70-Paper-round1.pdf.

Sreyan Ghosh, Sonal Kumar, Ashish Seth, Chandra Kiran Reddy Evuru, Utkarsh Tyagi, S Sak-
  shi, Oriol Nieto, Ramani Duraiswami, and Dinesh Manocha. Gama: A large audio-language
  model with advanced audio understanding and complex reasoning abilities. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.11768, 2024.

Mandar Gogate, Kia Dashtipour, Ahsan Adeel, and Amir Hussain. Cochleanet: A robust language-
 independent audio-visual model for real-time speech enhancement. Information Fusion, 63:273–
 285, 2020.

Ary L Goldberger, Luis AN Amaral, Leon Glass, Jeffrey M Hausdorff, Plamen Ch Ivanov, Roger G
  Mark, Joseph E Mietus, George B Moody, Chung-Kang Peng, and H Eugene Stanley. Physiobank,
  physiotoolkit, and physionet: components of a new research resource for complex physiologic
  signals. circulation, 101(23):e215–e220, 2000.

Yuan Gong, Jin Yu, and James Glass. Vocalsound: A dataset for improving human vocal sounds
  recognition. In ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 151–155, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9746828.

Yuan Gong, Alexander H Liu, Hongyin Luo, Leonid Karlinsky, and James Glass. Joint audio and
  speech understanding. In 2023 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Work-
  shop (ASRU), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2023.

Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yihan Wu, Sheng Zhao, and Xu Tan. Prompttts: Controllable text-to-
  speech with text descriptions. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.

Curtis Hawthorne, Andriy Stasyuk, Adam Roberts, Ian Simon, Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang, Sander
  Dieleman, Erich Elsen, Jesse Engel, and Douglas Eck. Enabling factorized piano music modeling
  and generation with the MAESTRO dataset. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1lYRjC9F7.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Addison Howard et al. Cornell birdcall identification, 2020. URL https://kaggle.com/
  competitions/birdsong-recognition.

Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.

Shujie Hu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Sanyuan Chen, Hongkun Hao, Jing Pan, Xunying Liu, Jinyu
  Li, Sunit Sivasankaran, Linquan Liu, et al. Wavllm: Towards robust and adaptive speech large
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00656, 2024.

Chien-yu Huang, Ke-Han Lu, Shih-Heng Wang, Chi-Yuan Hsiao, Chun-Yi Kuan, Haibin Wu,
  Siddhant Arora, Kai-Wei Chang, Jiatong Shi, Yifan Peng, et al. Dynamic-superb: Towards
  a dynamic, collaborative, and comprehensive instruction-tuning benchmark for speech. In
  ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 12136–12140. IEEE, 2024a.

Kuan-Po Huang, Chih-Kai Yang, Yu-Kuan Fu, Ewan Dunbar, and Hung-yi Lee. Zero resource
  code-switched speech benchmark using speech utterance pairs for multiple spoken languages. In
  ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 10006–10010. IEEE, 2024b.

Eric Humphrey, Simon Durand, and Brian McFee. Openmic-2018: An open data-set for multiple
  instrument recognition. In ISMIR, pp. 438–444, 2018.

IEEE DCASE 2016 Challenge. IEEE DCASE 2016 Challenge. http://www.cs.tut.fi/
  sgn/arg/dcase2016/, 2016. Accessed: 2025-03-04.

Keith Ito and Linda Johnson. The lj speech dataset.               https://keithito.com/
  LJ-Speech-Dataset/, 2017.

Tahir Javed, Kaushal Bhogale, Abhigyan Raman, Pratyush Kumar, Anoop Kunchukuttan, and
  Mitesh M Khapra. Indicsuperb: A speech processing universal performance benchmark for in-
  dian languages. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp.
  12942–12950, 2023.

Denys Katerenchuk, David Guy Brizan, and Andrew Rosenberg. Interpersonal relationship labels
  for the CALLHOME corpus. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry
  Declerck, Sara Goggi, Koiti Hasida, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Hélène
  Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Takenobu Tokunaga (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
  2018), Miyazaki, Japan, May 2018. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). URL
  https://aclanthology.org/L18-1592.

Tyler Kendall and Charlie Farrington. The corpus of regional african american language, 2023. URL
  https://doi.org/10.7264/1ad5-6t35.

Bongjun Kim, Madhav Ghei, Bryan Pardo, and Zhiyao Duan. Vocal imitation set: a dataset of
  vocally imitated sound events using the audioset ontology. In DCASE, pp. 148–152, 2018.

Peter Knees, Ángel Faraldo Pérez, Herrera Boyer, Richard Vogl, Sebastian Böck, Florian
  Hörschläger, Mickael Le Goff, et al. Two data sets for tempo estimation and key detection in
  electronic dance music annotated from user corrections. In Proceedings of the 16th Interna-
  tional Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR); 2015 Oct 26-30; Málaga,
  Spain.[Málaga]: International Society for Music Information Retrieval, 2015. p. 364-70. Inter-
  national Society for Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR), 2015.

Tom Ko, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Povey, Michael L. Seltzer, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. A study
  on data augmentation of reverberant speech for robust speech recognition. In 2017 IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5220–5224, 2017.
  doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2017.7953152.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Edith Law, Kris West, Michael I Mandel, Mert Bay, and J Stephen Downie. Evaluation of algorithms
  using games: The case of music tagging. In ISMIR, pp. 387–392. Citeseer, 2009.

Colin Lea, Vikramjit Mitra, Aparna Joshi, Sachin Kajarekar, and Jeffrey P. Bigham. Sep-28k: A
  dataset for stuttering event detection from podcasts with people who stutter. In ICASSP 2021 -
  2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp.
  6798–6802, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9413520.

Keon Lee, Kyumin Park, and Daeyoung Kim. Dailytalk: Spoken dialogue dataset for conversational
  text-to-speech. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023a.

Yizhi LI, Ruibin Yuan, Ge Zhang, Yinghao Ma, Xingran Chen, Hanzhi Yin, Chenghao Xiao,
  Chenghua Lin, Anton Ragni, Emmanouil Benetos, Norbert Gyenge, Roger Dannenberg, Ruibo
  Liu, Wenhu Chen, Gus Xia, Yemin Shi, Wenhao Huang, Zili Wang, Yike Guo, and Jie Fu. MERT:
  Acoustic music understanding model with large-scale self-supervised training. In The Twelfth In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=w3YZ9MSlBu.

Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023b.

Guan-Ting Lin, Prashanth Gurunath Shivakumar, Ankur Gandhe, Chao-Han Huck Yang, Yile Gu,
  Shalini Ghosh, Andreas Stolcke, Hung-yi Lee, and Ivan Bulyko. Paralinguistics-enhanced large
  language modeling of spoken dialogue. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 10316–10320. IEEE, 2024.

Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and
  Mark D Plumbley. Audioldm: text-to-audio generation with latent diffusion models. In Proceed-
  ings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 21450–21474, 2023a.

Shansong Liu, Atin Sakkeer Hussain, Chenshuo Sun, and Ying Shan. Music understanding llama:
  Advancing text-to-music generation with question answering and captioning. In ICASSP 2024-
  2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp.
  286–290. IEEE, 2024.

Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. G-eval: Nlg
  evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2511–2522, 2023b.

Steven R Livingstone and Frank A Russo. The ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech
  and song (ravdess): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american
  english. PloS one, 13(5):e0196391, 2018.

Holy Lovenia, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Genta Indra Winata, Peng Xu, Xu Yan, Zihan Liu, Rita Frieske,
  Tiezheng Yu, Wenliang Dai, Elham J Barezi, et al. Ascend: A spontaneous chinese-english dataset
  for code-switching in multi-turn conversation. In Proceedings of the 13th Language Resources
  and Evaluation Conference (LREC), 2022.

Ken MacLean.               Voxforge,   2018.             Ken     MacLean.[Online].     Available:
  http://www.voxforge.org/home.[Acedido em 2012].

Gallil Maimon, Amit Roth, and Yossi Adi. A suite for acoustic language model evaluation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2409.07437, 2024.

Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In ACL, 2022.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


National Chengchi University. The nccu (national chengchi university) corpus of spoken taiwan
  mandarin, n.d. URL http://spokentaiwanmandarin.nccu.edu.tw/. [Accessed:
  2024-10-01].
Inês Nolasco, Alessandro Terenzi, Stefania Cecchi, Simone Orcioni, Helen L Bear, and Emmanouil
   Benetos. Audio-based identification of beehive states. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International
   Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 8256–8260. IEEE, 2019.
Lara Orlandic, Tomas Teijeiro, and David Atienza. The coughvid crowdsourcing dataset, a corpus
  for the study of large-scale cough analysis algorithms. Scientific Data, 8(1):156, 2021.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: an asr corpus
  based on public domain audio books. In 2015 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech
  and signal processing (ICASSP), pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.
Yagya Raj Pandeya and Joonwhoan Lee. Domestic cat sound classification using transfer learning.
  International Journal of Fuzzy Logic and Intelligent Systems, 18(2):154–160, 2018.
Yagya Raj Pandeya, Dongwhoon Kim, and Joonwhoan Lee. Domestic cat sound classification using
  learned features from deep neural nets. Applied Sciences, 8(10):1949, 2018.
Titouan Parcollet, Ha Nguyen, Solene Evain, Marcely Zanon Boito, Adrien Pupier, Salima Mdhaf-
   far, Hang Le, Sina Alisamir, Natalia Tomashenko, Marco Dinarelli, et al. Lebenchmark 2.0: a
   standardized, replicable and enhanced framework for self-supervised representations of french
   speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05472, 2023.
Karol J Piczak. Esc: Dataset for environmental sound classification. In Proceedings of the 23rd
  ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp. 1015–1018, 2015.
Soujanya Poria, Devamanyu Hazarika, Navonil Majumder, Gautam Naik, Erik Cambria, and Rada
  Mihalcea. MELD: A multimodal multi-party dataset for emotion recognition in conversations.
  In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 527–536, Florence, Italy, July
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1050. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P19-1050.
Sathvik Prasad and Bradley Reaves. Robocall audio from the ftc’s project point of no entry.
Vineel Pratap, Qiantong Xu, Anuroop Sriram, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Ronan Collobert. Mls: A
  large-scale multilingual dataset for speech research. In Interspeech 2020, pp. 2757–2761, 2020.
  doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2020-2826.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International conference on ma-
  chine learning, pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023.
Zafar Rafii, Antoine Liutkus, Fabian-Robert Stöter, Stylianos Ioannis Mimilakis, and Rachel Bittner.
  MUSDB18-HQ - an uncompressed version of musdb18, December 2019. URL https://doi.
  org/10.5281/zenodo.3338373.
Muhammad Mamunur Rashid, Guiqing Li, and Chengrui Du. Nonspeech7k dataset: Classification
 and analysis of human non-speech sound. IET Signal Processing, 17(6):e12233, 2023.
Matthew Rice, Christian J. Steinmetz, George Fazekas, and Joshua D. Reiss. General purpose audio
 effect removal. In IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics,
 2023.
J. Salamon, C. Jacoby, and J. P. Bello. A dataset and taxonomy for urban sound research. In
   22nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia (ACM-MM’14), pp. 1041–1044, Orlando,
   FL, USA, Nov. 2014.
Miguel Sarabia, Elena Menyaylenko, Alessandro Toso, Skyler Seto, Zakaria Aldeneh, Shadi Pirhos-
 seinloo, Luca Zappella, Barry-John Theobald, Nicholas Apostoloff, and Jonathan Sheaffer. Spa-
 tial librispeech: An augmented dataset for spatial audio learning. In INTERSPEECH 2023, pp.
 3724–3728, 2023. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2023-2117.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiatong Shi, Dan Berrebbi, William Chen, En-Pei Hu, Wei-Ping Huang, Ho-Lam Chung, Xuankai
   Chang, Shang-Wen Li, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Hung yi Lee, and Shinji Watanabe. Ml-superb:
   Multilingual speech universal performance benchmark. In INTERSPEECH 2023, pp. 884–888,
   2023. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2023-1316.
Jiatong Shi, Yueqian Lin, Xinyi Bai, Keyi Zhang, Yuning Wu, Yuxun Tang, Yifeng Yu, Qin Jin, and
   Shinji Watanabe. Singing voice data scaling-up: An introduction to ace-opencpop and ace-kising.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17619, 2024a.
Jiatong Shi, Shih-Heng Wang, William Chen, Martijn Bartelds, Vanya Bannihatti Kumar, Jinchuan
   Tian, Xuankai Chang, Dan Jurafsky, Karen Livescu, Hung yi Lee, and Shinji Watanabe. Ml-
   superb 2.0: Benchmarking multilingual speech models across modeling constraints, languages,
   and datasets. In Interspeech 2024, pp. 1230–1234, 2024b. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2024-2248.
Kazuki Shimada, Archontis Politis, Parthasaarathy Sudarsanam, Daniel A Krause, Kengo Uchida,
  Sharath Adavanne, Aapo Hakala, Yuichiro Koyama, Naoya Takahashi, Shusuke Takahashi, et al.
  Starss23: An audio-visual dataset of spatial recordings of real scenes with spatiotemporal anno-
  tations of sound events. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Suwon Shon, Ankita Pasad, Felix Wu, Pablo Brusco, Yoav Artzi, Karen Livescu, and Kyu J Han.
  Slue: New benchmark tasks for spoken language understanding evaluation on natural speech. In
  ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 7927–7931. IEEE, 2022.
Suwon Shon, Siddhant Arora, Chyi-Jiunn Lin, Ankita Pasad, Felix Wu, Roshan S Sharma, Wei-Lun
  Wu, Hung-Yi Lee, Karen Livescu, and Shinji Watanabe. Slue phase-2: A benchmark suite of
  diverse spoken language understanding tasks. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8906–8937, 2023.
David Snyder, Guoguo Chen, and Daniel Povey. Musan: A music, speech, and noise corpus. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1510.08484, 2015.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
Fabian-Robert Stöter, Soumitro Chakrabarty, Emanuël Habets, and Bernd Edler. LibriCount, a
  dataset for speaker count estimation, 2018. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  1216072.
Dan Stowell, Michael D Wood, Hanna Pamuła, Yannis Stylianou, and Hervé Glotin. Automatic
  acoustic detection of birds through deep learning: the first bird audio detection challenge. Methods
  in Ecology and Evolution, 10(3):368–380, 2019.
Changli Tang, Wenyi Yu, Guangzhi Sun, Xianzhao Chen, Tian Tan, Wei Li, Lu Lu, MA Zejun,
  and Chao Zhang. Salmonn: Towards generic hearing abilities for large language models. In The
  Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a.
Yuxun Tang, Jiatong Shi, Yuning Wu, and Qin Jin. Singmos: An extensive open-source singing
  voice dataset for mos prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10911, 2024b.
Mi Tian, Ajay Srinivasamurthy, Mark Sandler, and Xavier Serra. A study of instrument-wise on-
 set detection in beijing opera percussion ensembles. In 2014 ieee international conference on
 acoustics, speech and signal processing (icassp), pp. 2159–2163. IEEE, 2014.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sheng-Chi Tsai. English lexical stress detection and sentence-based intonation assessment based
  on contour shape description. Master’s thesis, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2015.
  Available at https://hdl.handle.net/11296/jjzzak.
Ching-Yu Tseng. An initial study on stress detection for spoken english. Master’s thesis, National
  Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, 2008. Available at https://hdl.handle.net/
  11296/qr88s2.
Joseph Turian, Jordie Shier, Humair Raj Khan, Bhiksha Raj, Björn W Schuller, Christian J Stein-
  metz, Colin Malloy, George Tzanetakis, Gissel Velarde, Kirk McNally, et al. Hear: Holistic
  evaluation of audio representations. In NeurIPS 2021 Competitions and Demonstrations Track,
  pp. 125–145. PMLR, 2022.
Nicolas Turpault, Romain Serizel, Ankit Parag Shah, and Justin Salamon. Sound event detection
  in domestic environments with weakly labeled data and soundscape synthesis. In Workshop on
  Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes and Events, 2019.
Jörgen Valk and Tanel Alumäe. Voxlingua107: a dataset for spoken language recognition. In 2021
   IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), pp. 652–658. IEEE, 2021.
Arun Balajee Vasudevan, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Semantic object prediction and spatial
  sound super-resolution with binaural sounds. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  638–655. Springer, 2020.
Changhan Wang, Anne Wu, Jiatao Gu, and Juan Pino. Covost 2 and massively multilingual speech
  translation. In Interspeech 2021, pp. 2247–2251, 2021. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2021-2027.
Jiaan Wang, Yunlong Liang, Fandong Meng, Zengkui Sun, Haoxiang Shi, Zhixu Li, Jinan Xu,
   Jianfeng Qu, and Jie Zhou. Is chatgpt a good nlg evaluator? a preliminary study. In Proceedings
   of EMNLP Workshop, pp. 1, 2023.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
  jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al.
  Super-naturalinstructions:generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ tasks. In EMNLP,
  2022.
Pete Warden. Speech commands: A dataset for limited-vocabulary speech recognition. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1804.03209, 2018.
Shinji Watanabe, Michael Mandel, Jon Barker, Emmanuel Vincent, Ashish Arora, Xuankai Chang,
  Sanjeev Khudanpur, Vimal Manohar, Daniel Povey, Desh Raj, et al. Chime-6 challenge: Tackling
  multispeaker speech recognition for unsegmented recordings. In CHiME 2020-6th International
  Workshop on Speech Processing in Everyday Environments, 2020.
WavSource. Sound effects library. https://www.wavsource.com, n.d. Accessed: 2024-10-
 01.
whats2000. Human screaming detection dataset, 2023. URL https://www.kaggle.
  com/datasets/whats2000/human-screaming-detection-dataset/data. Ac-
  cessed: 2024-10-02.
Gordon Wichern, Joe Antognini, Michael Flynn, Licheng Richard Zhu, Emmett McQuinn, Dwight
  Crow, Ethan Manilow, and Jonathan Le Roux. Wham!: Extending speech separation to noisy
  environments. In Interspeech 2019, pp. 1368–1372, 2019. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2821.
Julia Wilkins, Prem Seetharaman, Alison Wahl, and Bryan Pardo. Vocalset: A singing voice dataset.
  In ISMIR, pp. 468–474, 2018.
Zhizheng Wu, Tomi Kinnunen, Nicholas Evans, Junichi Yamagishi, Cemal Hanilçi, Md. Sahidullah,
  and Aleksandr Sizov. Asvspoof 2015: the first automatic speaker verification spoofing and coun-
  termeasures challenge. In Interspeech 2015, pp. 2037–2041, 2015. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.
  2015-462.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Junichi Yamagishi, Christophe Veaux, and Kirsten MacDonald. CSTR VCTK Corpus: English
  Multi-speaker Corpus for CSTR Voice Cloning Toolkit (version 0.92). sound, 2019. URL
  https://doi.org/10.7488/ds/2645.
Chih-Kai Yang, Kuan-Po Huang, Ke-Han Lu, Chun-Yi Kuan, Chi-Yuan Hsiao, and Hung-yi Lee.
  Investigating zero-shot generalizability on mandarin-english code-switched asr and speech-to-text
  translation of recent foundation models with self-supervision and weak supervision. In 2024 IEEE
  International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing Workshops (ICASSPW),
  pp. 540–544. IEEE, 2024a.
Qian Yang, Jin Xu, Wenrui Liu, Yunfei Chu, Ziyue Jiang, Xiaohuan Zhou, Yichong Leng, Yuanjun
  Lv, Zhou Zhao, Chang Zhou, et al. Air-bench: Benchmarking large audio-language models via
  generative comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07729, 2024b.
Shu-wen Yang, Po-Han Chi, Yung-Sung Chuang, Cheng-I Jeff Lai, Kushal Lakhotia, Yist Y. Lin,
  Andy T. Liu, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Guan-Ting Lin, Tzu-Hsien Huang, Wei-Cheng Tseng,
  Ko tik Lee, Da-Rong Liu, Zili Huang, Shuyan Dong, Shang-Wen Li, Shinji Watanabe, Abdelrah-
  man Mohamed, and Hung-yi Lee. Superb: Speech processing universal performance benchmark.
  In Interspeech 2021, pp. 1194–1198, 2021. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1775.
Qinyuan Ye, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Xiang Ren. Crossfit: A few-shot learning challenge for cross-task
  generalization in nlp. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 7163–7189, 2021.
Ruibin Yuan, Yinghao Ma, Yizhi Li, Ge Zhang, Xingran Chen, Hanzhi Yin, Yiqi Liu, Jiawen Huang,
  Zeyue Tian, Binyue Deng, et al. Marble: Music audio representation benchmark for universal
  evaluation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:39626–39647, 2023.
Yongyi Zang, Jiatong Shi, You Zhang, Ryuichi Yamamoto, Jionghao Han, Yuxun Tang, Shengyuan
  Xu, Wenxiao Zhao, Jing Guo, Tomoki Toda, and Zhiyao Duan. Ctrsvdd: A benchmark dataset
  and baseline analysis for controlled singing voice deepfake detection. In Interspeech 2024, pp.
  4783–4787, 2024. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2024-2242.
Heiga Zen, Viet Dang, Rob Clark, Yu Zhang, Ron J. Weiss, Ye Jia, Zhifeng Chen, and Yonghui
  Wu. Libritts: A corpus derived from librispeech for text-to-speech. In Interspeech 2019, pp.
  1526–1530, 2019. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2441.
Junbo Zhang, Zhiwen Zhang, Yongqing Wang, Zhiyong Yan, Qiong Song, Yukai Huang, Ke Li,
  Daniel Povey, and Yujun Wang. speechocean762: An open-source non-native english speech
  corpus for pronunciation assessment. In Interspeech 2021, pp. 3710–3714, 2021. doi: 10.21437/
  Interspeech.2021-1259.
Lichao Zhang, Ruiqi Li, Shoutong Wang, Liqun Deng, Jinglin Liu, Yi Ren, Jinzheng He, Rongjie
  Huang, Jieming Zhu, Xiao Chen, and Zhou Zhao. M4singer: A multi-style, multi-singer and mu-
  sical score provided mandarin singing corpus. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=qiDmAaG6mP.
Siqi Zheng, Luyao Cheng, Yafeng Chen, Hui Wang, and Qian Chen. 3d-speaker: A large-scale
  multi-device, multi-distance, and multi-dialect corpus for speech representation disentanglement.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15354, 2023.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    TASK TAXONOMY
Figures 4 and 5 show the complete task taxonomy in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2. Additionally, Ta-
ble 3 compares our task taxonomy with the INTERSPEECH conference and EDICS from IEEE SPS.
While not identical, our taxonomy is well-aligned with those organized by professional conferences
and institutions.


                               Figure 4: Task taxonomy of speech.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Figure 5: Task taxonomy of audio and music.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Comparison of task taxonomy in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2 with INTERSPEECH and
EDICS. A “✓” indicates that a conference session, area, or EDICS category matches or closely
aligns with the taxonomy.

             Taxonomy                                    INTERSPEECH          EDICS
             Music/Harmony & Pitch                                                ✓
             Music/Music Classification
             Music/Rhythm Analysis                                                ✓
             Audio/Quality Assessment                                             ✓
             Audio/Safety                                                         ✓
             Audio/Signal-Characteristics Analysis
             Audio/Singing Analysis                               ✓
             Audio/Sound Event                                    ✓               ✓
             Audio/Spatial Audio Analysis                         ✓               ✓
             Speech/Paralinguistics                               ✓
             Speech/Phonetics, Phonology, Prosody                 ✓
             Speech/Safety and Security                           ✓
             Speech/Speaker & Language                            ✓
             Speech/Speech Enhancement                            ✓               ✓
             Speech/Speech Recognition                            ✓               ✓
             Speech/Speech, Voice, Hearing Disorder               ✓
             Speech/Spoken Language Understanding                 ✓               ✓


B    DYNAMIC -SUPERB TASKS

Table 4: The list of all tasks in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2. Tasks are ordered by the taxonomy.
Core tasks are highlighted in green (SUPERB), blue (HEAR), or orange (MARBLE).

    Domain                     Task                     Dataset
    Audio / Harmony &          Chord Classification     Musical Instrument Chord
    Pitch / Harmony                                     Classification (Audio)
                                                        (DeepContractor, 2024)
    Audio / Harmony &          MARBLE Key               GiantSteps (key) (Knees et al., 2015)
    Pitch / Harmony            Detection
    Audio / Harmony &          HEAR Music               MAESTRO (Hawthorne et al., 2019)
    Pitch / Pitch              Transcription
    Audio / Harmony &          HEAR Percussion          Mridangam Stroke
    Pitch / Pitch              Instruments Tonic        (Anantapadmanabhan et al., 2013)
                               Classification
    Audio / Harmony &          Instrument Pitch         Nsynth (Engel et al., 2017)
    Pitch / Pitch              Classification
    Audio / Harmony &          Pitch Extraction By      CSD (Choi et al., 2020)
    Pitch / Pitch              Lyrics
    Audio / Music              Emotion                  EMOTIFY (Aljanaki et al., 2016)
    Classification / Emotion   Classificaiton In
                               Songs
    Audio / Music              MARBLE Emotion           MTG-Jamendo (Bogdanov et al.,
    Classification / Emotion   Detection                2019)
    Audio / Music              HEAR Music Genre         ISMIR04 (Cano et al., 2018)
    Classification / Genre     Classification
                                                                       Continued on next page


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                  Dataset
   Audio / Music              MARBLE Genre          MTG-Jamendo (Bogdanov et al.,
   Classification / Genre     Classification        2019)
                              MTG-Genre
   Audio / Music              MARBLE Music          MagnaTagATune (Law et al., 2009)
   Classification / Genre     Tagging
   Audio / Music              MARBLE Music          MTG-Jamendo (Bogdanov et al.,
   Classification / Genre     Tagging               2019)
   Audio / Music              Music Genre           FMA (Defferrard et al., 2017)
   Classification / Genre     Classification
   Audio / Music              HEAR Percussion       Beijing Opera Percussion Instrument
   Classification /           Instruments           Dataset (Tian et al., 2014)
   Instrument                 Classification
   Audio / Music              HEAR Percussion       Mridangam Stroke
   Classification /           Instruments Stroke    (Anantapadmanabhan et al., 2013)
   Instrument                 Classification
   Audio / Music              Instrument            Nsynth (Engel et al., 2017)
   Classification /           Classification
   Instrument
   Audio / Music              Instrument            OpenMIC-2018 (Humphrey et al.,
   Classification /           Combination           2018)
   Instrument                 Recognition
   Audio / Music              Instrument Source     Nsynth (Engel et al., 2017)
   Classification /           Classification
   Instrument
   Audio / Music              MARBLE                MTG-Jamendo (Bogdanov et al.,
   Classification /           Instrument            2019)
   Instrument                 Classification
   Audio / Quality            Singing Automatic     SingMOS (Tang et al., 2024b)
   Assessment / Singing       MOS Prediction
   Audio / Rhythm             MARBLE Beat           ASAP (Foscarin et al., 2020)
   Analysis                   Tracking ASAP
   Audio / Rhythm             Music Beat Tracking   ASAP (Foscarin et al., 2020)
   Analysis                   ASAP
   Audio / Safety / Audio     Audio Editing         People’s Speech (Galvez et al., 2021)
   Integrity                  Identification
   Audio / Safety / Audio     Scene Fake            ASPIRE (Gogate et al., 2020)
   Integrity                  Detection
   Audio / Safety /           Audio Deep Fake       LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Deepfake                   Detection             WaveFake (Frank & Schönherr)
                                                    MUSDB18HQ (Rafii et al., 2019)
   Audio / Safety /           Singing Voice         CtrSVDD (Zang et al., 2024)
   Deepfake                   Deepfake Detection    ACEKiSing (Shi et al., 2024a)
                                                    M4Singer (Zhang et al., 2022)
   Audio / Signal             Audio Duration        NTUML2021 (Yang et al., 2024a)
   Characteristics Analysis   Prediction
                                                                   Continued on next page


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                    Dataset
   Audio / Signal             HEAR Music              MAESTRO (Hawthorne et al., 2019)
   Characteristics Analysis   Speech                  Librispeech (Panayotov et al., 2015)
                              Classification
   Audio / Signal             Sound Effect            RemFx (Rice et al., 2023)
   Characteristics Analysis   Detection
   Audio / Signal             Speech Detection        LibriSpeech-TestClean (Panayotov
   Characteristics Analysis                           et al., 2015)
   Audio / Signal             Speech Detection        LibriSpeech-TestOther (Panayotov
   Characteristics Analysis                           et al., 2015)
   Audio / Signal             Speech Detection        LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Characteristics Analysis
   Audio / Singing            Children Song           CSD (Choi et al., 2020)
   Analysis / Lyrics          Transcript
                              Verification
   Audio / Singing            Lyric Translation       SingSet (self-recorded)
   Analysis / Lyrics
   Audio / Singing            Song Lyric              SingSet (self-recorded)
   Analysis / Lyrics          Recognition
   Audio / Singing            MARBLE Vocal            VocalSet (Wilkins et al., 2018)
   Analysis / Vocal           Technique Detection
   Techniques
   Audio / Sound Event /      Audio Segment           Clotho (Drossos et al., 2020)
   Advanced                   Retrieval
   Understanding
   Audio / Sound Event /      HEAR Sound Event        DCASE2016Task2 (IEEE DCASE
   Advanced                   Detection               2016 Challenge, 2016)
   Understanding
   Audio / Sound Event /      Multi-channel Sound     STARSS23 (Shimada et al., 2024)
   Advanced                   Event Understanding
   Understanding
   Audio / Sound Event /      Animal                  WaveSource-Test (WavSource, n.d.)
   Animal                     Classification
   Audio / Sound Event /      Bird Sound              Warblrb10k (Stowell et al., 2019)
   Animal                     Detection
   Audio / Sound Event /      Cat Emotion             CatSoundClassificationDataset-V2
   Animal                     Classification          (Pandeya et al., 2018; Pandeya & Lee,
                                                      2018)
   Audio / Sound Event /      Cornell Birdcall        Cornell Birdcall Identification
   Animal                     Identification          (Howard et al., 2020)
   Audio / Sound Event /      Environmental           ESC50-Animals (Piczak, 2015)
   Animal                     Sound Classification
   Audio / Sound Event /      HEAR Beehive            Beehive States (Nolasco et al., 2019)
   Animal                     States Classification
   Audio / Sound Event /      Domestic                DESED-PublicEval (Turpault et al.,
   Environment                Environment Sound       2019)
                              Event Detection
                                                                     Continued on next page



                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                   Dataset
   Audio / Sound Event /      Emergency Traffic      Large-Scale-Audio-dataset (Asif et al.,
   Environment                Detection              2022)
   Audio / Sound Event /      Environmental          ESC50-ExteriorAndUrbanNoises
   Environment                Sound Classification   (Piczak, 2015)
   Audio / Sound Event /      Environmental          ESC50-InteriorAndDomesticSounds
   Environment                Sound Classification   (Piczak, 2015)
   Audio / Sound Event /      Environmental          ESC50-
   Environment                Sound Classification   NaturalSoundscapesAndWaterSounds
                                                     (Piczak, 2015)
   Audio / Sound Event /      Environmental          UrbanSound8K-UrbanNoises
   Environment                Sound Classification   (Salamon et al., 2014)
   Audio / Sound Event /      Environment            ESC50 (Piczak, 2015)
   Environment                Recognition
   Audio / Sound Event /      HEAR                   ESC50 (Piczak, 2015)
   Environment                Environmental
                              Sound Classification
   Audio / Sound Event /      HEAR Vocal             Vocal Imitations (Kim et al., 2018)
   Human                      Imitation
                              Classification
   Audio / Spatial Audio      Audio Spatial          Spatial LibriSpeech (Sarabia et al.,
                              Distance Prediction    2023)
   Audio / Spatial Audio      How Far Are You        3DSpeaker (Zheng et al., 2023)
   Audio / Spatial Audio      Sound Position         BinauralSoundPerception (Vasudevan
                              Prediction             et al., 2020)
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Dialogue Emotion       DailyTalk (Lee et al., 2023)
   / Emotion Analysis         Classification
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Emoji Grounded         RAVDESS (Livingstone & Russo,
   / Emotion Analysis         Speech Emotion         2018)
                              Recognition
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Emotion Change         RAVDESS (Livingstone & Russo,
   / Emotion Analysis         Detection              2018)
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Emotion                MELD (Poria et al., 2019)
   / Emotion Analysis         Recognition
   Speech / Paralinguistics   HEAR Emotion           CREMAD (Cao et al., 2014)
   / Emotion Analysis         Recognition
   Speech / Paralinguistics   SUPERB Emotion         RAVDESS (Livingstone & Russo,
   / Emotion Analysis         Recognition            2018)
                              RAVDESS
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Covid19 Cough          CoughVid (Orlandic et al., 2021)
   / Vocal Event Detection    Audio Classification
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Environmental          ESC50-HumanAndNonSpeechSounds
   / Vocal Event Detection    Sound Classification   (Piczak, 2015)
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Human Non-Speech       Nonspeech7k-test (Rashid et al., 2023)
   / Vocal Event Detection    Sound Recognition      CommonVoice (Ardila et al., 2020)
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Human Screaming        Environmentdb (whats2000, 2023)
   / Vocal Event Detection    Detection
                                                                    Continued on next page


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                   Dataset
   Speech / Paralinguistics   Vocal Sound            VocalSound (Gong et al., 2022)
   / Vocal Event Detection    Recognition
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phoneme Segment        Librispeech-words (lib)
   Phonology, Prosody /       Counting
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing / Phoneme
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phone Segment          VoxAngeles (Chodroff et al., 2024)
   Phonology, Prosody /       Counting
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing / Phoneme
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Phonetics,        SUPERB Phoneme         LibriSpeech-TestClean (Panayotov
   Phonology, Prosody /       Recognition            et al., 2015)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing / Phoneme
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phoneme                LibriSpeech-TestOther (Panayotov
   Phonology, Prosody /       Recognition            et al., 2015)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing / Phoneme
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phonological Feature   VoxAngeles-
   Phonology, Prosody /       Classification         ConsonantPlaceOfArticulation
   Phonetics and Phoneme                             (Chodroff et al., 2024)
   Processing /
   Phonological Feature
   Analysis
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phonological Feature   VoxAngeles-MannerOfArticulation
   Phonology, Prosody /       Classification         (Chodroff et al., 2024)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing /
   Phonological Feature
   Analysis
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phonological Feature   VoxAngeles-Phone (Chodroff et al.,
   Phonology, Prosody /       Classification         2024)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing /
   Phonological Feature
   Analysis
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phonological Feature   VoxAngeles-VowelFrontness
   Phonology, Prosody /       Classification         (Chodroff et al., 2024)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing /
   Phonological Feature
   Analysis
                                                                   Continued on next page


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                    Dataset
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phonological Feature    VoxAngeles-VowelHeight (Chodroff
   Phonology, Prosody /       Classification          et al., 2024)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing /
   Phonological Feature
   Analysis
   Speech / Phonetics,        Phonological Feature    VoxAngeles-VowelRoundedness
   Phonology, Prosody /       Classification          (Chodroff et al., 2024)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing /
   Phonological Feature
   Analysis
   Speech / Phonetics,        Heteronym               HeteronymEn (self-constructed)
   Phonology, Prosody /       Differentiation
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing /
   Pronounciation
   Evaluation
   Speech / Phonetics,        L2 English Accuracy     speechocean762-Ranking (Zhang
   Phonology, Prosody /                               et al., 2021)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing /
   Pronounciation
   Evaluation
   Speech / Phonetics,        L2 English Accuracy     speechocean762-scoring (Zhang et al.,
   Phonology, Prosody /                               2021)
   Phonetics and Phoneme
   Processing /
   Pronounciation
   Evaluation
   Speech / Phonetics,        Multilingual            VoxAngeles (Chodroff et al., 2024)
   Phonology, Prosody /       Pronunciation
   Phonetics and Phoneme      Similarity
   Processing /
   Pronounciation
   Evaluation
   Speech / Phonetics,        Accent Classification   Accentdb Extended (Ahamad et al.,
   Phonology, Prosody /                               2020)
   Prosody / Prosodic
   Feature Classification
   Speech / Phonetics,        Stress Detection        MIRSD (CHEN & JANG, 2012;
   Phonology, Prosody /                               Tseng, 2008; Tsai, 2015)
   Prosody / Prosodic
   Feature Classification
   Speech / Phonetics,        Third Tone Sandhi       NCCU Corpus of Spoken Taiwan
   Phonology, Prosody /       Recognition             Mandarin (National Chengchi
   Prosody / Prosodic                                 University, n.d.)
   Feature Classification
                                                                    Continued on next page


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                   Dataset
   Speech / Phonetics,        L2 English Fluency     speechocean762-Ranking (Zhang
   Phonology, Prosody /                              et al., 2021)
   Prosody / Prosodic
   Quality Assessment
   Speech / Phonetics,        L2 English Fluency     speechocean762-Scoring (Zhang et al.,
   Phonology, Prosody /                              2021)
   Prosody / Prosodic
   Quality Assessment
   Speech / Phonetics,        L2 English Prosodic    speechocean762-Ranking (Zhang
   Phonology, Prosody /                              et al., 2021)
   Prosody / Prosodic
   Quality Assessment
   Speech / Phonetics,        L2 English Prosodic    speechocean762-Scoring (Zhang et al.,
   Phonology, Prosody /                              2021)
   Prosody / Prosodic
   Quality Assessment
   Speech / Phonetics,        Prosody Naturalness    ProsAudit-Lexical (de Seyssel et al.,
   Phonology, Prosody /                              2023)
   Prosody / Prosodic
   Quality Assessment
   Speech / Phonetics,        Prosody Naturalness    ProsAudit-Protosyntax (de Seyssel
   Phonology, Prosody /                              et al., 2023)
   Prosody / Prosodic
   Quality Assessment
   Speech / Safety &          Spoof Detection        ASVspoof2015 (Wu et al., 2015)
   Security / Spoofing and
   Anti-Spoofing
   Speech / Safety &          Spoof Detection        ASVspoof2017 (Delgado et al., 2018)
   Security / Spoofing and
   Anti-Spoofing
   Speech / Safety &          Deep Fake Voice        DEEP-VOICE (Bird & Lotfi, 2023)
   Security / Synthetic       Recognition
   Speech Detection
   Speech / Safety &          Enhancement            LibriTTS-TestClean (Zen et al., 2019)
   Security / Synthetic       Detection              WHAM (Wichern et al., 2019)
   Speech Detection
   Speech / Safety &          Fraud Robocall         CallHome (Katerenchuk et al., 2018)
   Security / Synthetic       Recognition
   Speech Detection
   Speech / Safety &          Fraud Robocall         Promo (self-constructed)
   Security / Synthetic       Recognition
   Speech Detection
   Speech / Safety &          Fraud Robocall         Robocall Prasad & Reaves
   Security / Synthetic       Recognition
   Speech Detection
   Speech / Speaker &         HEAR Language          VoxLingua107 Top10 (Valk &
   Language / Language /      Identification         Alumäe, 2021)
   Language Identification
                                                                    Continued on next page



                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                   Dataset
   Speech / Speaker &         Language               VoxForge (MacLean, 2018)
   Language / Language /      Identification
   Language Identification
   Speech / Speaker &         Age Classification     CommonVoiceCorpus-Test (Ardila
   Language / Speaker /                              et al., 2020)
   Speaker Characteristics
   Speech / Speaker &         Gender Recognition     CommonVoice-DeltaSegment-15
   Language / Speaker /       by Voice               (Ardila et al., 2020)
   Speaker Characteristics
   Speech / Speaker &         HEAR Speaker           LibriCount (Stöter et al., 2018)
   Language / Speaker /       Count Identification
   Speaker Recognition
   Speech / Speaker &         Multi Speaker          VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Language / Speaker /       Detection
   Speaker Recognition
   Speech / Speaker &         Speaker Counting       LibriTTS-TestClean (Zen et al., 2019)
   Language / Speaker /
   Speaker Recognition
   Speech / Speaker &         Speaker Verification   LibriSpeech-TestClean (Panayotov
   Language / Speaker /                              et al., 2015)
   Speaker Recognition
   Speech / Speaker &         Speaker Verification   LibriSpeech-TestOther (Panayotov
   Language / Speaker /                              et al., 2015)
   Speaker Recognition
   Speech / Speaker &         Speaker Verification   VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Language / Speaker /
   Speaker Recognition
   Speech / Speaker &         SUPERB Speaker         Libri2Mix-Test (Cosentino et al.,
   Language / Speaker /       Diarization            2020)
   Speaker Recognition
   Speech / Speaker &         SUPERB Speaker         SUPERB Hidden Set
   Language / Speaker /       Verification           (self-reconstructed)
   Speaker Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Noise Detection        LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Enhancement /                                     MUSAN-Gaussian (Snyder et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2015)
   Speech / Speech            Noise Detection        LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Enhancement /                                     MUSAN-Music (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
   Speech / Speech            Noise Detection        LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Enhancement /                                     MUSAN-Noise (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
   Speech / Speech            Noise Detection        LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Enhancement /                                     MUSAN-Speech (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
   Speech / Speech            Noise Detection        VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /                                     MUSAN-Music (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
                                                                     Continued on next page


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                   Dataset
   Speech / Speech            Noise Detection        VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /                                     MUSAN-Noise (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
   Speech / Speech            Noise Detection        VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /                                     MUSAN-Speech (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
   Speech / Speech            Noise Detection        VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /                                     MUSAN-Gaussian (Snyder et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2015)
   Speech / Speech            Noise SNR Level        VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /              Prediction             MUSAN-Gaussian (Snyder et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2015)
   Speech / Speech            Noise SNR Level        VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /              Prediction             MUSAN-Music (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
   Speech / Speech            Noise SNR Level        VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /              Prediction             MUSAN-Noise (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
   Speech / Speech            Noise SNR Level        VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /              Prediction             MUSAN-Speech (Snyder et al., 2015)
   Degradation Detection
   Speech / Speech            Reverberation          LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Enhancement /              Detection              RirsNoises-LargeRoom (Ko et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2017)
   Speech / Speech            Reverberation          LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Enhancement /              Detection              RirsNoises-MediumRoom (Ko et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2017)
   Speech / Speech            Reverberation          LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Enhancement /              Detection              RirsNoises-SmallRoom (Ko et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2017)
   Speech / Speech            Reverberation          VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /              Detection              RirsNoises-LargeRoom (Ko et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2017)
   Speech / Speech            Reverberation          VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /              Detection              RirsNoises-MediumRoom (Ko et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2017)
   Speech / Speech            Reverberation          VCTK (Yamagishi et al., 2019)
   Enhancement /              Detection              RirsNoises-SmallRoom (Ko et al.,
   Degradation Detection                             2017)
   Speech / Speech            N-Best Correction      Librispeech-TestOther (Panayotov
   Recognition / ASR                                 et al., 2015)
   Post-Processing
   Speech / Speech            AAVE Speech            CORAAL (Kendall & Farrington,
   Recognition / Language     Recognition            2023)
   Speech / Speech            Code-switch Speech     NTUML2021 (Yang et al., 2024a)
   Recognition / Language     Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Code-Switching         ASCEND (Lovenia et al., 2022)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
                                                                   Continued on next page


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                  Dataset
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Lingual         MLS-de (Pratap et al., 2020)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Lingual         MLS-en (Pratap et al., 2020)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Lingual         MLS-es (Pratap et al., 2020)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Lingual         MLS-fr (Pratap et al., 2020)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Lingual         MLS-it (Pratap et al., 2020)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Lingual         MLS-nl (Pratap et al., 2020)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Lingual         MLS-pl (Pratap et al., 2020)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Lingual         MLS-pt (Pratap et al., 2020)
   Recognition / Language     Speech Recognition
   Speech / Speech            PTBR Speech           CommonVoice17-Test (Ardila et al.,
   Recognition / Language     Recognition           2020)
   Speech / Speech            SUPERB ASR            LibriSpeech-TestClean (Panayotov
   Recognition / Language                           et al., 2015)
   Speech / Speech            ASR                   LibriSpeech-TestOther (Panayotov
   Recognition / Language                           et al., 2015)
   Speech / Speech            SUPERB OOD ASR        CommonVoice7-Test (Ardila et al.,
   Recognition / Language     (Ar)                  2020)
   Speech / Speech            SUPERB OOD ASR        CommonVoice7-Test (Ardila et al.,
   Recognition / Language     (Es)                  2020)
   Speech / Speech            SUPERB OOD ASR        CHIME6-Test (Barker et al., 2018;
   Recognition / Language     (Spontaneous)         Watanabe et al., 2020)
   Speech / Speech            SUPERB OOD ASR        CommonVoice7-Test (Ardila et al.,
   Recognition / Language     (Zh)                  2020)
   Speech / Speech            Target Speaker ASR    AMI-test (Carletta et al., 2005)
   Recognition / Speaker
   Speech / Speech            Multi-Speaker         LibriSpeech-TestClean (Panayotov
   Recognition / Specific     Detection             et al., 2015)
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech            Speech Command        AudioMNIST (Becker et al., 2024)
   Recognition / Specific     Recognition
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech            Speech Text           LibriSpeech-TestClean (Panayotov
   Recognition / Specific     Matching              et al., 2015)
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech            Speech Text           LibriSpeech-TestOther (Panayotov
   Recognition / Specific     Matching              et al., 2015)
   Recognition Tasks
                                                                   Continued on next page


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                   Dataset
   Speech / Speech            Speech Text            LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Recognition / Specific     Matching
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech            Spoken Term            LibriSpeech-TestClean (Panayotov
   Recognition / Specific     Detection              et al., 2015)
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech            Spoken Term            LibriSpeech-TestOther (Panayotov
   Recognition / Specific     Detection              et al., 2015)
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech            Spoken Term            LJSpeech (Ito & Johnson, 2017)
   Recognition / Specific     Detection
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech            SUPERB Keyword         SpeechCommandsV1-Test (Warden,
   Recognition / Specific     Spotting               2018)
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech            SUPERB Query by        Quesst14-Eval (Anguera et al., 2015)
   Recognition / Specific     Example
   Recognition Tasks
   Speech / Speech, Voice,    Stuttering Detection   SEP-28k (Lea et al., 2021)
   Hearing Disorder /
   Disorder Detection and
   Classification
   Speech / Speech, Voice,    Voice Disorder         VOICED (Goldberger et al., 2000)
   Hearing Disorder /         Classification
   Disorder Detection and
   Classification
   Speech / Spoken            Conversation           EnShortConversation (CEEC)
   Language                   Matching
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Dialogue Act           SLUE-HVB (Shon et al., 2022)
   Language                   Classification
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Dialogue Act           DailyTalk (Lee et al., 2023)
   Language                   Classification
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Dialogue Act Pairing   DailyTalk (Lee et al., 2023)
   Language
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            SUPERB Intent          SLURP (Bastianelli et al., 2020)
   Language                   Classification
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
                                                                    Continued on next page


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Domain                     Task                    Dataset
   Speech / Spoken            Intent Classification   SLURP-Action (Bastianelli et al.,
   Language                   (Action)                2020)
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Intent Classification   SLURP-Intent (Bastianelli et al., 2020)
   Language                   (Intent)
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Named Entity            SLUE-VoxPopuli (Shon et al., 2022)
   Language                   Localization
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Named Entity            SLUE-VoxPopuli (Shon et al., 2022)
   Language                   Recognition
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Sarcasm Detection       Mustard (Castro et al., 2019)
   Language
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Semantic Textual        SpokenSTS (Agirre et al., 2012)
   Language                   Similarity
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Speech Sentiment        MELD (Poria et al., 2019)
   Language                   Analysis
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Spoken Digit            AudioMNIST (Becker et al., 2024)
   Language                   Arithmetic
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            SUPERB Slot Filling     AudioSnips-Test (Yang et al., 2021)
   Language
   Understanding / Intent
   & Meaning
   Speech / Spoken            Code-Switching          CSZS-zh-en (Huang et al., 2024b)
   Language                   Semantic Grammar
   Understanding /            Acceptability
   Linguistic Structure &     Comparison
   Grammar
   Speech / Spoken            Nonce Word              sWUGGY (Dunbar et al.)
   Language                   Detection
   Understanding /
   Linguistic Structure &
   Grammar
                                                                     Continued on next page


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Domain                                    Task                             Dataset
    Speech / Spoken                           PoS Estimation                   LibriTTS (Zen et al., 2019)
    Language                                  LibriTTS PoS
    Understanding /
    Linguistic Structure &
    Grammar
    Speech / Spoken                           PoS Estimation                   LibriTTS (Zen et al., 2019)
    Language                                  LibriTTS PoS with
    Understanding /                           transcription
    Linguistic Structure &
    Grammar
    Speech / Spoken                           Sentence Grammar                 sBLIMP (Dunbar et al.)
    Language                                  Acceptability
    Understanding /
    Linguistic Structure &
    Grammar
    Speech / Spoken                           SUPERB Speech                    CoVoST2-Test (Wang et al., 2021)
    Language                                  Translation
    Understanding / Speech
    Translation


C     TASK - LEVEL EVALUATION RESULTS

                                  Table 5: Task-level Evaluation Results: GPT4o

    Task                 Metric    Whisper-     LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN     Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                                   LLaMA                  7B         13B         Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA     IT
                                                                                 Chat      7B-Inst.


    Chord                LLM-C↑    4.00%        10.00%    0.50%      9.00%       44.00%    28.50%       44.50%    51.00%    0.00%
    Classification

    MARBLE Key           LLM-C↑    3.00%        0.50%     1.50%      1.00%       3.00%     17.00%       2.00%     0.50%     0.00%
    Detection
    (GiantSteps - Key)

    HEAR Music           NAR↓      92.43%       100.00%   99.46%     100.00%     96.76%    96.76%       96.76%    100.00%   100.00%
    Transcription
    (MAESTRO)

    HEAR Music           TER↓      1.0065       -         36.0000    -           8.3438    1.6875       6.25      -         -
    Transcription
    (MAESTRO)

    HEAR Percussion      LLM-C↑    2.00%        2.50%     12.70%     13.40%      11.30%    11.80%       12.80%    12.50%    5.70%
    Instruments Tonic
    Classification
    (Mridangam
    Tonic)

    Instrument Pitch     LLM-C↑    0.56%        0.56%     0.11%      0.22%       0.67%     18.11%       0.78%     0.33%     0.78%
    Classification
    (Nsynth)

    Pitch Extraction     NAR↓      37.50%       94.00%    47.50%     73.50%      65.50%    84.50%       76.00%    98.00%    68.50%
    By Lyrics (CSD)

    Pitch Extraction     TER↓      146.28%      116.67%   226.21%    639.24%     106.45%   165.96%      136.11%   100.00%   195.18%
    By Lyrics (CSD)


                                                                                                      Continued on next page


                                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                 Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-      GAMA-
                                 LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA    IT
                                                                           Chat      7B-Inst.


   Emotion              LLM-C↑   10.00%     0.00%     1.67%      3.33%     13.33%    8.33%        8.33%     1.67%    0.00%
   Classificaiton In
   Songs
   (EMOTIFY)

   MARBLE               LLM-C↑   0.00%      1.50%     0.00%      0.00%     2.70%     0.80%        0.80%     0.80%    0.10%
   Emotion Detection
   (MTG)

   HEAR Music           LLM-C↑   15.58%     7.04%     31.16%     44.22%    33.67%    37.69%       16.58%    27.64%   2.51%
   Genre
   Classification
   (ISMIR04)

   MARBLE Genre         LLM-C↑   0.00%      1.60%     0.10%      0.20%     3.20%     0.10%        0.20%     0.20%    0.00%
   Classification
   (MTG)

   MARBLE Music         LLM-C↑   5.50%      1.00%     3.50%      9.00%     4.50%     1.50%        1.00%     3.50%    7.50%
   Tagging
   (MagnaTagATune)

   MARBLE Music         LLM-C↑   0.10%      0.30%     0.00%      0.00%     2.90%     0.30%        0.10%     0.50%    0.10%
   Tagging (MTG)

   Music Genre          LLM-C↑   10.71%     1.79%     9.82%      16.07%    8.04%     15.18%       9.82%     9.82%    4.46%
   Classification
   (FMA)

   HEAR Percussion      LLM-C↑   3.39%      4.24%     10.17%     20.76%    16.10%    27.12%       24.15%    22.03%   11.44%
   Instruments
   Classification
   (Beijing Opera
   Percussion)

   HEAR Percussion      LLM-C↑   0.10%      3.80%     7.60%      4.90%     11.50%    10.80%       13.70%    10.30%   0.10%
   Instruments Stroke
   Classification
   (Mridangam
   Stroke)

   Instrument           LLM-C↑   1.23%      9.56%     13.97%     14.58%    17.89%    54.41%       11.89%    6.99%    10.17%
   Classification
   (Nsynth)

   Instrument           LLM-C↑   4.20%      13.51%    17.72%     24.02%    25.83%    24.92%       20.42%    19.52%   8.11%
   Combination
   Recognition
   (OpenMIC-2018)

   Instrument Source    LLM-C↑   7.22%      28.33%    37.33%     43.56%    32.67%    35.22%       30.89%    38.00%   35.89%
   Classification
   (Nsynth)

   MARBLE               LLM-C↑   0.40%      2.30%     0.00%      0.00%     6.40%     1.40%        0.20%     0.60%    0.20%
   Instrument
   Classification
   (MTG)

   Singing Automatic    NAR↓     99.50%     67.72%    0.33%      11.15%    17.30%    0.00%        22.96%    97.34%   98.34%
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   Singing Automatic    MSE↓     12.17      2.3872    10.0777    11.2308   14.8895   1.4485       11.421    4.53     2.08
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   Singing Automatic    KTAU↑    -0.3333    0.0126    -0.1105    0.0166    0.0712    0.0099       0.0103    0.1705   0.3539
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   Singing Automatic    LCC↑     -0.6747    -0.0706   -0.1354    0.036     0.0824    0.0255       -0.0216   0.1866   0.3846
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   Singing Automatic    SRCC↑    -0.5       0.0183    -0.1325    0.0231    0.0872    0.0124       0.0118    0.2281   0.4247
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)


                                                                                                Continued on next page



                                                                36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                 Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS     SALMONN    SALMONN     Qwen-      Qwen2-       WavLLM      MU-        GAMA-
                                 LLaMA                 7B         13B         Audio-     Audio-                   LLaMA      IT
                                                                              Chat       7B-Inst.


   MARBLE Beat          NAR↓     100.00%    100.00%    100.00%    100.00%     100.00%    100.00%      100.00%     100.00%    100.00%
   Tracking (ASAP)

   MARBLE Beat          ERR↓     -          -          -          -           -          -            -           -          -
   Tracking (ASAP)

   Music Beat           NAR↓     54.55%     74.55%     51.82%     63.64%      62.73%     40.91%       47.27%      80.00%     84.55%
   Tracking (ASAP)

   Music Beat           Miss     135.6077   183.6786   118.4047   77.9687     157.5917   76.0904      111.7759    240        93.8751
   Tracking (ASAP)      Time↓

   Audio Editing        NAR↓     84.38%     87.50%     62.50%     75.00%      75.00%     68.75%       96.88%      65.62%     37.50%
   Identification
   (People’s Speech)

   Audio Editing        ACC↑     204.3094   53.6938    165.0617   43.1693     184.695    154.6202     100         164.0558   154.8122
   Identification
   (People’s Speech)

   Scene Fake           LLM-C↑   22.00%     46.00%     48.00%     37.00%      49.00%     54.00%       49.00%      20.00%     41.00%
   Detection
   (ASPIRE)

   Audio Deep Fake      LLM-C↑   8.25%      24.56%     22.79%     38.31%      31.43%     27.90%       30.84%      39.10%     25.54%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech,
   WaveFake,
   MUSDB18HQ)

   Singing Voice        LLM-C↑   5.56%      22.06%     22.06%     26.19%      24.44%     21.43%       9.21%       20.95%     9.84%
   Deepfake
   Detection
   (CtrSVDD,
   ACEKiSing,
   M4Singer)

   Audio Duration       NAR↓     33.00%     37.00%     10.50%     55.00%      0.00%      0.00%        0.50%       46.50%     14.00%
   Prediction
   (NTUML2021)

   Audio Duration       MSE↓     13.3657    39.1111    31652.7877 2216.7111   28.985     62.515       3581.0352   1527.785   62.7674
   Prediction
   (NTUML2021)

   HEAR Music           LLM-C↑   72.50%     77.50%     91.50%     99.50%      98.00%     89.50%       59.50%      51.50%     88.00%
   Speech
   Classification
   (MAESTRO,
   Librispeech)

   Sound Effect         LLM-C↑   2.00%      6.50%      14.17%     17.67%      15.83%     19.83%       17.50%      17.00%     15.83%
   Detection
   (RemFx)

   Speech Detection     LLM-C↑   48.00%     29.00%     46.00%     66.00%      45.50%     56.50%       35.00%      46.50%     38.50%
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Speech Detection     LLM-C↑   52.00%     31.50%     46.00%     66.50%      44.50%     55.50%       37.00%      45.50%     36.00%
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   Speech Detection     LLM-C↑   54.00%     44.50%     60.50%     74.00%      57.00%     45.00%       53.00%      49.00%     55.50%
   (LJSpeech)

   Children Song        WER↓     58.68%     102.68%    104.02%    100.99%     128.67%    94.93%       155.48%     100.00%    100.12%
   Transcript
   Verification (CSD)

   Lyric Translation    Sacre    2.1093     1.0357     2.8126     0.9941      3.3975     3.9155       1.8969      0.1593     0.0739
   (SingSet)            Bleu↑

   Song Lyric           MER↓     101.93%    164.53%    356.36%    266.00%     118.41%    115.62%      481.13%     117.53%    168.52%
   Recognition
   (SingSet)


                                                                                                    Continued on next page


                                                                 37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                  Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS   SALMONN   SALMONN   Qwen-    Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-       GAMA-
                                  LLaMA               7B        13B       Audio-   Audio-                LLaMA     IT
                                                                          Chat     7B-Inst.


   MARBLE Vocal          LLM-C↑   8.00%      1.00%    11.00%    6.50%     6.50%    15.50%       8.00%    8.50%     2.50%
   Technique
   Detection
   (VocalSet)

   Audio Segment         NAR↓     80.00%     78.00%   2.00%     4.00%     12.00%   4.00%        14.00%   82.00%    6.00%
   Retrieval (Clotho)

   Audio Segment         IoU↑     8.17%      22.17%   8.25%     8.68%     4.58%    7.07%        6.90%    0.00%     10.45%
   Retrieval (Clotho)

   HEAR Sound            LLM-C↑   0.00%      0.00%    21.43%    35.71%    7.14%    14.29%       21.43%   21.43%    7.14%
   Event Detection
   (DCASE2016
   Task2)

   Multi-channel         LLM-C↑   38.73%     4.23%    37.32%    26.06%    38.03%   41.55%       21.83%   4.93%     11.27%
   Sound Event
   Understanding
   (STARSS23)

   Animal                LLM-C↑   9.25%      40.50%   58.25%    67.00%    75.75%   34.00%       12.00%   4.25%     15.25%
   Classification
   (WaveSource-
   Test)

   Bird Sound            LLM-C↑   28.50%     43.00%   74.50%    75.00%    78.50%   79.00%       75.00%   40.50%    33.00%
   Detection
   (Warblrb10k)

   Cat Emotion           LLM-C↑   6.00%      0.00%    2.00%     4.00%     6.00%    14.00%       8.00%    2.00%     14.00%
   Classification (Cat
   Sound
   Classification
   Dataset V2)

   Cornell Birdcall      LLM-C↑   0.00%      0.00%    0.00%     3.33%     10.00%   10.00%       13.33%   3.33%     0.00%
   Identification

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   14.50%     8.00%    14.00%    3.00%     82.00%   36.00%       5.00%    0.00%     2.00%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Animals)

   HEAR Beehive          LLM-C↑   43.00%     35.00%   54.00%    42.50%    19.00%   42.50%       37.00%   37.50%    19.00%
   States
   Classification
   (Beehive States)

   Domestic              NAR↓     91.39%     99.44%   99.72%    99.72%    99.17%   99.72%       99.72%   100.00%   99.72%
   Environment
   Sound Event
   Detection
   (DESED-
   PublicEval)

   Domestic              Event-   0          0.6      0         0         0        0.01         0        0         0
   Environment           based
   Sound                 F1↑
   EventDetection
   (DESED-
   PublicEval)

   Emergency Traffic     LLM-C↑   39.00%     34.00%   55.50%    7.25%     65.50%   74.50%       17.50%   43.50%    15.83%
   Detection
   (Large-Scale-
   Audio-dataset)

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   4.50%      14.50%   0.50%     0.50%     77.00%   25.00%       6.50%    0.00%     6.50%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Exterior
   And Urban
   Noises)

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   4.50%      3.50%    0.50%     0.00%     59.00%   2.50%        4.00%    0.00%     0.00%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Interior
   And Domestic
   Sounds)


                                                                                              Continued on next page


                                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                  Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-       GAMA-
                                  LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                LLaMA     IT
                                                                            Chat      7B-Inst.


   Environmental         LLM-C↑   3.00%      7.50%     6.50%      1.00%     78.00%    5.00%        7.00%    0.00%     7.00%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Natural
   Soundscapes And
   Water Sounds)

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   10.00%     3.26%     1.40%      0.00%     39.53%    4.88%        10.47%   0.00%     0.70%
   Sound
   Classification
   (UrbanSound8K-
   Urban Noises)

   Environment           LLM-C↑   7.02%      38.60%    42.11%     19.30%    56.14%    63.16%       40.35%   10.53%    31.58%
   Recognition
   (ESC50)

   HEAR                  LLM-C↑   4.80%      25.30%    61.00%     73.40%    68.80%    43.90%       9.80%    0.40%     35.30%
   Environmental
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50)

   HEAR Vocal            LLM-C↑   15.17%     5.50%     1.17%      1.83%     18.67%    11.17%       17.50%   3.83%     5.83%
   Imitation
   Classification
   (Vocal Imitations)

   Audio Spatial         NAR↓     50.50%     59.00%    62.50%     100.00%   85.50%    58.00%       44.00%   97.00%    71.00%
   Distance
   Prediction (Spatial
   LibriSpeech)

   Audio Spatial         MEDAE↓   0.6651     0.933     0.449      -         1.5011    0.6915       0.9011   0.9212    0.5
   Distance
   Prediction (Spatial
   LibriSpeech)

   How Far Are You       LLM-C↑   26.00%     13.00%    4.50%      8.00%     30.00%    26.00%       32.00%   18.00%    2.50%
   (3DSpeaker)

   Sound Position        NAR↓     81.25%     100.00%   100.00%    100.00%   100.00%   25.00%       93.75%   100.00%   100.00%
   Prediction

   Sound Position        Angle    1.4006     -         -          -         -         1.1063       0.8681   -         -
   Prediction            Diff↓

   Dialogue Emotion      LLM-C↑   33.50%     16.50%    27.00%     11.50%    33.00%    54.00%       18.50%   19.00%    33.00%
   Classification
   (Daily Talk)

   Emoji Grounded        LLM-C↑   1.10%      0.00%     0.00%      0.10%     1.30%     1.20%        0.10%    1.90%     48.50%
   Speech Emotion
   Recognition
   (RAVDESS)

   Emotion Change        LLM-C↑   0.08%      0.42%     0.58%      0.96%     0.04%     2.96%        0.08%    0.58%     0.04%
   Detection
   (Ravdess)

   Emotion               LLM-C↑   22.50%     14.50%    19.00%     9.50%     43.50%    36.50%       40.50%   0.50%     2.50%
   Recognition
   (MELD)

   HEAR Emotion          LLM-C↑   6.70%      9.30%     18.80%     18.10%    62.50%    61.10%       25.60%   12.40%    13.20%
   Recognition
   (CREMAD)

   SUPERB Emotion        LLM-C↑   12.50%     25.83%    12.08%     12.50%    70.42%    75.83%       12.08%   12.92%    0.00%
   Recognition
   (RAVDESS)

   Covid19 Cough         LLM-C↑   0.93%      1.03%     0.00%      0.00%     4.12%     0.72%        4.22%    21.91%    0.21%
   Audio
   Classification
   (CoughVid)


                                                                                                 Continued on next page


                                                                 39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task               Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS      SALMONN   SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM     MU-       GAMA-
                               LLaMA                  7B        13B       Audio-    Audio-                  LLaMA     IT
                                                                          Chat      7B-Inst.


   Environmental      LLM-C↑   17.50%     11.00%      8.50%     3.00%     82.00%    29.00%       16.50%     0.00%     2.00%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Human
   And Non Speech
   Sounds)

   Human Non          LLM-C↑   2.86%      5.00%       44.29%    30.71%    27.14%    23.57%       14.29%     17.14%    32.86%
   Speech Sound
   Recognition
   (Nonspeech7k,
   CommonVoice)

   Human Screaming    LLM-C↑   52.50%     25.00%      52.50%    65.00%    62.50%    87.50%       47.50%     42.50%    60.00%
   Detection
   (Environmentdb)

   Vocal Sound        LLM-C↑   29.86%     1.53%       11.53%    4.31%     75.56%    30.97%       14.44%     0.28%     2.78%
   Recognition
   (VocalSound)

   Phoneme Segment    NAR↓     16.29%     48.64%      39.09%    11.62%    5.99%     1.73%        0.50%      2.67%     72.22%
   Counting
   (Librispeech-
   words)

   Phoneme Segment    ACC↑     13.56%     11.77%      11.84%    8.25%     5.42%     13.46%       9.55%      0.47%     2.29%
   Counting
   (Librispeech-
   words)

   Phoneme Segment    Abs      2.5378     1012.8103   6.5285    50.7724   7.1857    3.0622       7.9109     15.6777   5.0491
   Counting           Diff↓
   (Librispeech-
   words)

   Phone Segment      NAR↓     19.19%     57.24%      41.88%    12.56%    0.41%     16.11%       15.04%     41.47%    18.79%
   Counting
   (VoxAngeles)

   Phone Segment      ACC↑     13.20%     1.69%       15.81%    20.04%    1.77%     6.60%        10.11%     9.14%     3.80%
   Counting
   (VoxAngeles)

   Phone Segment      Abs      41.236     3759.3878   5.4857    4.9331    3.1286    2.8706       45754.9952 5.4242    2.8694
   Counting           Diff↓
   (VoxAngeles)

   SUPERB             PER↓     100.12%    102.75%     25.36%    24.60%    100.58%   100.96%      99.99%     110.27%   100.37%
   Phoneme
   Recognition
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Phoneme            PER↓     100.17%    101.08%     22.79%    22.91%    100.62%   100.88%      99.99%     111.18%   100.61%
   Recognition
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   Phonological       LLM-C↑   25.77%     1.37%       1.88%     1.37%     1.54%     3.24%        1.88%      1.54%     0.51%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Consonant Place
   Of Articulation)

   Phonological       LLM-C↑   17.42%     9.36%       2.06%     1.50%     5.62%     6.74%        6.84%      7.96%     8.99%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Manner Of
   Articulation)

   Phonological       LLM-C↑   5.73%      0.09%       1.76%     -         3.60%     3.97%        0.00%      0.00%     0.09%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Phone)


                                                                                               Continued on next page


                                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS   SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-      GAMA-
                                LLaMA               7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                LLaMA    IT
                                                                         Chat      7B-Inst.


   Phonological        LLM-C↑   50.71%     17.52%   41.14%     38.09%    48.47%    57.23%       36.46%   42.97%   10.39%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Vowel Frontness)

   Phonological        LLM-C↑   24.44%     17.11%   31.77%     35.23%    29.53%    36.86%       37.88%   39.10%   24.44%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Vowel Height)

   Phonological        LLM-C↑   43.38%     21.18%   27.29%     61.30%    46.44%    69.65%       38.90%   21.79%   18.94%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Vowel
   Roundedness)

   Heteronym           LLM-C↑   55.00%     26.00%   37.00%     45.00%    52.00%    44.00%       51.00%   30.00%   20.00%
   Differentiation
   (HeteronymEn)

   L2 English          LLM-C↑   24.72%     33.89%   50.00%     49.72%    34.44%    50.00%       41.67%   48.06%   45.56%
   Accuracy
   (speechocean762-
   Ranking)

   L2 English          NAR↓     15.44%     95.03%   0.40%      0.27%     37.72%    0.94%        9.53%    90.47%   50.07%
   Accuracy
   (speechocean762-
   scoring)

   L2 English          PCC↑     0.0185     -0.183   0.0633     0.0438    0.0293    -0.0159      0.0439   0.0727   0.0151
   Accuracy
   (speechocean762-
   scoring)

   Multi-lingual       LLM-C↑   38.40%     13.50%   47.20%     48.50%    23.70%    44.70%       48.00%   25.10%   40.60%
   Pronunciation
   Similarity
   (VoxAngeles)

   Accent              LLM-C↑   17.50%     5.50%    3.00%      4.50%     26.50%    14.00%       7.00%    27.00%   4.00%
   Classification
   (Accentdb
   Extended)

   Stress Detection    LLM-C↑   15.50%     3.00%    2.00%      13.00%    16.50%    23.50%       25.50%   0.00%    1.00%
   (MIRSD)

   Third Tone Sandhi   NAR↓     59.38%     93.75%   100.00%    87.50%    84.38%    84.38%       28.12%   96.88%   100.00%
   Recognition
   (NCCU Corpus of
   Spoken Taiwan
   Mandarin)

   Third Tone Sandhi   IoU↑     0.2179     0.5      0          0.75      0         0            0.1304   0        0
   Recognition
   (NCCU Corpus of
   Spoken Taiwan
   Mandarin)

   L2 English          LLM-C↑   31.39%     21.94%   50.00%     50.00%    40.28%    50.56%       27.78%   49.44%   45.00%
   Fluency
   (speechocean762-
   Ranking)

   L2 English          NAR↓     14.67%     88.16%   0.00%      0.67%     8.75%     0.81%        41.86%   63.53%   55.72%
   Fluency
   (speechocean762-
   Scoring)

   L2 English          PCC↑     0.0055     0.0332   0.0292     0.0183    -0.0422   -0.0858      0.0222   0.0505   0.0532
   Fluency
   (speechocean762-
   Scoring)


                                                                                              Continued on next page


                                                              41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                 Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-       GAMA-
                                 LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                LLaMA     IT
                                                                           Chat      7B-Inst.


   L2 English           LLM-C↑   26.39%     35.00%    46.67%     52.50%    34.44%    51.11%       34.44%   49.72%    42.22%
   Prosodic
   (speechocean762-
   Ranking)

   L2 English           NAR↓     39.43%     94.75%    0.27%      1.21%     71.47%    3.10%        11.98%   94.62%    82.91%
   Prosodic
   (speechocean762-
   Scoring)

   L2 English           PCC↑     0.0435     -0.1747   0.0427     0.0775    0.1446    0.0201       0.0461   -0.1535   0.0973
   Prosodic
   (speechocean762-
   Scoring)

   Prosody              LLM-C↑   49.81%     32.82%    48.26%     47.10%    21.62%    51.74%       54.83%   47.10%    5.41%
   Naturalness
   (ProsAudit-
   Lexical)

   Prosody              LLM-C↑   53.44%     31.68%    46.56%     46.18%    25.95%    50.76%       43.51%   49.24%    4.20%
   Naturalness
   (ProsAudit-
   Protosyntax)

   Spoof Detection      LLM-C↑   41.00%     19.00%    55.00%     14.00%    13.00%    23.00%       19.50%   69.50%    0.50%
   (ASVspoof2015)

   Spoof Detection      LLM-C↑   49.00%     4.50%     63.00%     38.00%    27.00%    32.50%       21.00%   64.00%    0.00%
   (ASVspoof2017)

   Deep Fake Voice      LLM-C↑   27.25%     7.75%     50.75%     40.00%    48.75%    50.50%       43.50%   45.00%    19.75%
   Recognition
   (DEEP-VOICE)

   Enhancement          LLM-C↑   50.50%     30.50%    30.00%     46.50%    55.00%    56.50%       30.00%   50.00%    21.00%
   Detection
   (LibriTTS-
   TestClean,
   WHAM)

   Fraud Robocall       LLM-C↑   73.33%     13.33%    0.00%      100.00%   100.00%   100.00%      90.00%   26.67%    100.00%
   Recognition
   (CallHome)

   Fraud Robocall       LLM-C↑   47.37%     10.53%    0.00%      73.68%    57.89%    63.16%       63.16%   5.26%     100.00%
   Recognition
   (Promo)

   Fraud Robocall       LLM-C↑   94.87%     51.28%    100.00%    20.51%    51.28%    61.54%       30.77%   30.77%    0.00%
   Recognition
   (Robocall)

   HEAR Language        LLM-C↑   92.18%     1.95%     6.28%      11.01%    18.00%    36.11%       1.85%    0.00%     0.10%
   Identification
   (VoxLingua107)

   Language             LLM-C↑   95.50%     13.50%    22.00%     8.50%     84.50%    93.00%       18.00%   6.00%     0.00%
   Identification
   (VoxForge)

   Age Classification   LLM-C↑   0.50%      19.75%    22.75%     21.00%    26.00%    35.50%       21.00%   23.50%    17.75%
   (Common Voice)

   Gender               LLM-C↑   1.00%      81.50%    63.00%     57.00%    53.50%    97.50%       35.00%   51.00%    63.00%
   Recognition by
   Voice (Common
   Voice)

   HEAR Speaker         NAR↓     30.40%     42.10%    35.90%     42.50%    3.50%     0.40%        22.00%   23.20%    26.20%
   Count
   Identification
   (LibriCount)

   HEAR Speaker         ACC↑     17.53%     16.93%    13.26%     17.22%    10.26%    13.76%       5.51%    13.80%    17.48%
   Count
   Identification
   (LibriCount)


                                                                                                Continued on next page



                                                                42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task               Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS   SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-    Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-       GAMA-
                               LLaMA               7B         13B       Audio-   Audio-                LLaMA     IT
                                                                        Chat     7B-Inst.


   Multi-Speaker      LLM-C↑   46.50%     23.50%   36.00%     30.50%    57.00%   51.00%       32.50%   39.00%    48.50%
   Detection (VCTK)

   Speaker Counting   LLM-C↑   18.50%     6.00%    14.50%     13.50%    17.50%   26.50%       14.00%   4.00%     12.00%
   (LibriTTS-
   TestClean)

   Speaker            LLM-C↑   48.00%     37.50%   45.00%     54.50%    43.50%   52.00%       19.00%   24.00%    13.00%
   Verification
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Speaker            LLM-C↑   46.00%     36.00%   49.00%     46.00%    47.00%   54.00%       21.00%   33.00%    23.00%
   Verification
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   Speaker            LLM-C↑   48.00%     38.50%   54.00%     58.50%    32.50%   51.00%       24.00%   19.50%    7.00%
   Verification
   (VCTK)

   SUPERB Speaker     NAR↓     93.00%     99.50%   100.00%    100.00%   99.50%   98.00%       97.50%   100.00%   60.50%
   Diarization
   (Libri2Mix-Test)

   SUPERB Speaker     DER↓     74.81%     74.62%   -          -         44.26%   93.29%       90.53%   -         74.12%
   Diarization
   (Libri2Mix-Test)

   SUPERB Speaker     LLM-C↑   45.00%     44.00%   45.00%     51.00%    49.00%   51.00%       49.00%   44.00%    45.00%
   Verification
   (SUPERB Hidden
   Set)

   Noise Detection    LLM-C↑   45.50%     18.50%   50.00%     47.50%    42.00%   49.00%       39.00%   41.00%    21.50%
   (LJSpeech,
   MUSAN-
   Gaussian)

   Noise Detection    LLM-C↑   52.00%     8.50%    52.00%     47.00%    50.50%   47.00%       44.50%   33.00%    6.00%
   (LJSpeech,
   MUSAN-Music)

   Noise Detection    LLM-C↑   47.00%     13.50%   50.50%     49.00%    50.50%   49.50%       44.50%   48.00%    9.00%
   (LJSpeech,
   MUSAN-Noise)

   Noise Detection    LLM-C↑   48.00%     13.50%   53.00%     36.00%    50.50%   47.00%       45.00%   50.50%    51.00%
   (LJSpeech,
   MUSAN-Speech)

   Noise Detection    LLM-C↑   46.00%     32.50%   45.50%     57.50%    42.00%   54.50%       52.00%   37.50%    3.50%
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Music)

   Noise Detection    LLM-C↑   44.50%     26.50%   45.50%     55.00%    44.50%   61.00%       47.00%   54.00%    4.50%
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Noise)

   Noise Detection    LLM-C↑   45.00%     51.50%   43.50%     52.50%    46.50%   57.00%       44.50%   48.50%    56.50%
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Speech)

   Noise Detection    LLM-C↑   53.00%     15.50%   49.00%     56.50%    45.50%   54.50%       46.00%   38.50%    11.50%
   (VCTK, MUSAN-
   Gaussian)

   Noise SNR Level    LLM-C↑   24.00%     8.00%    13.50%     15.50%    13.00%   17.50%       17.50%   15.00%    1.50%
   Prediction
   (VCTK, MUSAN-
   Gaussian)

   Noise SNR Level    LLM-C↑   23.00%     9.00%    10.00%     8.50%     10.00%   14.00%       15.50%   9.00%     1.50%
   Prediction
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Music)


                                                                                            Continued on next page


                                                             43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                                LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA     IT
                                                                          Chat      7B-Inst.


   Noise SNR Level     LLM-C↑   23.00%     12.50%    9.50%      16.00%    7.50%     19.00%       14.00%    11.00%    0.50%
   Prediction
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Noise)

   Noise SNR Level     LLM-C↑   23.50%     11.50%    13.00%     1.50%     14.00%    20.50%       15.00%    10.50%    0.50%
   Prediction
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Speech)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   44.50%     11.00%    19.00%     34.00%    28.00%    48.00%       42.50%    17.50%    6.00%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech,
   RirsNoises-
   LargeRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   40.00%     4.50%     14.50%     25.00%    31.00%    48.00%       41.00%    10.50%    5.00%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech,
   RirsNoises-
   MediumRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   45.00%     4.50%     9.00%      19.50%    24.00%    48.00%       42.50%    14.00%    6.50%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech,
   RirsNoises-
   SmallRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   43.00%     24.50%    18.50%     25.00%    18.00%    46.00%       37.00%    14.50%    7.50%
   Detection (VCTK,
   RirsNoises-
   LargeRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   46.50%     22.50%    8.50%      19.50%    20.00%    46.00%       38.50%    14.00%    6.50%
   Detection (VCTK,
   RirsNoises-
   MediumRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   47.00%     18.50%    8.00%      13.00%    17.50%    46.00%       36.00%    10.50%    11.00%
   Detection (VCTK,
   RirsNoises-
   SmallRoom)

   N-Best Correction   LLM-C↑   31.80%     22.80%    23.00%     29.20%    32.80%    29.00%       32.60%    20.80%    30.80%
   (Librispeech-
   TestOther)

   AAVE Speech         WER↓     21.73%     97.34%    23.99%     31.56%    96.81%    38.55%       34.91%    136.50%   102.92%
   Recognition
   (CORAAL)

   Code-switch         MER↓     424.58%    215.51%   293.50%    185.27%   165.54%   116.88%      172.03%   130.18%   193.47%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (NTUML2021)

   Code-Switching      NAR↓     68.20%     12.20%    5.40%      88.80%    1.60%     0.00%        30.40%    69.40%    14.60%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (ASCEND)

   Code-Switching      ACC↑     28.30%     50.57%    58.14%     14.29%    44.31%    60.80%       10.92%    13.73%    9.84%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (ASCEND)

   Multi-Lingual       WER↓     73.80%     132.35%   34.46%     25.21%    79.60%    24.96%       49.56%    99.37%    105.81%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-de)

   Multi-Lingual       WER↓     65.03%     100.29%   9.37%      9.47%     27.97%    17.47%       17.23%    96.03%    97.09%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-en)

   Multi-Lingual       WER↓     72.49%     123.26%   23.45%     16.10%    58.82%    18.19%       44.90%    103.19%   101.75%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-es)


                                                                                               Continued on next page


                                                               44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task             Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                             LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA     IT
                                                                       Chat      7B-Inst.


   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     71.09%     133.86%   26.52%     21.27%    46.27%    19.01%       42.35%    102.25%   102.01%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-fr)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     85.38%     125.39%   39.11%     31.54%    56.55%    33.16%       46.14%    102.72%   108.84%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-it)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     74.96%     120.29%   32.11%     29.37%    140.01%   42.94%       55.56%    102.05%   101.22%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-nl)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     76.79%     139.04%   73.83%     51.53%    278.19%   101.41%      90.11%    100.23%   105.43%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-pl)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     73.63%     136.66%   31.88%     25.07%    117.33%   24.72%       46.26%    99.71%    103.48%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-pt)

   PTBR Speech      WER↓     45.75%     248.05%   69.88%     73.91%    233.85%   38.57%       62.93%    639.12%   270.64%
   Recognition
   (Common Voice)

   SUPERB ASR       WER↓     33.96%     96.28%    15.11%     2.79%     69.35%    36.70%       6.87%     103.67%   116.66%
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   ASR              WER↓     42.14%     91.89%    11.44%     4.31%     79.53%    40.28%       9.17%     111.03%   130.00%
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   SUPERB OOD       WER↓     51.04%     245.85%   216.51%    178.02%   289.25%   178.21%      149.15%   225.28%   504.53%
   ASR (Ar)
   (Common Voice)

   SUPERB OOD       WER↓     10.93%     150.00%   98.96%     99.22%    100.83%   75.08%       99.38%    141.68%   303.28%
   ASR (Es)
   (Common Voice)

   SUPERB OOD       WER↓     65.71%     122.86%   61.11%     62.80%    92.17%    80.21%       136.24%   137.25%   266.72%
   ASR
   (Spontaneous)
   (CHIME6-Test)

   SUPERB OOD       CER↓     29.67%     508.02%   609.28%    310.33%   449.32%   270.63%      445.36%   435.33%   1097.41%
   ASR (Zh)
   (Common Voice)

   Target Speaker   WER↓     143.02%    133.86%   273.90%    187.15%   207.01%   132.13%      266.26%   108.32%   140.37%
   ASR (AMI-test)

   Multi-Speaker    LLM-C↑   46.00%     29.00%    16.50%     22.00%    58.00%    52.00%       22.00%    42.50%    53.00%
   Detection
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Speech Command   NAR↓     4.80%      76.40%    3.07%      0.40%     0.67%     0.00%        0.67%     1.60%     76.40%
   Recognition
   (AudioMNIST)

   Speech Command   ACC↑     88.80%     77.40%    96.70%     74.43%    96.24%    77.07%       93.42%    9.89%     8.47%
   Recognition
   (AudioMNIST)

   Speech Text      LLM-C↑   86.50%     43.50%    57.00%     59.50%    64.00%    92.00%       50.50%    50.50%    42.00%
   Matching
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Speech Text      LLM-C↑   80.50%     42.50%    56.50%     60.00%    66.00%    92.50%       51.50%    47.50%    40.00%
   Matching
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)


                                                                                            Continued on next page



                                                            45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task               Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-       GAMA-
                               LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                LLaMA     IT
                                                                         Chat      7B-Inst.


   Speech Text        LLM-C↑   83.50%     44.50%    57.00%     60.00%    67.00%    90.00%       60.00%   49.50%    41.00%
   Matching
   (LJSpeech)

   Spoken Term        LLM-C↑   76.50%     28.00%    60.00%     54.50%    77.00%    61.50%       51.00%   30.50%    37.50%
   Detection
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Spoken Term        LLM-C↑   75.50%     23.00%    54.50%     50.50%    72.50%    64.00%       59.50%   41.00%    34.00%
   Detection
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   Spoken Term        LLM-C↑   83.50%     33.50%    57.00%     53.50%    74.50%    79.50%       56.50%   38.50%    25.00%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech)

   SUPERB             LLM-C↑   36.50%     1.00%     30.50%     2.00%     60.50%    47.00%       43.00%   4.00%     2.00%
   Keyword Spotting
   (Speech
   Commands
   V1-Test)

   SUPERB Query       LLM-C↑   46.50%     45.00%    49.00%     51.50%    48.00%    53.50%       49.50%   51.00%    2.50%
   by Example
   (Quesst14-Eval)

   Stuttering         LLM-C↑   49.10%     51.00%    50.50%     50.30%    50.50%    52.40%       55.00%   49.60%    47.40%
   Detection
   (SEP28k)

   Voice Disorder     LLM-C↑   13.46%     1.92%     13.46%     17.31%    13.46%    16.35%       18.27%   21.15%    6.73%
   Classification
   (VOICED)

   Conversation       LLM-C↑   77.78%     5.56%     57.41%     37.04%    51.85%    66.67%       62.96%   3.70%     24.07%
   Matching

   Dialogue Act       LLM-C↑   11.08%     0.00%     36.00%     0.92%     5.00%     15.83%       13.17%   1.83%     1.33%
   Classification
   (SLUE-HVB)

   Dialogue Act       LLM-C↑   29.00%     10.50%    34.00%     40.50%    42.00%    30.00%       36.50%   18.50%    4.00%
   Classification
   (Daily Talk)

   Dialogue Act       LLM-C↑   50.00%     3.50%     51.00%     48.00%    43.50%    46.00%       37.00%   40.00%    25.00%
   Pairing (Daily
   Talk)

   SUPERB Intent      LLM-C↑   36.50%     0.06%     21.00%     5.50%     26.50%    26.00%       28.00%   3.50%     1.00%
   Classification
   (SLURP)

   Intent             LLM-C↑   27.00%     14.00%    28.50%     28.50%    44.00%    68.50%       37.50%   6.50%     1.50%
   Classification
   (SLURP-Action)

   Intent             LLM-C↑   45.50%     11.50%    27.00%     19.00%    68.50%    56.00%       56.50%   4.00%     0.50%
   Classification
   (SLURP-Intent)

   Named Entity       NAR↓     81.25%     100.00%   100.00%    100.00%   100.00%   25.00%       93.75%   100.00%   100.00%
   Localization
   (SLUE-
   VoxPopuli)

   Named Entity       F1↑      1.4006     -         -          -         -         1.1063       0.8681   -         -
   Localization
   (SLUE-
   VoxPopuli)

   Named Entity       NAR↓     90.76%     98.37%    95.65%     98.37%    95.11%    91.30%       91.85%   97.83%    96.74%
   Recognition
   (SLUE-
   VoxPopuli)


                                                                                              Continued on next page


                                                              46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                    Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS   SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-    Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-      GAMA-
                                    LLaMA               7B         13B       Audio-   Audio-                 LLaMA    IT
                                                                             Chat     7B-Inst.


   Named Entity            IoU↑     0          0.3333   0          0         0        0.0625       0.0222    0        0
   Recognition
   (SLUE-
   VoxPopuli)

   Sarcasm Detection       LLM-C↑   44.50%     15.00%   38.50%     46.00%    42.50%   48.00%       46.50%    43.00%   8.00%
   (Mustard)

   Semantic Textual        LLM-C↑   48.80%     47.20%   47.20%     50.40%    42.80%   46.80%       50.40%    51.20%   38.80%
   Similarity
   (SpokenSTS)

   Speech Sentiment        LLM-C↑   38.50%     37.50%   33.50%     35.09%    38.50%   49.00%       44.00%    27.50%   27.00%
   Analysis (MELD)

   Spoken Digit            LLM-C↑   43.50%     13.00%   31.00%     33.00%    15.00%   43.50%       40.50%    4.50%    13.00%
   Arithmetic
   (AudioMNIST)

   SUPERB Slot             NAR↓     38.00%     88.50%   34.00%     68.50%    51.00%   45.00%       44.00%    99.00%   97.00%
   Filling
   (AudioSnips-Test)

   SUPERB Slot             Slot     0.8637     0.8864   0.9325     0.9396    0.8616   0.7704       0.907     1        0.8939
   Filling                 Type
   (AudioSnips-Test)       F1↑

   SUPERB Slot             Slot     0.3178     0.6432   0.4059     0.3349    0.4417   0.3065       0.4752    1.587    1.425
   Filling                 Value
   (AudioSnips-Test)       CER↓

   Code-Switching          LLM-C↑   51.50%     45.00%   50.00%     49.50%    27.50%   49.50%       27.50%    28.00%   19.00%
   Semantic
   Grammar
   Acceptability
   Comparison
   (CSZS-zh-en)

   Nonce Word              LLM-C↑   48.43%     30.20%   48.43%     48.43%    21.08%   50.14%       48.15%    35.04%   19.37%
   Detection
   (sWUGGY)

   PoS Estimation          POS↓     2.5722     1.2792   2.9675     1.199     3.062    2.3091       3.1126    1.5327   1.9635
   (LibriTTS)

   PoS Estimation          POS↓     0.9081     1.3507   1.7583     1.0601    2.158    1.7514       2.0463    1.2394   1.3911
   with transcription
   (LibriTTS)

   Sentence                LLM-C↑   52.78%     6.75%    27.38%     42.06%    28.97%   49.40%       49.80%    50.79%   3.57%
   Grammar
   Acceptability
   (sBLIMP)

   SUPERB Speech           Sacre    17.372     0.107    18.7884    16.7835   6.9846   23.3458      21.7423   0.0566   0.0219
   Translation             Bleu↑
   (CoVoST2-Test)


                        Table 6: Task-level evaluation results using LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct.

   Task                    Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS   SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-    Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-      GAMA-
                                    LLaMA               7B         13B       Audio-   Audio-                 LLaMA    IT
                                                                             Chat     7B-Inst.


   Chord                   LLM-C↑   4.00%      5.00%    7.50%      13.00%    43.00%   16.00%       45.50%    50.00%   0.50%
   Classification

   MARBLE Key              LLM-C↑   3.50%      1.00%    1.50%      1.00%     3.00%    13.00%       2.00%     0.50%    11.50%
   Detection
   (GiantSteps - Key)


                                                                                                 Continued on next page


                                                                  47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                 Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-    Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-       GAMA-
                                 LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-   Audio-                LLaMA     IT
                                                                           Chat     7B-Inst.


   HEAR Music           NAR↓     95.14%     100.00%   100.00%    100.00%   97.30%   96.22%       84.86%   100.00%   100.00%
   Transcription
   (MAESTRO)

   HEAR Music           TER↓     99.45%     -         -          -         99.54%   100.00%      99.48%   -         -
   Transcription
   (MAESTRO)

   HEAR Percussion      LLM-C↑   2.40%      3.30%     14.00%     15.10%    14.00%   13.20%       16.00%   14.30%    8.60%
   Instruments Tonic
   Classification
   (Mridangam
   Tonic)

   Instrument Pitch     LLM-C↑   0.70%      0.90%     1.70%      5.40%     1.60%    18.90%       1.20%    0.40%     1.00%
   Classification
   (Nsynth)

   Pitch Extraction     NAR↓     30.00%     73.50%    57.00%     85.50%    76.50%   73.00%       57.50%   97.50%    53.00%
   By Lyrics (CSD)

   Pitch Extraction     TER↓     1.86       2.82      4.32       7.38      2.33     2.42         2.71     1.00      3.87
   By Lyrics (CSD)

   Emotion              LLM-C↑   10.00%     0.00%     1.70%      3.30%     21.70%   8.30%        8.30%    1.70%     1.70%
   Classificaiton In
   Songs
   (EMOTIFY)

   MARBLE               LLM-C↑   3.60%      8.70%     0.80%      3.70%     9.90%    3.30%        1.80%    7.20%     1.10%
   Emotion Detection
   (MTG)

   HEAR Music           LLM-C↑   13.07%     10.05%    26.13%     45.73%    31.66%   37.19%       15.58%   26.13%    1.51%
   Genre
   Classification
   (ISMIR04)

   MARBLE Genre         LLM-C↑   1.20%      2.80%     0.90%      1.50%     5.60%    0.50%        1.20%    1.80%     0.40%
   Classification
   (MTG)

   MARBLE Music         LLM-C↑   7.50%      3.00%     7.00%      16.00%    5.00%    3.50%        14.50%   9.00%     7.00%
   Tagging
   (MagnaTagATune)

   MARBLE Music         LLM-C↑   5.20%      3.00%     1.40%      0.90%     4.50%    4.80%        2.60%    3.80%     1.10%
   Tagging (MTG)

   Music Genre          LLM-C↑   13.40%     1.80%     9.80%      16.10%    8.00%    17.00%       8.90%    9.80%     5.40%
   Classification
   (FMA)

   HEAR Percussion      LLM-C↑   2.98%      3.82%     10.60%     20.74%    16.48%   29.26%       25.42%   22.02%    11.84%
   Instruments
   Classification
   (Beijing Opera
   Percussion)

   HEAR Percussion      LLM-C↑   0.10%      5.00%     7.90%      4.90%     12.00%   11.50%       14.40%   10.60%    0.90%
   Instruments Stroke
   Classification
   (Mridangam
   Stroke)

   Instrument           LLM-C↑   3.70%      12.90%    14.80%     15.30%    21.30%   55.40%       13.20%   10.90%    9.60%
   Classification
   (Nsynth)

   Instrument           LLM-C↑   8.10%      12.00%    21.90%     27.90%    33.60%   25.50%       24.90%   22.80%    10.20%
   Combination
   Recognition
   (OpenMIC-2018)

   Instrument Source    LLM-C↑   9.90%      36.20%    39.20%     48.00%    37.10%   37.90%       38.00%   41.40%    47.70%
   Classification
   (Nsynth)


                                                                                               Continued on next page


                                                                48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS     SALMONN    SALMONN    Qwen-      Qwen2-       WavLLM     MU-        GAMA-
                                LLaMA                 7B         13B        Audio-     Audio-                  LLaMA      IT
                                                                            Chat       7B-Inst.


   MARBLE              LLM-C↑   1.50%      6.90%      0.20%      0.00%      6.70%      2.60%        1.30%      3.00%      7.60%
   Instrument
   Classification
   (MTG)

   Singing Automatic   NAR↓     99.50%     68.22%     0.33%      16.14%     17.30%     0.83%        23.13%     97.84%     98.50%
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   Singing Automatic   MSE↓     6.5670     2.4110     5.3810     33.1090    14.8900    1.3810       11.2760    4.3720     2.3070
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   Singing Automatic   KTAU↑    0.3330     0.0090     0.2330     0.0230     0.0710     0.0180       0.0300     0.1640     0.2250
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   Singing Automatic   LCC↑     0.6150     -0.0780    0.0240     0.0140     0.0820     0.0400       -0.0050    0.0980     0.2330
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   Singing Automatic   SRCC↑    0.5000     0.0120     0.2210     0.0330     0.0870     0.0230       0.0380     0.1870     0.2790
   MOS Prediction
   (SingMOS)

   MARBLE Beat         NAR↓     100.00%    100.00%    100.00%    100.00%    100.00%    100.00%      100.00%    100.00%    100.00%
   Tracking (ASAP)

   MARBLE Beat         ERR↓     -          -          -          -          -          -            -          -          -
   Tracking (ASAP)

   Music Beat          NAR↓     53.64%     91.82%     50.00%     65.45%     51.82%     40.91%       43.64%     78.18%     95.45%
   Tracking (ASAP)

   Music Beat          Miss     59.7630    63.6760    98.6640    56.3060    131.7640   31.3990      81.3490    199.8770   22.2000
   Tracking (ASAP)     Time↓

   Audio Editing       NAR↓     87.50%     93.75%     84.38%     84.38%     46.88%     31.25%       81.25%     87.50%     37.50%
   Identification
   (People’s Speech)

   Audio Editing       ACC↑     153.6830   -          283.7050   82.8400    123.3700   165.0680     -          154.1090   147.6570
   Identification                          650.0000                                                 49.7720
   (People’s Speech)

   Scene Fake          LLM-C↑   29.00%     48.00%     48.00%     52.00%     49.00%     54.00%       49.00%     19.00%     47.00%
   Detection
   (ASPIRE)

   Audio Deep Fake     LLM-C↑   18.50%     34.20%     29.10%     42.00%     36.00%     39.70%       42.00%     40.30%     37.90%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech,
   WaveFake,
   MUSDB18HQ)

   Singing Voice       LLM-C↑   10.00%     35.20%     29.80%     38.60%     29.70%     31.90%       27.10%     40.80%     22.20%
   Deepfake
   Detection
   (CtrSVDD,
   ACEKiSing,
   M4Singer)

   Audio Duration      NAR↓     33.00%     28.00%     0.50%      49.00%     0.00%      0.00%        0.00%      46.00%     14.00%
   Prediction
   (NTUML2021)

   Audio Duration      MSE↓     13.3660    35.6460    98,768.7290 2,005.3330 28.9400   62.1550      3,243.7400 1,779.0420 62.7500
   Prediction
   (NTUML2021)

   HEAR Music          LLM-C↑   65.00%     68.50%     87.50%     99.50%     94.00%     89.50%       22.00%     53.50%     88.00%
   Speech
   Classification
   (MAESTRO,
   Librispeech)

   Sound Effect        LLM-C↑   4.00%      7.67%      14.67%     18.00%     17.00%     19.67%       17.33%     17.00%     16.33%
   Detection
   (RemFx)


                                                                                                  Continued on next page


                                                                49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                  Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                                  LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA     IT
                                                                            Chat      7B-Inst.


   Speech Detection      LLM-C↑   48.00%     32.00%    46.00%     66.00%    45.50%    56.50%       36.50%    46.50%    56.00%
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Speech Detection      LLM-C↑   51.00%     33.00%    46.00%     66.50%    45.00%    55.50%       38.50%    45.00%    51.00%
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   Speech Detection      LLM-C↑   55.00%     46.00%    60.50%     74.00%    56.50%    47.50%       51.50%    49.50%    76.00%
   (LJSpeech)

   Children Song         WER↓     58.70%     102.70%   104.00%    101.00%   128.70%   94.90%       155.50%   100.00%   100.10%
   Transcript
   Verification (CSD)

   Lyric Translation     Sacre    2.1090     1.0360    2.8130     0.9940    3.3970    3.9160       1.8970    0.1590    0.0740
   (SingSet)             Bleu↑

   Song Lyric            MER↓     1.0193     1.6453    3.5636     2.6600    1.1841    1.1562       4.8113    1.1753    1.6852
   Recognition
   (SingSet)

   MARBLE Vocal          LLM-C↑   8.50%      2.00%     12.00%     11.00%    7.50%     15.50%       10.00%    9.00%     4.00%
   Technique
   Detection
   (VocalSet)

   Audio Segment         NAR↓     86.00%     92.00%    24.00%     24.00%    42.00%    28.00%       44.00%    84.00%    42.00%
   Retrieval (Clotho)

   Audio Segment         IoU↑     0.3700     0.2970    0.1900     0.2460    0.0570    0.1930       0.1710    0.0000    0.1590
   Retrieval (Clotho)

   HEAR Sound            LLM-C↑   0.00%      0.00%     28.60%     35.70%    0.00%     7.10%        42.90%    7.10%     14.30%
   Event Detection
   (DCASE2016
   Task2)

   Multi-channel         LLM-C↑   36.60%     9.20%     36.60%     26.10%    38.00%    43.00%       23.90%    8.50%     15.50%
   Sound Event
   Understanding
   (STARSS23)

   Animal                LLM-C↑   9.80%      36.30%    58.50%     66.50%    75.80%    34.50%       13.30%    4.30%     15.30%
   Classification
   (WaveSource-
   Test)

   Bird Sound            LLM-C↑   32.50%     41.50%    75.50%     77.50%    78.50%    82.50%       75.00%    45.00%    35.50%
   Detection
   (Warblrb10k)

   Cat Emotion           LLM-C↑   10.00%     2.00%     2.00%      4.00%     4.00%     16.00%       8.00%     2.00%     8.00%
   Classification (Cat
   Sound
   Classification
   Dataset V2)

   Cornell Birdcall      LLM-C↑   10.00%     3.30%     0.00%      3.30%     10.00%    10.00%       13.30%    3.30%     13.30%
   Identification

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   14.00%     17.50%    20.00%     8.00%     78.00%    34.00%       5.50%     2.50%     7.50%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Animals)

   HEAR Beehive          LLM-C↑   92.50%     70.00%    60.50%     92.00%    56.00%    92.00%       82.50%    61.00%    70.00%
   States
   Classification
   (Beehive States)

   Domestic              NAR↓     97.22%     100.00%   99.72%     100.00%   99.44%    99.72%       100.00%   98.33%    99.72%
   Environment
   Sound Event
   Detection
   (DESED-
   PublicEval)


                                                                                                 Continued on next page


                                                                 50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                  Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                                  LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA     IT
                                                                            Chat      7B-Inst.


   Domestic              Event-   0.4800     0.0000    0.0000     0.0000    0.1680    1.0000       0.0000    1.0000    0.0000
   Environment           based
   Sound                 F1↑
   EventDetection
   (DESED-
   PublicEval)

   Emergency Traffic     LLM-C↑   53.50%     32.50%    57.50%     85.00%    66.00%    75.50%       40.50%    46.00%    73.00%
   Detection
   (Large-Scale-
   Audio-dataset)

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   7.00%      11.00%    4.50%      5.00%     67.50%    25.00%       6.50%     1.00%     12.00%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Exterior
   And Urban
   Noises)

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   13.50%     7.50%     1.00%      0.50%     56.50%    15.00%       10.00%    0.00%     6.50%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Interior
   And Domestic
   Sounds)

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   5.00%      10.00%    7.00%      1.00%     68.50%    8.00%        8.50%     0.00%     9.00%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Natural
   Soundscapes And
   Water Sounds)

   Environmental         LLM-C↑   13.00%     5.80%     2.30%      5.30%     35.10%    7.90%        10.90%    0.50%     4.70%
   Sound
   Classification
   (UrbanSound8K-
   Urban Noises)

   Environment           LLM-C↑   7.00%      45.60%    40.40%     21.10%    68.40%    66.70%       38.60%    10.50%    52.60%
   Recognition
   (ESC50)

   HEAR                  LLM-C↑   10.70%     31.40%    64.00%     76.60%    73.00%    52.00%       22.80%    4.30%     43.40%
   Environmental
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50)

   HEAR Vocal            LLM-C↑   15.33%     9.00%     2.00%      2.17%     17.83%    11.33%       22.83%    4.17%     7.67%
   Imitation
   Classification
   (Vocal Imitations)

   Audio Spatial         NAR↓     45.00%     64.00%    81.00%     95.50%    80.00%    41.50%       39.50%    92.50%    55.50%
   Distance
   Prediction (Spatial
   LibriSpeech)

   Audio Spatial         MEDAE↓   0.7110     0.6800    0.6840     0.0000    1.3130    0.7840       0.7450    0.6340    0.5910
   Distance
   Prediction (Spatial
   LibriSpeech)

   How Far Are You       LLM-C↑   27.50%     13.00%    19.00%     8.00%     30.00%    26.50%       32.00%    19.00%    2.50%
   (3DSpeaker)

   Sound Position        NAR↓     100.00%    100.00%   100.00%    100.00%   100.00%   100.00%      100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
   Prediction

   Sound Position        Angle    -          -         -          -         -         -            -         -         -
   Prediction            Diff↓

   Dialogue Emotion      LLM-C↑   54.00%     18.00%    28.50%     13.00%    33.50%    54.00%       22.50%    42.00%    41.00%
   Classification
   (Daily Talk)

   Emoji Grounded        LLM-C↑   1.10%      2.00%     2.20%      0.20%     3.50%     1.80%        0.10%     2.20%     5.00%
   Speech Emotion
   Recognition
   (RAVDESS)


                                                                                                 Continued on next page


                                                                 51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task              Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS     SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM     MU-       GAMA-
                              LLaMA                 7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                  LLaMA     IT
                                                                         Chat      7B-Inst.


   Emotion Change    LLM-C↑   5.00%      10.30%     10.00%     11.20%    1.00%     10.30%       3.90%      11.30%    2.90%
   Detection
   (Ravdess)

   Emotion           LLM-C↑   33.50%     14.00%     20.00%     10.00%    43.50%    36.50%       40.50%     1.50%     8.50%
   Recognition
   (MELD)

   HEAR Emotion      LLM-C↑   10.60%     10.40%     18.80%     18.10%    64.00%    62.40%       26.30%     13.60%    16.00%
   Recognition
   (CREMAD)

   SUPERB Emotion    LLM-C↑   12.92%     24.58%     13.75%     13.33%    70.42%    76.25%       12.50%     13.75%    5.00%
   Recognition
   (RAVDESS)

   Covid19 Cough     LLM-C↑   40.00%     18.80%     4.90%      86.40%    9.30%     8.30%        18.60%     42.10%    6.00%
   Audio
   Classification
   (CoughVid)

   Environmental     LLM-C↑   17.00%     11.00%     9.50%      3.00%     77.00%    29.00%       19.50%     0.00%     11.00%
   Sound
   Classification
   (ESC50-Human
   And Non Speech
   Sounds)

   Human Non         LLM-C↑   3.60%      5.70%      45.00%     30.70%    27.90%    23.60%       18.60%     17.10%    28.60%
   Speech Sound
   Recognition
   (Nonspeech7k,
   CommonVoice)

   Human Screaming   LLM-C↑   52.50%     45.00%     52.50%     65.00%    62.50%    87.50%       47.50%     47.50%    67.50%
   Detection
   (Environmentdb)

   Vocal Sound       LLM-C↑   32.50%     2.50%      11.70%     4.00%     75.70%    38.30%       22.10%     1.00%     3.90%
   Recognition
   (VocalSound)

   Phoneme Segment   NAR↓     23.29%     60.40%     37.69%     18.67%    9.52%     13.44%       26.81%     4.97%     89.74%
   Counting
   (Librispeech-
   words)

   Phoneme Segment   ACC↑     0.1510     0.1400     0.1760     0.1190    0.0540    0.1530       0.1380     0.0070    0.1020
   Counting
   (Librispeech-
   words)

   Phoneme Segment   Abs      2.4090     79.7600    367.5620   38.1450   7.1110    2.9900       8.8670     15.2140   4.5020
   Counting          Diff↓
   (Librispeech-
   words)

   Phone Segment     NAR↓     23.29%     70.96%     32.22%     14.07%    12.30%    28.23%       18.81%     46.88%    24.10%
   Counting
   (VoxAngeles)

   Phone Segment     ACC↑     0.1510     0.1180     0.1910     0.2300    0.0730    0.0950       0.1610     0.1100    0.0430
   Counting
   (VoxAngeles)

   Phone Segment     Abs      2.2150     5,532.7270 8.1900     6.2270    2.8590    2.7220       51,811.8860 3.9190   2.8570
   Counting          Diff↓
   (VoxAngeles)

   SUPERB            PER↓     100.12%    102.75%    25.36%     24.60%    100.58%   100.96%      99.99%     110.27%   100.37%
   Phoneme
   Recognition
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Phoneme           PER↓     100.17%    101.08%    22.79%     22.91%    100.62%   100.88%      99.99%     111.18%   100.61%
   Recognition
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)


                                                                                              Continued on next page



                                                             52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS   SALMONN   SALMONN   Qwen-    Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-      GAMA-
                                LLaMA               7B        13B       Audio-   Audio-                LLaMA    IT
                                                                        Chat     7B-Inst.


   Phonological        LLM-C↑   25.90%     2.20%    2.00%     5.10%     4.40%    9.90%        3.60%    3.10%    1.00%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Consonant Place
   Of Articulation)

   Phonological        LLM-C↑   16.90%     9.50%    2.20%     1.50%     5.50%    6.50%        7.00%    8.00%    6.00%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Manner Of
   Articulation)

   Phonological        LLM-C↑   5.90%      0.00%    2.80%     -         9.50%    5.20%        79.90%   0.60%    0.10%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Phone)

   Phonological        LLM-C↑   50.30%     14.90%   41.30%    38.30%    50.50%   58.20%       47.00%   42.20%   16.10%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Vowel Frontness)

   Phonological        LLM-C↑   21.20%     15.10%   32.00%    35.20%    30.80%   38.70%       39.30%   39.10%   25.70%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Vowel Height)

   Phonological        LLM-C↑   41.10%     18.10%   27.30%    61.30%    46.40%   70.10%       37.10%   21.80%   17.90%
   Feature
   Classification
   (VoxAngeles-
   Vowel
   Roundedness)

   Heteronym           LLM-C↑   55.00%     25.00%   42.00%    53.00%    45.00%   44.00%       49.00%   29.00%   20.00%
   Differentiation
   (HeteronymEn)

   L2 English          LLM-C↑   22.20%     30.80%   50.00%    51.10%    35.30%   50.00%       37.20%   51.90%   30.80%
   Accuracy
   (speechocean762-
   Ranking)

   L2 English          NAR↓     15.44%     78.52%   0.27%     32.48%    10.47%   0.94%        12.89%   61.88%   15.84%
   Accuracy
   (speechocean762-
   scoring)

   L2 English          PCC↑     0.0260     0.2990   0.0670    0.0920    0.0250   -0.0110      0.0930   0.0370   -0.0310
   Accuracy
   (speechocean762-
   scoring)

   Multi-lingual       LLM-C↑   37.90%     6.60%    46.60%    46.20%    14.80%   43.20%       44.40%   20.20%   29.70%
   Pronunciation
   Similarity
   (VoxAngeles)

   Accent              LLM-C↑   17.50%     8.50%    6.00%     7.00%     24.00%   14.00%       7.50%    37.00%   4.00%
   Classification
   (Accentdb
   Extended)

   Stress Detection    LLM-C↑   15.00%     6.50%    7.00%     18.50%    9.50%    20.00%       29.00%   5.00%    5.00%
   (MIRSD)

   Third Tone Sandhi   NAR↓     25.00%     34.38%   65.62%    28.12%    62.50%   3.12%        28.12%   56.25%   50.00%
   Recognition
   (NCCU Corpus of
   Spoken Taiwan
   Mandarin)


                                                                                            Continued on next page


                                                             53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS   SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-       GAMA-
                                LLaMA               7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                LLaMA     IT
                                                                         Chat      7B-Inst.


   Third Tone Sandhi   IoU↑     0.0420     0.0530   0.0910     0.1460    0.0830    0.0650       0.1740   0.1430    0.0630
   Recognition
   (NCCU Corpus of
   Spoken Taiwan
   Mandarin)

   L2 English          LLM-C↑   27.80%     22.80%   50.00%     50.60%    51.90%    54.20%       30.00%   50.60%    49.40%
   Fluency
   (speechocean762-
   Ranking)

   L2 English          NAR↓     13.59%     74.02%   0.00%      19.52%    2.42%     0.40%        41.18%   14.27%    2.02%
   Fluency
   (speechocean762-
   Scoring)

   L2 English          PCC↑     0.0210     0.2580   0.0290     0.0370    0.0460    -0.0860      0.0540   0.3110    0.2920
   Fluency
   (speechocean762-
   Scoring)

   L2 English          LLM-C↑   23.60%     36.70%   46.70%     50.80%    36.10%    47.20%       45.30%   52.50%    24.20%
   Prosodic
   (speechocean762-
   Ranking)

   L2 English          NAR↓     27.86%     92.73%   0.27%      10.77%    26.92%    2.69%        13.86%   82.10%    17.77%
   Prosodic
   (speechocean762-
   Scoring)

   L2 English          PCC↑     0.0900     0.3550   0.0430     0.0900    0.4930    -0.0170      0.0940   -0.0670   0.1330
   Prosodic
   (speechocean762-
   Scoring)

   Prosody             LLM-C↑   57.10%     40.90%   51.40%     52.90%    32.00%    58.70%       68.70%   74.90%    36.30%
   Naturalness
   (ProsAudit-
   Lexical)

   Prosody             LLM-C↑   61.50%     41.60%   53.80%     50.40%    36.30%    59.20%       59.20%   75.20%    36.30%
   Naturalness
   (ProsAudit-
   Protosyntax)

   Spoof Detection     LLM-C↑   45.50%     23.00%   56.00%     19.00%    13.00%    24.00%       23.00%   73.00%    10.50%
   (ASVspoof2015)

   Spoof Detection     LLM-C↑   48.50%     11.00%   68.50%     42.50%    28.00%    35.50%       27.50%   66.00%    10.50%
   (ASVspoof2017)

   Deep Fake Voice     LLM-C↑   37.50%     26.00%   51.80%     47.30%    49.50%    47.00%       47.50%   42.00%    31.50%
   Recognition
   (DEEP-VOICE)

   Enhancement         LLM-C↑   52.00%     33.00%   30.00%     50.50%    59.00%    58.00%       35.00%   54.50%    45.50%
   Detection
   (LibriTTS-
   TestClean,
   WHAM)

   Fraud Robocall      LLM-C↑   73.30%     13.30%   0.00%      100.00%   100.00%   100.00%      83.30%   50.00%    100.00%
   Recognition
   (CallHome)

   Fraud Robocall      LLM-C↑   47.40%     0.00%    0.00%      73.70%    42.10%    63.20%       47.40%   47.40%    100.00%
   Recognition
   (Promo)

   Fraud Robocall      LLM-C↑   94.90%     46.20%   100.00%    20.50%    74.40%    61.50%       33.30%   38.50%    0.00%
   Recognition
   (Robocall)

   HEAR Language       LLM-C↑   88.68%     6.66%    10.48%     17.50%    26.02%    54.32%       4.70%    12.34%    3.10%
   Identification
   (VoxLingua107)


                                                                                              Continued on next page


                                                              54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                 Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                                 LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA     IT
                                                                           Chat      7B-Inst.


   Language             LLM-C↑   96.00%     12.00%    21.00%     8.50%     84.50%    93.00%       17.50%    5.50%     0.00%
   Identification
   (VoxForge)

   Age Classification   LLM-C↑   12.80%     24.50%    23.30%     20.80%    24.50%    36.50%       21.80%    23.50%    15.50%
   (Common Voice)

   Gender               LLM-C↑   4.50%      82.00%    61.00%     57.00%    53.50%    97.50%       35.00%    51.00%    64.50%
   Recognition by
   Voice (Common
   Voice)

   HEAR Speaker         NAR↓     32.80%     56.70%    45.30%     47.00%    10.70%    9.60%        37.90%    36.70%    24.80%
   Count
   Identification
   (LibriCount)

   HEAR Speaker         ACC↑     20.39%     24.94%    16.64%     20.94%    12.21%    15.60%       11.11%    17.69%    17.42%
   Count
   Identification
   (LibriCount)

   Multi-Speaker        LLM-C↑   49.50%     32.50%    36.00%     30.50%    50.00%    51.00%       30.50%    32.50%    42.00%
   Detection (VCTK)

   Speaker Counting     LLM-C↑   18.00%     6.00%     14.50%     13.50%    17.50%    26.50%       14.00%    3.50%     14.50%
   (LibriTTS-
   TestClean)

   Speaker              LLM-C↑   56.50%     28.50%    45.00%     58.00%    43.50%    63.00%       16.50%    36.00%    34.50%
   Verification
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Speaker              LLM-C↑   48.00%     29.00%    49.00%     60.00%    48.00%    70.00%       19.00%    41.00%    33.00%
   Verification
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   Speaker              LLM-C↑   55.00%     29.50%    54.00%     59.50%    44.00%    60.50%       23.00%    33.50%    36.50%
   Verification
   (VCTK)

   SUPERB Speaker       NAR↓     100.00%    100.00%   100.00%    100.00%   100.00%   100.00%      100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
   Diarization
   (Libri2Mix-Test)

   SUPERB Speaker       DER↓     -          -         -          -         -         -            -         -         -
   Diarization
   (Libri2Mix-Test)

   SUPERB Speaker       LLM-C↑   52.00%     38.00%    45.00%     52.00%    52.00%    59.00%       43.00%    52.00%    39.00%
   Verification
   (SUPERB Hidden
   Set)

   Noise Detection      LLM-C↑   45.50%     18.50%    50.00%     40.00%    42.00%    49.00%       45.00%    36.50%    31.50%
   (LJSpeech,
   MUSAN-
   Gaussian)

   Noise Detection      LLM-C↑   53.00%     23.00%    52.00%     47.00%    50.50%    47.50%       50.00%    31.50%    37.00%
   (LJSpeech,
   MUSAN-Music)

   Noise Detection      LLM-C↑   49.50%     18.00%    50.50%     57.00%    50.50%    59.50%       48.00%    48.00%    33.00%
   (LJSpeech,
   MUSAN-Noise)

   Noise Detection      LLM-C↑   48.00%     22.00%    53.00%     36.00%    50.50%    47.00%       46.50%    50.00%    51.00%
   (LJSpeech,
   MUSAN-Speech)

   Noise Detection      LLM-C↑   47.50%     39.00%    45.50%     57.50%    42.00%    58.50%       56.00%    37.50%    39.00%
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Music)

   Noise Detection      LLM-C↑   45.50%     35.00%    45.50%     56.50%    44.50%    67.00%       53.50%    54.00%    33.50%
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Noise)


                                                                                                Continued on next page


                                                                55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                                LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA     IT
                                                                          Chat      7B-Inst.


   Noise Detection     LLM-C↑   46.50%     50.00%    43.50%     52.50%    45.50%    57.00%       46.50%    48.50%    56.50%
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Speech)

   Noise Detection     LLM-C↑   53.00%     24.50%    49.00%     51.50%    45.50%    54.50%       52.50%    36.00%    21.00%
   (VCTK, MUSAN-
   Gaussian)

   Noise SNR Level     LLM-C↑   23.50%     15.00%    31.50%     21.00%    15.00%    22.00%       17.50%    21.50%    17.00%
   Prediction
   (VCTK, MUSAN-
   Gaussian)

   Noise SNR Level     LLM-C↑   21.50%     13.50%    24.50%     26.00%    14.50%    15.00%       17.00%    14.50%    10.00%
   Prediction
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Music)

   Noise SNR Level     LLM-C↑   30.00%     19.50%    10.50%     21.00%    10.50%    21.00%       16.50%    15.50%    15.00%
   Prediction
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Noise)

   Noise SNR Level     LLM-C↑   24.00%     15.00%    16.00%     10.00%    17.50%    21.50%       18.00%    15.50%    13.50%
   Prediction
   (VCTK,
   MUSAN-Speech)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   46.50%     38.50%    45.50%     57.00%    54.50%    48.00%       47.00%    49.00%    27.50%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech,
   RirsNoises-
   LargeRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   40.50%     25.50%    44.00%     51.00%    53.50%    50.50%       49.50%    48.00%    29.00%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech,
   RirsNoises-
   MediumRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   46.00%     36.50%    42.50%     47.50%    43.50%    51.00%       50.00%    44.50%    37.50%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech,
   RirsNoises-
   SmallRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   44.50%     37.50%    42.50%     48.00%    63.00%    46.00%       44.00%    45.00%    36.00%
   Detection (VCTK,
   RirsNoises-
   LargeRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   49.00%     32.00%    40.50%     45.50%    53.00%    51.50%       44.00%    47.00%    27.00%
   Detection (VCTK,
   RirsNoises-
   MediumRoom)

   Reverberation       LLM-C↑   48.00%     39.00%    42.50%     44.00%    47.50%    51.50%       45.50%    43.50%    47.00%
   Detection (VCTK,
   RirsNoises-
   SmallRoom)

   N-Best Correction   LLM-C↑   45.00%     30.00%    31.60%     36.20%    42.60%    41.80%       39.20%    39.60%    35.40%
   (Librispeech-
   TestOther)

   AAVE Speech         WER↓     21.70%     97.30%    24.00%     31.60%    96.80%    38.60%       34.90%    136.50%   102.90%
   Recognition
   (CORAAL)

   Code-switch         MER↓     424.58%    215.51%   293.50%    185.27%   165.54%   116.88%      172.03%   130.18%   193.47%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (NTUML2021)

   Code-Switching      NAR↓     68.20%     12.20%    5.40%      88.80%    1.60%     0.00%        30.40%    69.40%    14.60%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (ASCEND)


                                                                                               Continued on next page


                                                               56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task             Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-       WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                             LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-                 LLaMA     IT
                                                                       Chat      7B-Inst.


   Code-Switching   ACC↑     28.30%     50.57%    58.14%     14.29%    44.31%    60.80%       10.92%    13.73%    9.84%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (ASCEND)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     73.80%     132.35%   34.46%     25.21%    79.60%    24.96%       49.56%    99.37%    105.81%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-de)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     65.03%     100.29%   9.37%      9.47%     27.97%    17.47%       17.23%    96.03%    97.09%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-en)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     72.49%     123.26%   23.45%     16.10%    58.82%    18.19%       44.90%    103.19%   101.75%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-es)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     71.09%     133.86%   26.52%     21.27%    46.27%    19.01%       42.35%    102.25%   102.01%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-fr)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     85.38%     125.39%   39.11%     31.54%    56.55%    33.16%       46.14%    102.72%   108.84%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-it)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     74.96%     120.29%   32.11%     29.37%    140.01%   42.94%       55.56%    102.05%   101.22%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-nl)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     76.79%     139.04%   73.83%     51.53%    278.19%   101.41%      90.11%    100.23%   105.43%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-pl)

   Multi-Lingual    WER↓     73.63%     136.66%   31.88%     25.07%    117.33%   24.72%       46.26%    99.71%    103.48%
   Speech
   Recognition
   (MLS-pt)

   PTBR Speech      WER↓     45.75%     248.05%   69.88%     73.91%    233.85%   38.57%       62.93%    639.12%   270.64%
   Recognition
   (Common Voice)

   SUPERB ASR       WER↓     33.96%     96.28%    15.11%     2.79%     69.35%    36.70%       6.87%     103.67%   116.66%
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   ASR              WER↓     42.14%     91.89%    11.44%     4.31%     79.53%    40.28%       9.17%     111.03%   130.00%
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   SUPERB OOD       WER↓     51.04%     245.85%   216.51%    178.02%   289.25%   178.21%      149.15%   225.28%   504.53%
   ASR (Ar)
   (Common Voice)

   SUPERB OOD       WER↓     10.93%     150.00%   98.96%     99.22%    100.83%   75.08%       99.38%    141.68%   303.28%
   ASR (Es)
   (Common Voice)

   SUPERB OOD       WER↓     65.71%     122.86%   61.11%     62.80%    92.17%    80.21%       136.24%   137.25%   266.72%
   ASR
   (Spontaneous)
   (CHIME6-Test)

   SUPERB OOD       CER↓     29.67%     508.02%   609.28%    310.33%   449.32%   270.63%      445.36%   435.33%   1097.41%
   ASR (Zh)
   (Common Voice)

   Target Speaker   WER↓     143.02%    133.86%   273.90%    187.15%   207.01%   132.13%      266.26%   108.32%   140.37%
   ASR (AMI-test)


                                                                                            Continued on next page


                                                            57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task               Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS   SALMONN   SALMONN   Qwen-    Qwen2-       WavLLM   MU-      GAMA-
                               LLaMA               7B        13B       Audio-   Audio-                LLaMA    IT
                                                                       Chat     7B-Inst.


   Multi-Speaker      LLM-C↑   49.00%     31.50%   16.50%    21.50%    50.50%   52.00%       20.50%   33.50%   48.50%
   Detection
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Speech Command     NAR↓     4.93%      76.80%   2.93%     0.00%     0.93%    0.00%        0.53%    5.20%    75.87%
   Recognition
   (AudioMNIST)

   Speech Command     ACC↑     0.8890     0.8330   0.9670    0.7410    0.9620   0.7710       0.9340   0.1000   0.2430
   Recognition
   (AudioMNIST)

   Speech Text        LLM-C↑   87.00%     32.00%   58.00%    57.00%    68.00%   84.50%       50.50%   41.50%   18.50%
   Matching
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Speech Text        LLM-C↑   82.00%     34.00%   57.00%    56.50%    72.00%   87.50%       55.50%   45.00%   18.50%
   Matching
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   Speech Text        LLM-C↑   82.50%     32.00%   59.50%    55.50%    64.50%   76.00%       49.00%   47.50%   16.00%
   Matching
   (LJSpeech)

   Spoken Term        LLM-C↑   77.00%     29.50%   54.50%    53.50%    52.50%   62.00%       57.00%   48.50%   39.50%
   Detection
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestClean)

   Spoken Term        LLM-C↑   77.00%     27.50%   50.00%    50.00%    48.50%   66.00%       55.50%   40.00%   39.50%
   Detection
   (LibriSpeech-
   TestOther)

   Spoken Term        LLM-C↑   83.50%     28.50%   53.00%    51.50%    47.00%   79.50%       50.00%   40.00%   31.00%
   Detection
   (LJSpeech)

   SUPERB             LLM-C↑   75.50%     4.50%    30.50%    31.50%    30.00%   59.00%       47.50%   27.50%   34.00%
   Keyword Spotting
   (Speech
   Commands
   V1-Test)

   SUPERB Query       LLM-C↑   48.50%     33.50%   49.00%    51.50%    37.50%   53.50%       49.00%   52.00%   31.00%
   by Example
   (Quesst14-Eval)

   Stuttering         LLM-C↑   49.50%     45.40%   50.50%    50.30%    50.20%   52.60%       58.90%   49.80%   48.50%
   Detection
   (SEP28k)

   Voice Disorder     LLM-C↑   16.30%     13.50%   13.50%    17.30%    19.70%   17.30%       20.20%   22.10%   13.50%
   Classification
   (VOICED)

   Conversation       LLM-C↑   77.80%     9.30%    57.40%    37.00%    51.90%   61.10%       61.10%   1.90%    18.50%
   Matching

   Dialogue Act       LLM-C↑   21.80%     18.90%   22.80%    3.30%     9.40%    20.60%       17.30%   4.90%    4.10%
   Classification
   (SLUE-HVB)

   Dialogue Act       LLM-C↑   29.00%     14.50%   37.00%    44.00%    43.50%   30.50%       42.00%   20.50%   11.00%
   Classification
   (Daily Talk)

   Dialogue Act       LLM-C↑   51.00%     16.00%   53.50%    48.00%    43.00%   48.50%       39.50%   50.00%   39.00%
   Pairing (Daily
   Talk)

   SUPERB Intent      LLM-C↑   33.00%     7.50%    13.50%    3.00%     31.00%   26.50%       20.50%   4.00%    2.00%
   Classification
   (SLURP)


                                                                                           Continued on next page


                                                            58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Task                 Metric   Whisper-   LTU-AS    SALMONN    SALMONN   Qwen-     Qwen2-     WavLLM    MU-       GAMA-
                                 LLaMA                7B         13B       Audio-    Audio-               LLaMA     IT
                                                                           Chat      7B-Inst.


   Intent               LLM-C↑   24.50%     12.50%    16.50%     16.00%    27.50%    67.50%     33.00%    7.00%     10.00%
   Classification
   (SLURP-Action)

   Intent               LLM-C↑   36.50%     12.00%    21.00%     13.50%    48.50%    43.00%     41.50%    6.00%     6.50%
   Classification
   (SLURP-Intent)

   Named Entity         NAR↓     100.00%    100.00%   100.00%    100.00%   100.00%   100.00%    100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
   Localization
   (SLUE-
   VoxPopuli)

   Named Entity         F1↑      -          -         -          -         -         -          -         -         -
   Localization
   (SLUE-
   VoxPopuli)

   Named Entity         NAR↓     43.48%     84.78%    67.39%     55.43%    44.57%    64.13%     68.48%    89.13%    90.22%
   Recognition
   (SLUE-
   VoxPopuli)

   Named Entity         IoU↑     0.0190     0.2640    0.2120     0.1180    0.0290    0.1190     0.6930    0.0500    0.0000
   Recognition
   (SLUE-
   VoxPopuli)

   Sarcasm Detection    LLM-C↑   38.50%     36.50%    41.50%     46.00%    44.00%    48.00%     47.50%    45.50%    36.00%
   (Mustard)

   Semantic Textual     LLM-C↑   50.40%     40.80%    49.60%     50.40%    22.00%    49.20%     43.60%    54.00%    21.20%
   Similarity
   (SpokenSTS)

   Speech Sentiment     LLM-C↑   39.00%     31.00%    33.50%     36.00%    38.50%    49.00%     42.50%    28.50%    29.50%
   Analysis (MELD)

   Spoken Digit         LLM-C↑   43.50%     13.00%    31.00%     33.00%    51.50%    43.50%     41.50%    26.50%    16.50%
   Arithmetic
   (AudioMNIST)

   SUPERB Slot          NAR↓     40.50%     82.50%    44.00%     70.00%    41.50%    58.00%     63.50%    95.00%    92.00%
   Filling
   (AudioSnips-Test)

   SUPERB Slot          Slot     0.8570     0.9020    0.9230     0.9210    0.8650    0.9270     0.8960    0.7770    0.9020
   Filling              Type
   (AudioSnips-Test)    F1↑

   SUPERB Slot          Slot     0.3540     0.8500    0.2370     0.2970    0.4600    0.2390     0.5510    0.6690    0.4160
   Filling              Value
   (AudioSnips-Test)    CER↓

   Code-Switching       LLM-C↑   51.50%     37.50%    50.00%     49.50%    45.50%    49.50%     23.00%    45.50%    32.00%
   Semantic
   Grammar
   Acceptability
   Comparison
   (CSZS-zh-en)

   Nonce Word           LLM-C↑   63.00%     25.60%    55.00%     58.10%    32.20%    61.80%     63.50%    42.50%    19.90%
   Detection
   (sWUGGY)

   PoS Estimation       POS↓     2.5722     1.2792    2.9675     1.1990    3.0620    2.3091     3.1126    1.5327    1.9635
   (LibriTTS)

   PoS Estimation       POS↓     0.9081     1.3507    1.7583     1.0601    2.1580    1.7514     2.0463    1.2394    1.3911
   with transcription
   (LibriTTS)

   Sentence             LLM-C↑   68.50%     7.30%     44.00%     62.30%    50.80%    73.80%     61.30%    72.80%    10.50%
   Grammar
   Acceptability
   (sBLIMP)

   SUPERB Speech        Sacre    17.3720    0.1070    18.7884    16.7835   6.9846    23.3458    21.7423   0.0566    0.0219
   Translation          Bleu↑
   (CoVoST2-Test)


                                                                59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D       HEAR & MARBLE E VALUATION R ESULTS
Tables 7 and 8 show the evaluation results for the HEAR and MARBLE tasks, respectively, as
collected in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2. Importantly, we replaced the datasets for some tasks to
address licensing issues and reduced their size to enable more efficient inference. Furthermore,
we removed certain tasks because they overlap with existing SUPERB tasks. Consequently, these
results are not directly comparable to those evaluated on the original HEAR and MARBLE.

Table 7: HEAR (audio) Results. LLM-C stands for LLM Classification, NAR stands for Not Appli-
cable Rate, TER stands for Token Error Rate, and ACC stands for Accuracy.
                                                Whisper-               SALMONN      SALMONN         Qwen-         Qwen2-                    MU-
             Task                    Metric                 LTU-AS                                                               WavLLM              GAMA-IT
                                                LLaMA                     7B           13B        Audio-Chat    Audio-7B-Inst.             LLaMA
 Beehive States Classification
                                    LLM-C ↑      43.00%     35.00%       54.00%         42.50%      19.00%         42.50%         37.00%    37.50%    19.00%
       - Beehive States
     Emotion Recognition
                                    LLM-C ↑       6.70%      9.30%       18.80%         18.10%      62.50%         61.10%         25.60%    12.40%    13.20%
        - CREMAD
     Environmental Sound
                                    LLM-C ↑       4.80%     25.30%       61.00%         73.40%      68.80%         43.90%         9.80%     0.40%     35.30%
    Classification - ESC-50
    Language Identification
                                    LLM-C ↑      92.18%      1.95%        6.28%         11.01%      18.00%         36.11%         1.85%     0.00%     0.10%
    - VoxLingua107 Top10
  Music Genre Classification
                                    LLM-C ↑      15.58%      7.04%       31.16%         44.22%      33.67%         37.69%         16.58%    27.64%    2.51%
         - ISMIR04
 Music Speech Classification
                                    LLM-C ↑      72.50%     77.50%       91.50%         99.50%      98.00%         89.50%         59.50%    51.50%    88.00%
 - MAESTRO-LibriSpeech
      Music Transcription            NAR ↓       92.43%     100.00%      99.46%      100.00%        96.76%         96.76%         96.76%   100.00%   100.00%
        - MAESTRO                    TER ↓       1.0065         -        36.0000         -          8.3438         1.6875         6.2500      -         -
    Percussion Instruments
 Classification - Beijing Opera     LLM-C ↑       3.39%      4.24%       10.17%         20.76%      16.10%         27.12%         24.15%    22.03%    11.44%
    Percussion Instrument
    Percussion Instruments
     Stroke Classification          LLM-C ↑       0.10%      3.80%        7.60%         4.90%       11.50%         10.80%         13.70%    10.30%    0.10%
     - Mridangam Stroke
    Percussion Instruments
     Tonic Classification           LLM-C ↑       2.00%      2.50%       12.70%         13.40%      11.30%         11.80%         12.80%    12.50%    5.70%
     - Mridangam Stroke
    Sound Event Detection
                                    LLM-C ↑       0.00%      0.00%       21.43%         35.71%      7.14%          14.29%         21.43%    21.43%    7.14%
     - DCASE2016 Task2
 Speaker Count Identification        NAR ↓       30.40%     42.10%       35.90%         42.50%      3.50%          0.40%          22.00%    23.20%    26.20%
        - LibriCount                 ACC ↑       17.53%     16.93%       13.26%         17.22%      10.26%         13.76%          5.51%    13.80%    17.48%
 Vocal Imitation Classification
                                    LLM-C ↑      15.17%      5.50%        1.17%         1.83%       18.67%         11.17%         17.50%    3.83%     5.83%
      - Vocal Imitations


Table 8: MARBLE (music) Results. LLM-C stands for LLM Classification, NAR stands for Not
Applicable Rate, and MSE stands for Mean Squared Error.
                                              Whisper-                SALMONN      SALMONN         Qwen-         Qwen2-                     MU-
           Task                   Metric                  LTU-AS                                                                 WavLLM              GAMA-IT
                                              LLaMA                      7B           13B        Audio-Chat    Audio-7B-Inst.              LLaMA
       Key Detection
                               LLM-C ↑         3.00%       0.50%       1.50%        1.00%          3.00%          17.00%          2.00%    0.50%      0.00%
     - Giantsteps (Key)
      Music Tagging
                               LLM-C ↑         0.10%       0.30%       0.00%        0.00%          2.90%           0.30%          0.10%    0.50%      0.10%
     - MTG-Jamendo
      Music Tagging
                               LLM-C ↑         5.50%       1.00%       3.50%        9.00%          4.50%           1.50%          1.00%    3.50%      7.50%
    - MagnaTagATune
    Genre Classification
                               LLM-C ↑         0.00%       1.60%       0.10%        0.20%          3.20%           0.10%          0.20%    0.20%      0.00%
     - MTG-Jamendo
    Emotion Detection
                               LLM-C ↑         0.00%       1.50%       0.00%        0.00%          2.70%           0.80%          0.80%    0.80%      0.10%
     - MTG-Jamendo
       Beat Tracking              NAR ↓       100.00%     100.00%      100.00%      100.00%       100.00%         100.00%        100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
         - ASAP                   MSE ↑          -           -            -            -             -               -              -         -         -
     Vocal Technique
                               LLM-C ↑         8.00%       1.00%       11.00%       6.50%          6.50%          15.50%          8.00%    8.50%      2.50%
    Detection - VocalSet
 Instrument Classification
                               LLM-C ↑         0.40%       2.30%       0.00%        0.00%          6.40%           1.40%          0.20%    0.60%      0.20%
      - MTG-Jamendo


                                                                                   60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    LLM- BASED EVALUATION


Here, we list the prompt templates used in the evaluation. Figure 6 illustrates the prompt for classi-
fication task evaluation, while Figure 7 shows the prompt for regression task evaluation. In addition
to GPT-4o, we also employed open-source LLMs to ensure better reproducibility. Tables 9 and
10 present the performance evaluations of the proposed prompts on classification and regression
tasks, respectively, comparing their correlation with a human-labeled evaluation set. We found that
GPT-4o and LLaMA-3.1-70B-Instruct achieved very high accuracy in both classification and regres-
sion tasks. This demonstrates that our evaluation using GPT-4o is reliable and that researchers can
leverage LLaMA-3.1-70B-Instruct to conduct fully reproducible evaluations.


Table 9: Performance evaluation of the proposed post-processing prompt on classification tasks
using a human-labeled evaluation set. Accuracy is determined by agreement between the model
output and the corresponding human label.

                   Model Name                    Accuracy       Correct Count
                   gpt-4o                         98.67%             148/150
                   gpt-4o-mini                    98.00%             147/150
                   gpt-o1-preview                 98.67%             148/150
                   gpt-o1-mini                    99.33%             149/150
                   llama-3.1-70B-Instruct         96.67%             145/150
                   llama-3.1-8B-Instruct          92.67%             139/150
                   llama-3.2-3B-Instruct          86.67 %            130/150
                   llama-3.2-1B-Instruct          61.33%             92/150


Table 10: Performance evaluation of the proposed post-processing prompt on regression tasks us-
ing a human-labeled evaluation set. Accuracy is determined by exact matches between the post-
processed model output and the corresponding human-generated post-processed output.

                  Model Name                     Accuracy       Correct Count
                  gpt-4o                          92.00%            138/150
                  gpt-4o-mini                     86.67%            130/150
                  gpt-o1-preview                  86.00%            129/150
                  gpt-o1-mini                     89.33%            134/150
                  llama-3.1-70B-Instruct          90.00%            135/150
                  llama-3.1-8B-Instruct           82.00%            123/150
                  llama-3.2-3B-Instruct           61.33%             92/150
                  llama-3.2-1B-Instruct           39.33%             59/150


                                                 61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Classification Post-processing Prompt:
  You will be given a question, a corresponding correct answer(s), and a response from a model. The
  model’s response is a reply to the question. Your task is to judge if the ”Model’s Response” aligns with
  the ”Ground Truth Answer” based on the ”Question.”

  Please strictly follow the guidelines below:
  - Briefly explain the reasons for your judgment.
  - Answer with the format ”Result: <YES or NO>” at the end.
  - Output ”YES” if the response aligns with the ground truth answer; output ”NO” if the response does
  not match the ground truth answer, selects incorrect or irrelevant options, or provides more answers than
  required.
  - The questions would be single-choice or multi-choice:
  For single-choice questions, the model’s response should contain one and only one answer. If the model’s
  response selects more than one answer or does not clearly indicate a single answer, you should mark it
  as incorrect and output ”NO.” For multi-choice questions, the model’s response must exactly match all
  applicable correct choices. If the model’s response selects too many, too few, or any incorrect answers,
  you should mark it as incorrect and output ”NO.”
  - Since the question is short answer, the model’s response does not need to mention the content of the
  question. You only need to check if the model’s response has the same meaning as the ground truth
  answer(s).

  Input Format:
  Question: {instruction}
  Ground Truth Answer: {label}
  Model’s Response: {response}

Figure 6: The prompt used for post-processing the classification tasks inference outputs in the study.


                                                     62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Regression Post-processing Prompt:
    You will be provided with an ”instruction,” a ”ground-truth label,” and a ”model output.” Your job is to
    extract the value from the given ”model output” and return the post-processed ”model output”. Provide
    your output with just the post-processed output without an explanation.

    [Task Description]
    - Analyze the ”instruction” and ”ground-truth label” to understand the desired output format.
    - Post-process the ”model output” so that it matches the format of the ”ground-truth label” and is
    numerically comparable to it.

    [Guidelines]
    - If the ”model output” can be adjusted to match the format of the ”ground-truth label,” return only the
    post-processed result.
    - If the ”model output” is already in an appropriate format, return it as is without changing it.
    - If it can not be adjusted into the correct format, does not clearly indicate any of the candidates, is
    ambiguous, or implies more than one answer, return ”N/A.”
    - Do not confuse the ”ground-truth label” with ”model output”; you are only supposed to use the
    ”ground-truth label” to understand the desired output format.
    - Do not tamper with the original content of ”model output”; you are only supposed to post-process
    the format of ”model output” so it matches the format of ”ground-truth label” and can be compared or
    evaluated against each other directly.
    - The post-processed output should only be a number in numeric form.

    Below you have three examples. Please consider their patterns to understand your task better:

    [Example 1 - Inputs]
    - ”instruction”: ”Please identify the total times of code-switching in this wavefile.”
    - ”ground-truth label”: 8
    - ”model output”: ”There are no instances of code-switching in this wavefile; it is purely Mandarin
    speech.”
    - Your response: 0

    [Example 2 - Inputs]
    - ”instruction”: ””Listen to the audio and assess the clarity and accuracy of pronunciation by considering
    precise phonology, pronunciation errors, and overall comprehensibility. Use an Arabic numeral from 0 to
    10 for your answer.””
    - ”ground-truth label”: 3
    - ”model output”: ”The audio is of a man speaking, in a Chinese, saying, ”I has to find a different back
    door”. The accuracy of the pronunciation is 90%.”
    - Your response: 9

    [Example 3 - Inputs]
    - ”instruction”: ”Please predict the spatial distance(0.5m-4.5m) based on the given audio.”
    - ”ground-truth label”: 2.1196093634329904
    - ”model output”: ”Based on the given audio, the spatial distance is likely between 0.5m and 4.5m.”
    - Your response: N/A

    [Inputs]
    - ”instruction”: {instruction}
    - ”ground-truth label”: {label}
    - ”model output”: {model output}
    - Your response:

Figure 7: The prompt used for post-processing the regression tasks inference outputs in the study.


F     C ALL FOR TASKS

Here we provide material from the call for tasks. Figure 8 shows a task proposal that we ask each
contributor to initiate. Task proposers need to provide a high-level description of the task, explain
its importance and challenges, and list the datasets they plan to use along with the dataset licenses.
Figure 9 presents the standard README format for each task. In the README, task proposers
include the task introduction, its challenges, the dataset, and the evaluation metric. Importantly, we


                                                       63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


also ask them to provide a table of state-of-the-art performance on the task, even if not achieved by
universal spoken language models. These results can serve as a reference for researchers to better
understand the task’s difficulty and how it has developed so far. Then, Figure 10 shows the JSON
format we require to record task information. For each task, our evaluation pipeline uses this JSON
file as input to automatically download data from Huggingface, formatting it for subsequent use.


                 Figure 8: An example of a task proposal from a task contributor.


                                                 64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Figure 9: An example of the README file required in the task contribution.


            Figure 10: An example of the JSON file required in the task contribution.


                                               65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    AUDIO DURATION DISTRIBUTION
Figure 11 shows the distribution of all audio files in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2. Only about 6.5%
of the audio files have a duration longer than 30 seconds, which reflects an inherent limitation of
models that incorporate Whisper in their framework.


           Figure 11: Duration distribution of all audios in Dynamic-SUPERB Phase-2.


                                                66
