Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P-S PIKE SSM: H ARNESSING P ROBABILISTIC S PIKING
S TATE S PACE M ODELS FOR L ONG -R ANGE D EPEN -
DENCY TASKS

 Malyaban Bal & Abhronil Sengupta
 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
 The Pennsylvania State University
 University Park, PA 16802
 {mjb7906,sengupta}@psu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are posited as a computationally efficient and
         biologically plausible alternative to conventional neural architectures, with their
         core computational framework primarily using the leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF)
         neuron model. However, the limited hidden state representation of LIF neurons,
         characterized by a scalar membrane potential, and sequential spike generation
         process, poses challenges for effectively developing scalable spiking models to
         address long-range dependencies in sequence learning tasks. In this study, we de-
         velop a scalable probabilistic spiking learning framework for long-range depen-
         dency tasks leveraging the fundamentals of state space models. Unlike LIF neu-
         rons that rely on the deterministic Heaviside function for a sequential process of
         spike generation, we introduce a SpikeSampler layer that samples spikes stochas-
         tically based on an SSM-based neuronal model while allowing parallel computa-
         tions. To address non-differentiability of the spiking operation and enable effec-
         tive training, we also propose a surrogate function tailored for the stochastic nature
         of the SpikeSampler layer. To enhance inter-neuron communication, we introduce
         the SpikeMixer block, which integrates spikes from neuron populations in each
         layer. This is followed by a ClampFuse layer, incorporating a residual connection
         to capture complex dependencies, enabling scalability of the model. Our models
         attain state-of-the-art performance among SNN models across diverse long-range
         dependency tasks, encompassing the Long Range Arena benchmark, permuted se-
         quential MNIST, and the Speech Command dataset and demonstrate sparse spik-
         ing pattern highlighting its computational efficiency. Our implementation source
         code is available at https://github.com/NeuroCompLab-psu/PSpikeSSMs.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Ghosh-Dastidar & Adeli, 2009) have garnered attention as a bio-
plausible substitute for traditional artificial neural networks (ANNs). Their appeal stems from their
utilization of spike-based communication among neurons, a feature that closely mimics biological
processes. The inherent stateful nature of SNNs enables them to adeptly handle temporal informa-
tion (Neftci et al., 2019), further enhancing their suitability for various applications (Yamazaki et al.,
2022). The sparse spike-based information flow characteristic of SNNs allow event-driven compu-
tation and communication in neuromorphic hardware, leading to energy savings (Sengupta et al.,
2019). SNN-based models, ideal for edge computing, have undergone rigorous testing on neuro-
morphic hardware platforms such as Intel Loihi 2 (Davies et al., 2021), IBM TrueNorth (Merolla
et al., 2014), among others, showcasing orders of magnitude improvements in energy efficiency.
In the progression of SNN-based architecture advancements, research has predominantly focused
on employing leaky-integrate-and-fire (LIF) neurons (Burkitt, 2006). While the dynamics modeled
by LIF neurons are deemed biologically plausible, the actual operations within the brain entail ad-
ditional layers of complexity (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1990) and stochasticity (Harrison et al., 2005)
that are not fully captured by the simplified LIF neuron model. Moreover, the sequential state up-


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dates and spike generation using a deterministic Heaviside function complicate the training of LIF-
based SNN architectures, often requiring computationally expensive methods like backpropagation
through time (BPTT) (Neftci et al., 2019). This fundamental challenge has significantly limited the
adoption of SNN models, particularly for complicated sequence learning tasks involving long-range
dependencies. Efficient algorithmic alternative to conventional BPTT training (Bauer et al., 2023;
Shrestha & Orchard, 2018; Lin et al., 2024; Bal & Sengupta, 2022) for LIF-based spiking archi-
tectures are also being proposed, but remain unexplored for long context tasks. However, in this
paper, we move beyond traditional LIF-based spike generation models to develop a computationally
efficient probabilistic SNN architecture, designed to effectively tackle long-range dependency tasks
in the spiking domain.
State Space Models (SSMs) have been recently employed to effectively model sequence learning
tasks (Gu et al., 2021a; Gu & Dao, 2023). SSMs serve as fundamental scientific models utilized
across various disciplines, notably in control theory, to articulate the behavior of dynamic systems.
They offer a streamlined and robust framework, facilitating a comprehensive analysis and deep un-
derstanding of the dynamics of complex systems as they unfold over time. In this work, we employ
SSMs to capture temporal dependencies within sequences of input spikes, rather than conventional
real-valued data. This approach not only enables computational efficiency but also underscores the
remarkable capability of SSMs in analyzing long-term temporal dependencies in spike-based data.
Probabilistic Spiking State-Space Model: In this paper, we propose an SNN architecture grounded
in a probabilistic state-space neuronal model, which we call P-SpikeSSM. We conceptualize the
n-dimensional hidden state of the underlying SSM as the membrane potential, providing richer rep-
resentations when compared to the scalar hidden state of an LIF neuron. Dynamics of each neuron is
governed by an independent set of parameters, allowing the model to flexibly learn diverse temporal
dependencies across neurons, thus enhancing its processing capacity. As outlined in the methodol-
ogy, instead of real-valued inputs, we feed sequence of spikes into the P-SpikeSSM neuronal model.
This enables developing a computationally efficient framework by applying convolution over the
sparse spikes, instead of real-valued data. The SpikeSampler layer samples spikes from each P-
SpikeSSM neuron, enabling parallel operation with minimal overhead. Moreover, to address the
challenge of non-differentiability inherent in the stochastic spiking function, we introduce a novel
surrogate in the form of E[St ], where the discrete Bernoulli random variable St is associated with
the spiking event of each neuron at time t.
Scalable Architecture with SpikeSampler and SpikeMixer: Although individual P-SpikeSSM
neurons can process one input spike sequence, addressing tasks with complex long-range depen-
dencies demands a deeper, more scalable architecture capable of capturing diverse dependencies.
To address this, we introduce a robust architecture (Fig. 1) and training framework. We encode
the real-valued input sequence, associated with a sequence learning task, into N distinct spike trains,
which are fed to a layer consisting of N corresponding neurons (see Section 3.2). Each neuron gener-
ates spikes stochastically based on its individual input spike train, while the collective activity of the
neuron population allows for effectively capturing a diverse range of dependencies across the differ-
ent input spike sequences. The output spikes from each neuron population in a layer are processed
through a SpikeMixer layer, facilitating inter-neuron communication. Next, a FuseClamp layer
performs further aggregation and computes the probability necessary for generating the subsequent
spike sequences, which are then passed to the next layer of P-SpikeSSM based neuronal units. Fur-
thermore, because the model communicates and uses sparse spike trains for computation, it achieves
substantial computational efficiency by significantly reducing the number of floating-point multipli-
cation and accumulation (MAC) operations across all layers and using simpler accumulative (ACC)
operations instead. Furthermore, current state-of-the-art transformer-based spiking architectures,
like (Zhou et al., 2022; Bal & Sengupta, 2024; Bal et al., 2024), process input sequences in parallel
but require additional time steps to simulate network dynamics. In contrast, our proposed model
eliminates this overhead, substantially improving computational efficiency.
Application to Long-Range Dependency Tasks: We evaluate the performance of our proposed
spiking architecture on various datasets within the Long Range Arena (LRA) benchmark, along
with sequence-based datasets such as permuted sequential MNIST (psMNIST) and the raw inputs
of the SC10 subset of the Speech Command dataset. Our model outperforms traditional non-spiking
transformer-based architectures and, to the best of our knowledge, establishes a new benchmark for
spiking models in the domain of long-range arena tasks.



                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Input


                                                                                             Spiking Probability (ps[t])
                          Encoder             Input Spikes



                P-SpikeSSM Encoder     P-Spike   N neurons   P-Spike
                      Layer 1           SSM                   SSM



                P-SpikeSSM Encoder                                                                                         Time Steps
                      Layer 2           SpikeSampler Layer                                                                    (b)


                                                                       Active Neuron Ratio
                                              SpikeMixing
                P-SpikeSSM Encoder
                      Layer K             ClampFuse Layer
                          Decoder
                                        SpikeSampler Layer

                     Output
                                                                                                                           Time Steps
                                       (a)                                                                                    (c)


Figure 1: (a) High-level overview of the P-SpikeSSM-based spiking architecture for LRA tasks.
(b) Graph depicting the sparsity of spiking events generated by a single P-SpikeSSM neuron over
input sequence length (for ListOps dataset). (c) Graph showing the layer-wise active neuron ratio
(i.e., the proportion of neurons generating spikes within a layer per time step) against operating time
steps, for randomly sampled input from ListOps dataset. The layer-wise spiking behavior illustrates
the model-wide sparsity in spiking activity, contributing to computational efficiency.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

The realm of sequence modeling is primarily dominated by transformer-based architectures. Effi-
cient implementations like LinFormer (Wang et al., 2020), Performer (Choromanski et al., 2020),
among others, have demonstrated scalability to long sequence lengths. Meanwhile, non-spiking ar-
chitectures based on SSMs, such as S4 and Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023; Gu et al., 2021a; 2020a), have
also shown the capability to handle lengthy sequences. Sequence learning in SNN-based architec-
tures have primarily been applied to vision-based datasets (Zhou et al., 2022; Fang et al., 2024) and
NLP datasets (Bal & Sengupta, 2024; Zhu et al., 2023), typically with constrained sequence lengths.
However, within the domain of SNNs, frameworks based on Legendre Memory Units (LMUs) (Liu
et al., 2024; Voelker et al., 2020) has ventured into exploring long-range dependency tasks.
Previous efforts integrating SSMs within spiking models (Stan & Rhodes, 2023; Du et al., 2024)
have primarily focused on passing the SSM output through a layer of LIF neurons to generate spikes.
Using non-linear LIF neurons negates the parallel training efficiency of SSMs, as LIF neurons pro-
cess information sequentially, introducing a bottleneck (see Section 3.1.4). Stan & Rhodes (2023)
seeks to enhance efficiency by linearizing LIF neurons. However, because the inputs to their SSM
model remain real-valued, leading to additional floating-point MAC operations, this approach fails
to leverage the energy-saving potential of SNNs. Moreover, the work lacks an analysis of computa-
tional efficiency and energy benefits, particularly concerning neuron firing activity, leaving a critical
aspect of model efficiency unaddressed. Furthermore, from a sequence processing standpoint, the
inherent ability and use of SSMs to capture temporal dependencies renders the addition of LIF neu-
rons superfluous, introducing unnecessary computational overhead without providing any functional
improvements beyond enabling spike generation.


3   M ETHODOLOGY

In this section, we first delve into the dynamics of the proposed Probabilistic Spiking State Space
Models (P-SpikeSSM). We then delve into the specifics of our proposed spiking architecture, high-
lighting the SpikeSampler, SpikeMixer, and FuseClamp layers. Additionally, we offer insights on
scaling the P-SpikeSSM-based spiking model for tackling complex long-range dependency tasks
and develop a computationally efficient parallel training framework.


                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1     P-S PIKE SSM F ORMULATION

We formulate the neuronal model as a time invariant system which takes in sequence of input spikes
given as xs (t) ∈ {0, 1}, at time t. Much like the membrane potential upholds the state of the
LIF neuron, we anchor our approach in SSMs (Gu & Dao, 2023; Gu et al., 2021a), crafting an
n-dimensional hidden state (h(t)) at time t. Expanding the dimensionality of the hidden state en-
ables our neuronal model to achieve a more comprehensive state encoding of the underlying input
sequence, surpassing the limitations imposed by the scalar hidden state in LIF models. The event of
spike generation at time t is associated with a Bernoulli random variable St corresponding to each
neuron. The probability of spiking, i.e., ps (t) at time t, is modeled as a function of the output of the
neural model. The continuous time neuronal dynamics are expressed as,

                                           ḣ(t) = Ah(t) + Bxs (t)
                                      ps (t) = σ(Ch(t) + Dxs (t))                                       (1)
                                            σ(z) = clamp(az + b)
                                         
                                         0 if y < 0
where, ḣ(t) = dh  dt  and clamp(y)   =     y if 0 ≤ y ≤ 1 , a and b are parameters. Setting a = 1
                                         
                                            1 if y > 1
and b = 0 allows using the output of the SSM directly as the probability of spiking event without
further scaling or translation. A is a matrix controlling the evolution of the hidden state over time
without any input spikes. B represents the influence of the input spikes (xs (t)). C describes the
mapping of the hidden state vector h(t) to the observed outputs, i.e., ps (t). D is the feedforward
parameter, representing any direct influence of the inputs spikes xs (t) on the observed output proba-
bility ps (t). For the purpose of simpler formulation, following previous works on SSMs (Gu & Dao,
2023), we will consider D = 0, since the term Dxs (t) can be viewed as a simple skip-connection.
Furthermore, σ is a function that clamps the output between [0, 1], since probability ps [t] ∈ [0, 1].
We utilize ps [t] to sample spikes from the underlying neuron, as discussed in Section 3.1.3. The
aforementioned formulation of our SSM-based neuronal model is presented in a continuous-time
setting. However, since our primary focus is on sequence modeling tasks in domains such as NLP
and vision tasks, we now proceed to formulate the dynamics of our neuronal model in discrete time.

3.1.1    P-S PIKE SSM D ISCRETE T IME DYNAMICS
In order to discretize our system, we sample a sequence of spikes of length L, given by Xs =
(xs [1], xs [2], ..., xs [L]) from the original continuous signal given by xs (t), with step size ∆ such as
xs [i] = xs (i∆). The P-SpikeSSM neuronal dynamics are subsequently discretized using bilinear
transformations (Tustin, 1947), whereby we approximate the parameters A, B, C as A, B, C which
is given as,

                                 A = (I − ∆/2 · A)−1 (I + ∆/2 · A)
                                             B = (I − ∆/2 · A)−1 ∆B                                     (2)
                                                                  C=C

where, I is the Identity matrix. The transition dynamics of the discretized system at time step t is,

                                       h[t] = Ah[t − 1] + Bxs [t]
                                                                                                        (3)
                                                 ps [t] = σ(Ch[t])

where, h[t] is the hidden state of the neuron, ps [t] is the probability of the event St . This allows us to
write the transition dynamics of the system as a recurrence in discrete time. The sparse spiking dy-
namics of our proposed neuronal model, characterized by the spike probability ps [t], is illustrated in
Fig. 1b. The spiking activity manifests in temporally localized patterns, mirroring the firing patterns
observed in biological neurons (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962), with periods of non-activity interspersed
between bursts. Now, instead of using a recurrent representation, we investigate how the evolution of


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


state dynamics can be represented by a convolution operation (with spikes as input signal), thus re-
quiring only accumulation-based computationally efficient operation. Moreover, using convolution
instead of a recurrence-based approach enables us to parallelize the framework.

3.1.2    R EPRESENTING DYNAMICS AS C ONVOLUTION OVER S PIKES
There are two problems with Eqn. 3, concerning the training of a scalable spiking architecture.
Firstly, training it in its recurrent form necessitates employing a BPTT approach (Gu et al., 2021b),
which is impractical for longer sequence lengths due to its time and memory overhead. Secondly,
as the hidden state h[t] at time t can be a vector of floating points rather than spikes, the transition
operations involved would not take complete advantage of energy/power efficient neuromorphic
hardware. To achieve a fully parallelizable training procedure and leverage SNN-based operational
efficiency during inference, we investigate an alternative formulation of Eqn. 3 as a convolution
operation (Gu et al., 2021b). Since the proposed neuronal model is a time invariant system, con-
sidering the initial hidden state i.e., h[0] to be a 0-vector, the recurrent relationship can be unrolled
as,


                                                                                           i
               i−1                 i−2                                                     X          i−j
    h[i] = A         Bxs [1] + A         Bxs [2] + · · · + ABxs [i − 1] + Bxs [i] =              (A         Bxs [j])   (4)
                                                                                           j=1


Thus, generalizing it to the entire sequence of length L we get,
                                                                                L−1
                              H = K̂ ∗ Xs ,          K̂ = (B, AB, . . . , A           B)                               (5)
where, ∗ represents the non-circular convolution operation. H represents the sequence of hidden
states (h[1], h[2], . . . , h[L]) of length L. K̂ is a convolutional kernel of length L as defined above
(see Appendix A for further explanation). The output of the neuronal model, i.e. probability of
spiking of the neuron at time t, is given as,

                                               ps [i] = σ((K ∗ Xs )i )                                                 (6)
                                                              L−1                          Pi
where, kernel K = C K̂ = (CB, CAB, . . . , CA                       B); (K ∗ Xs )i =        j=1 Kj xs [i − j + 1] is
    th                                                                        i−1
the i term of the non-circular convolution, where Ki = CA B. Ps = (ps [1], ps [2], . . . , ps [L])
is the sequence of probability of spikes from a neuron over the operating time steps. Thus, we can
compute the output sequence parallely by doing convolution of the input sequence of spikes with
the weights of kernel K. Additionally, each element of the sequence Ps can be computed as a dot
product of a vector of real values (elements of precomputed K) and vector of spikes (subsequence of
Xs ). Sparse input spikes further enables skipping unnecessary computations on zero elements within
the input signal. Specialized neuromorphic hardware accelerators (Ivanov et al., 2022; Davies et al.,
2021) can be leveraged to perform this process, thus avoiding floating point MAC operations during
inference.

3.1.3    S PIKE S AMPLER L AYER
The spiking event of a specific P-SpikeSSM neuron at time t is modeled by a Bernoulli random
variable St . The spike generation process utilizes the output of the neuron, ps [t] (Eqn. 3 & 6), as
the probability of spiking at time t, as demonstrated below:

                                                         1   if z < ps [t],
                                              St =
                                                         0   otherwise,                                                (7)
                                               z ∼ U(0, 1)

This seemingly simple sampling process allows the proposed framework to operate in parallel with-
out incurring significant computational overhead. This SpikeSampling process can be parallelized
across both the sequence dimension and the population of neurons N , to develop a SpikeSampler


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


layer (Fig. 1a), facilitating the scaling of this methodology for more complex long-range depen-
dency tasks. Additionally, the on-chip deployment of models that use random number sampling
from a uniform distribution, on neuromorphic hardware such as Loihi-2, has been previously ex-
plored (Pierro et al., 2024). This enables the implementation of our SpikeSampler layer directly
on-chip.
Surrogate Gradient: The stochastic nature of the SpikeSampler layer introduces challenges during
training, as P-SpikeSSM-based spiking architectures face the problem of non-differentiability of
spikes. To address this and enhance stability of the learning process, during the backward phase of
backpropagation, we use a surrogate operation (S t ) for the stochastic spiking operation at time t as,

                         S t = E[St ] = 0 · P (St = 0) + 1 · P (St = 1) = ps [t]                                                                                  (8)

3.1.4    W HY C HOOSE S TOCHASTIC S PIKE G ENERATION OVER U SING LIF N EURONS ?
The continuous-time internal dynamics of a basic LIF                         Deterministic Process                                Stochastic Process

neuron is outlined below,
                                                                            o[1]                u[1]       s[1]              ps[1]              S1         s[1]
                                                                                                   Heaviside                                     Bernoulli R.V.
                                                                                                   Function                                       Sampling

                 du                                                         o[2]                u[2]       s[2]              ps[2]              S2         s[2]
          τm ·      = −(u(t) − urest ) + R · I(t)          (9)


                                                                                   Sequential


                                                                                                                  Parallel
                                                                 Parallel


                                                                                                                                     Parallel
                 dt

where, at time t, u(t) ∈ R is the membrane potential
which can be considered as the hidden state of the sys-         o[L]   u[L]   s[L]     p [L]     SL     s[L]                  s
tem; I(t) is the input current scaled by a constant R; τm       SSM     LIF  Output   P-Spike   Spike  Output
is the time constant associated with the decay in mem-         Output Neuron Spikes SSM Output Sampler Spikes


brane potential over time; urest is the resting membrane
potential. LIF neurons thus sequentially updates its state Figure 2: Computational flow of the
(u) and uses deterministic Heaviside function for spike LIF-based SSM model compared to the
generation.                                                   SpikeSampler-driven P-SpikeSSM neu-
Sequential Bottleneck Issues for LIF Neurons: The ronal model. Here, L is the sequence
above sequential process of state update and spike gen- length, u[t] represents the membrane
eration causes a bottleneck during the parallel training potential of LIF neuron and s[t] denotes
of the underlying SSM based framework. This results the spike output (either 1 or 0) at time t.
in increase in both training and inference time (see Sec- Unlike the LIF-based approach, which
tion 4.1.2) compared to our method. Prior work (Stan & is constrained by a sequential bottle-
Rhodes, 2023) attempts to linearize LIF neurons for par- neck, our probabilistic approach sup-
allel operation with SSMs, but offers limited analysis on ports parallel processing.
the impact of this parallelization on model performance.
In contrast, as shown in our results, our approach not only surpasses the accuracy achieved by previ-
ous methods across multiple datasets, but does so by being computationally simpler than the former.
Additionally, the previous study has not provided evidence for any contributions of LIF neurons to
model performance improvement, beyond their use in spike generation.
Parallel Execution in Our Model: The SpikeSampler layer compliments the parallel computa-
tional advantages of the P-SpikeSSM neuron (Eqn. 6), resulting in a parallel and efficient spike
generation process without the additional overhead of an LIF neuron (Fig. 2). During the back-
ward phase, the surrogate gradient (Eqn. 8) is utilized for effective and efficient model training.
To efficiently compute the kernel K, we capitalize on prior theoretical structural findings regard-
ing non-spiking SSMs (Gu et al., 2021a). By exploiting the decomposition of matrix A into a sum
comprising a normal and low-rank matrix, we achieve efficient computation of K in O(L) time
complexity. More details regarding efficient computation of K is added in Appendix B.

3.2     S CALING P-S PIKE SSM S TO D EEPER SNN A RCHITECTURES

To expand the sequence learning capabilities of the P-SpikeSSM neuronal model and facilitate its
scalability to deeper architectures, we introduce the P-SpikeSSM neuronal layer. This layer com-
prises of N P-SpikeSSM neurons. The sparse spiking activity of layer i at time t can be characterized
by analyzing the active neuron ratio, denoted as anri [t]. This ratio is determined by the number of


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                         PNi
                                                                               sij [t]
spikes occurring in that layer at time t, and is defined as: anri [t] = j=1
                                                                          Ni   , where Ni is the total
number of neurons in layer i, and sij [t] represents the spike generated by neuron j in that layer, at
time t. The layer-wise sparse spiking activity of the P-SpikeSSM neurons is illustrated in Fig. 1c.
The high-level architecture of the proposed spiking architecture features K stacked P-SpikeSSM
Encoder layers, each of which encapsulates the layers as shown in Fig. 1a. The effect of the number
of neurons on model performance is shown in Fig. 3. This demonstrates that as the population of
neurons within a single layer increases, the spikes generated by them more effectively capture the
temporal dependencies in the input sequence.
SpikeMixer Block: Since each P-SpikeSSM neuron indepen-
dently processes input sequence tokens, a neuron mixer layer
in the form of a fully-connected block is introduced. This fa-
cilitates the aggregation of spikes from previous layer of P-
SpikeSSM neurons and flow of information among neuronal
layers, ensuring efficient processing of diverse temporal de-
pendencies learned by various neurons. The output of the
SpikeMixer layer is given as,
                 fmix [t] = gelu(Is [t] · Wm )               (10)

where, Is [t] ∈ {0, 1}N are the N spikes from the previous
SpikeSampler layer at time t and Wm ∈ RN ×N is a linear           Figure 3: Results obtained from
weight. We use gelu function as a non-linearity. The lin-         the test set of the ps-MNIST
ear layer in this module avoids floating-point MAC operations     dataset. This experiment utilizes
since the input to the FC block consists of spikes. However,      two P-SpikeSSM neuronal layers,
due to the gelu() activation, there is element-wise floating-     with each layer containing N neu-
point multiplication of O(n2 ) complexity (Hendrycks & Gim-       rons, represented on the x-axis.
pel, 2016), which is still lower than the O(n3 ) MAC operation    The accuracy achieved is displayed
in floating-point matrix multiplications.                         on the y-axis.
FuseClamp Block: The FuseClamp block combines the input spikes (xs ) to the encoder layer with
the SpikeMixer output via a residual connection as shown in Fig. 1a. This is followed by batch
normalization (BN ), after which the output is clamped between [0, 1] using σ. The FuseClamp
block is succeeded by a SpikeSampler layer that utilizes its output as probabilities to generate spikes,
which are then propagated to the subsequent layer. The operation is defined as:

                                 pf ci [t] = σ(BN (fmix [t] + xs [t]))                             (11)
Input Encoding and Output Decoding: We typically employ a linear layer as the input encoder,
with weight We ∈ R1×N , followed by an optional batch normalization layer and SpikeSampler
layer. This process facilitates the generation of input spike sequences for all N neurons in the sub-
sequent layer. This choice is informed by the prevalent structure of our datasets, wherein input data
sequences are commonly formatted as RL×1 . For the long-range dependency based classification
tasks, the output of the final P-SpikeSSM encoder layer, is passed through a pooling-based sequence
decoder to generate the model prediction.

4   E XPERIMENTATION
In this section, we showcase the efficacy        Model                                   SNN    Acc.
of our proposed P-SpikeSSM neuronal              S4 (Gu et al., 2021a)                   No     98.7
model-based SNN architecture by eval-            LSTM (Gu et al., 2020b)                 No     95.1
uating their performance across various          HSLMU (Voelker et al., 2020)            Yes    96.8
long-range dependency based datasets.            LMU (Voelker et al., 2019)              No     97.2
                                                 DSD-SNN (Han et al., 2023)              Yes    97.3
We also conduct a preliminary energy             Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)      No     97.9
analysis to highlight the computational          Spiking LMUFormer (Liu et al., 2024)    Yes∗   97.9
efficacy of our proposed framework.              P-SpikeSSM (Our Model)                  Yes∗   98.4
The experiments were run on Nvidia
RTX A5000 GPUs (8) each with 24GB           Table 1: Results comparing the accuracy of our model to
memory.                                     other methods on test set of psMNIST dataset.

                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Model                                   SNN         ListOps    Text    Retrieval       Image    Pathfinder
 S4 (Original) (Gu et al., 2021a)        No          58.35      76.02   87.09           87.26    86.05
 S4 (Improved) (Gu et al., 2021a)        No          59.60      86.82   90.90           88.65    94.20
 Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)      No          36.37      64.27   57.46           42.44    71.40
 Sparse Transformer(Tay et al., 2020)    No          17.07      63.58   59.59           44.24    71.71
 Linformer (Wang et al., 2020)           No          35.70      53.94   52.27           38.56    76.34
 Linear Transformer (Tay et al., 2020)   No          16.13      65.90   53.09           42.34    75.30
 FLASH-quad (Hua et al., 2022)           No          42.20      64.10   83.00           48.30    63.28
 Spiking LMUFormer (Liu et al., 2024)    Yes∗        37.30      65.80   79.76           55.65    72.68
 Transnormer T2 (Qin et al., 2022)       No          41.60      72.20   83.82           49.60    76.80
 BinaryS4D (Stan & Rhodes, 2023)         Partial∗∗   54.80      82.50   85.30           82.00    82.60
 P-SpikeSSM (Our Model)                  Yes∗        58.20      81.20   88.53           82.40    84.80

Table 2: Results comparing the accuracy of our model against some spiking and non-spiking
architectures on test sets of LRA benchmark tasks (*Model uses gelu activation but no floating point
matrix multiplications, **Model uses gelu act. as well as floating point matrix multiplications).

4.1     R ESULTS

We evaluate our model (Tables 1, 2 & 3) on multiple long-range dependency tasks across datasets
such as psMNIST (Le et al., 2015), Speech Command (SC10) (Warden, 2018) and the long-range
arena (LRA) benchmark (Tay et al., 2020). The dataset details are in Appendix C.
Permuted Sequential MNIST: A simple model comprising two P-SpikeSSM Encoder layers, each
with a P-SpikeSSM neuronal layer consisting of 400 neurons, achieves state-of-the-art results among
spiking architectures. It performs comparably to the current best non-spiking model and outperforms
non-spiking transformer-based architectures, as detailed in Table 1.
Speech Command: Our SNN model,                   Model                                    SNN     Acc.
featuring four P-SpikeSSM Encoder                S4 (Gu et al., 2021a)                    No      98.3
layers, each with 256 neurons, sur-              Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)       No      ×
passes the performance of many con-              NRDE (Gu et al., 2021a)                  No      16.5
temporary non-spiking architectures on           Performer (Choromanski et al., 2020)     No      30.8
Speech Command 10 subset (SC10) as               CKConv(Gu et al., 2021a)                 No      71.7
demonstrated in Table 3. Furthermore,            P-SpikeSSM (Our Model)                   Yes∗    95.6
on the 35-set Speech Command dataset,
it achieves 96.23% outperforming previ-     Table 3: Results comparing the accuracy obtained by our
ous spiking baselines (Liu et al., 2024;    model to other non-spiking architectures on test set of
Bittar & Garner, 2022).                     SC10 dataset.

Long Range Arena Benchmark:
Transformer-based non-spiking models, as demonstrated in Table 2, struggle with suboptimal per-
formance on long-context tasks in LRA benchmark. This is primarily due to the overhead incurred
during the computation of attention scores, which becomes more pronounced with longer sequence
lengths. In our analysis, we also compare our method against the LMU-based spiking model, Spik-
ingLMUFormer, as well as the BinaryS4D model (Stan & Rhodes, 2023). Although BinaryS4D is
not a fully spiking model (requires floating point MAC based matrix multiplications), it incorporates
a layer of LIF neurons to generate spikes from an underlying state-space model (SSM).

4.1.1    H YPER - PARAMETERS
Initializing the state matrix A with            Hyper-parameters        Range         Optimal
                                                K: Encoder Layers       (2-6)               4
HiPPO matrices (Gu et al., 2020a) leads
                                                N : Neurons per Layer (64-400)            256
to optimal performance and rapid con-           n: Hidden State Dim.    (4-64)             16
vergence. Across a majority of tasks,           lr: Learning Rate       (1e-4 - 1e-1)   0.005
utilizing HiPPO-legS (further discussed         Batch Size              (8-256)            32
in Appendix B) consistently yields the          Epochs                  20-200            200
highest accuracy.     Hyper-parameters
employed for training our model can be Table 4: Hyper-parameters of our SNN models. Optimal
found in Table 4, with additional details values for ListOps dataset is also shown.
in Appendix D.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1.2    A BLATION S TUDIES

Effect of Components: We perform experi-                    Our Model               Accuracy
ments to analyze the effect of various compo-               w/o Surrogate (S̄t )    70.90
nents introduced in this work, specifically the             w/o SpikeMixer          68.90
surrogate (used during training) for the Spike-             w/o Normalization       77.80
Sampler layer, the SpikeMixer, and use of nor-              w/ Fixed Param. σ       80.20
malization in ClampFuse layer. On more chal-                w/ Learnable Param. σ 81.20
lenging datasets, such as ListOps, the model                w/ relu Activation      80.40
fails to achieve better-than-random accuracy
when trained without the surrogate. For the Table 5: Results showing the effect of different
LRA Text task, although training without the components of our proposed SNN architecture on
surrogate is feasible, it results in significantly test accuracy when trained on LRA Text dataset.
reduced performance, as shown in Table 5. We
also ran experiments to understand the effects of SpikeMixer layer and emphasize the performance
benefits of incorporating the SpikeMixer layer, which facilitates inter-neuron communication and
enhances the ability of the model to capture complex temporal dependencies. Since normalization
(used in the ClampFuse layer) is typically treated as a non-local operation that poses challenges for
implementation on neuromorphic hardware, we conducted an experiment to assess the impact of
removing normalization, and achieve promising result with minimal accuracy drop. We conducted
an experiment replacing the gelu layer in the SpikeMixer block with a hardware friendly relu acti-
vation function (Timcheck et al., 2023), and observed minimal performance degradation.
Parameterized σ: The function σ is defined with parameters a and b (Eqn. 1). These parame-
ters can either be treated as hyper-parameters or learned during training. We conducted additional
experiments on the LRA text dataset to analyze the impact of learning σ. Our results (Table 5) indi-
cate that allowing σ to be learnable improves model performance, though it introduces an additional
computational cost of O(N ) element-wise multiplications per layer (with N neurons), compared to
using fixed values of a = 0 and b = 1 (i.e. using output of SSM directly for sampling probability).
Comparing our Stochastic Model to LIF-based Implementation: We implemented a version of
our model based on LIF neurons, where the output of the underlying SSM (operating over spike
sequences) is passed to an LIF neuron for spike generation. We use similar experimental setup as
discussed in Section 4.1 for the psMNIST dataset. This approach achieves an accuracy of 97.7%
on the ps-MNIST dataset, compared to 98.4% by our stochastic approach. Furthermore, our model
demonstrates significantly reduced training and inference times. Specifically, training for one epoch
takes approximately 1.5 minutes, compared to 6.1 minutes for the LIF-based approach on the ps-
MNIST dataset. For inference, our model takes only 9 seconds on the test set, whereas the LIF-based
approach requires 17 seconds. This disparity is largely due to the sequential processing bottleneck
inherent in the LIF-based approach, which also necessitates Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT)
(Neftci et al., 2019) during training. In contrast, our parallel framework allows for training in a single
pass using standard backpropagation.


4.2     A NALYSIS OF E NERGY E FFICIENCY

We perform a preliminary analysis comparing the energy efficiency of a non-spiking S4 model to our
spiking model during parallel inference on a 45nm CMOS technology (Han et al., 2015). For 32-bit
floating points, ACC operations (cost .9pJ) consume 5.1× less energy than MAC operations (cost
4.6pJ) (Han et al., 2015). Assuming input sequence length of L, with N neurons per layer across
K layers, the dominant computational cost per layer for the non-spiking S4 model (Gu et al., 2021a)
is N L2 and LN 2 floating point MAC operations, representing the cost of computation (underlying
SSM is operated parallely and convolutional kernel is precomputed and cached) in a single S4 layer
and following linear layer with hidden dimension N . For simplicity, we estimate the energy costs
using standard convolution instead of FFT, as implementing FFT on a neuromorphic chip—which
primarily relies on spike-based accumulative operations—is significantly more complex. Although a
complete energy calculation includes non-linear layers like gelu(), their contribution is less (O(LN )
operations) compared to the energy cost of the parallel SSM and linear layers. Furthermore, we also
explore a model variant replacing gelu with relu (Table 5).


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Building on our previous analysis, the primary computational cost per P-SpikeSSM Encoder Layer
in our spiking model is given by IF Rin · L2 N and IF Ro · LN 2 floating-point accumulation (ACC)
operations, contributed primarily by the parallel operation of all the neurons of the P-SpikeSSM
layer and SpikeMixer layer respectively. Here, IF Rin represents the firing rate of the input layer
to the P-SpikeSSM neuronal layer, while IF Ro denotes the firing rate of spikes sampled from the
P-SpikeSSM neuronal layer, i.e. input to the SpikeMixer. N here denotes the number of neurons in
a P-SpikeSSM encoder layer. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the majority of neurons in the layer remain
dormant during the input sequence, leading to sparse communication.
To illustrate with a specific example, let
us consider the ListOps dataset. An iso-
parametric state-of-the-art non-spiking S4
model achieves an accuracy of 58.35 (im-
proved version: 59.60) (Gu et al., 2021a),
while our P-SpikeSSM achieves 58.20.
For ListOps dataset, we use L = 2K
and hidden dimension of S4, i.e., N =
256. The energy consumption of the non-
spiking model is EAN N = 4×(2K×2K×
256 + 2K × 256 × 256) * (4.6pJ).
Our P-SpikeSSM based architecture uses
4 encoder layers, each with number of
neurons N = 256. The values for Figure 4: Results obtained after passing randomly sam-
IF Rin are [0.08, 0.19, 0.16, 0.17], and pled inputs from ListOps dataset through our model.
the corresponding values for IF Ro are Figure consists of histogram representing the count of
[0.03, 0.12, 0.06, 0.07] (corresponding to neurons associated with mean probability of spiking
the four layers). Now, the total compu- (averaged over sequence length L) and Kernel Density
tational cost of our SNN considering N Estimation (KDE) plot of the data using an exponen-
neurons in each encoder layer is ESN N = tial kernel. Thus, over the entire sequence, majority of
P4                                         neurons (≈ 90%) have close to 0 probability of spik-
   i=1 (IF Rini × 2K × 2K × 256 +
IF Roi × 2K × 256 × 256) ∗ (0.9pJ). ing, signifying sparse spiking pattern.
Thus, for ListOps dataset, our SNN model
is 36× more energy efficient (EAN N /ESN N ) than the non-spiking model.
For this analysis, we concentrate exclusively on the cost of arithmetic operations, and did not con-
sider memory I/O transaction costs. Although this methodology does not include architectural de-
tails in the energy analysis, it still highlights the computational efficacy of our approach. By leverag-
ing the prevalence of inactive neurons and sparse spiking patterns of active neurons, we can achieve
significant improvements in energy and power efficiency on neuromorphic platforms.


5   C ONCLUSIONS


We propose a computationally efficient probabilistic spiking framework for addressing long-term
dependency sequence learning tasks. Instead of using LIF neurons, our model uses the output of
P-SpikeSSM neuronal model as the probability for generating spikes using the proposed SpikeSam-
pler layer. To tackle the non-differentiability of this stochastic spiking mechanism, we introduce
a surrogate gradient approach, enabling efficient training. To ensure scalability, our architecture
features SpikeMixer and ClampFuse layers, enabling effective sequence processing through sim-
plified accumulation-based operations. We evaluate our models on classification tasks involving
long-range dependencies, such as the LRA benchmark, ps-MNIST, and the SC10 dataset. Our mod-
els consistently outperform transformer-based non-spiking counterparts, achieving state-of-the-art
performance among SNN models, while also demonstrating exceptional computational efficiency
due to the inherent sparsity of spiking events. To further harness these energy efficiency benefits,
future work could explore deploying the model on edge devices and neuromorphic hardware, such
as Intel Loihi 2.

                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under
award No. CCSS #2333881, CAREER #2337646, CCF #1955815, and EFRI BRAID #2318101.

R EFERENCES
Malyaban Bal and Abhronil Sengupta. Sequence learning using equilibrium propagation. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2209.09626, 2022.
Malyaban Bal and Abhronil Sengupta. Spikingbert: Distilling bert to train spiking language models
 using implicit differentiation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 volume 38, pp. 10998–11006, 2024.
Malyaban Bal, Yi Jiang, and Abhronil Sengupta. Exploring extreme quantization in spiking lan-
 guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02543, 2024.
Felix C Bauer, Gregor Lenz, Saeid Haghighatshoar, and Sadique Sheik. Exodus: Stable and efficient
  training of spiking neural networks. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 17:1110444, 2023.
Alexandre Bittar and Philip N Garner. A surrogate gradient spiking baseline for speech command
  recognition. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 16:865897, 2022.
Anthony N Burkitt. A review of the integrate-and-fire neuron model: I. homogeneous synaptic input.
  Biological cybernetics, 95:1–19, 2006.
Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas
  Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, et al. Rethinking attention
  with performers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14794, 2020.
Mike Davies, Andreas Wild, Garrick Orchard, Yulia Sandamirskaya, Gabriel A Fonseca Guerra,
 Prasad Joshi, Philipp Plank, and Sumedh R Risbud. Advancing neuromorphic computing with
 loihi: A survey of results and outlook. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5):911–934, 2021.
Yu Du, Xu Liu, and Yansong Chua. Spiking structured state space model for monaural speech
  enhancement. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 766–770. IEEE, 2024.
Wei Fang, Zhaofei Yu, Zhaokun Zhou, Ding Chen, Yanqi Chen, Zhengyu Ma, Timothée Masquelier,
 and Yonghong Tian. Parallel spiking neurons with high efficiency and ability to learn long-term
 dependencies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Samanwoy Ghosh-Dastidar and Hojjat Adeli. Spiking neural networks. International journal of
  neural systems, 19(04):295–308, 2009.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hippo: Recurrent memory
  with optimal polynomial projections. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  1474–1487, 2020a.
Albert Gu, Caglar Gulcehre, Thomas Paine, Matt Hoffman, and Razvan Pascanu. Improving the gat-
  ing mechanism of recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 3800–3809. PMLR, 2020b.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00396, 2021a.
Albert Gu, Isys Johnson, Karan Goel, Khaled Saab, Tri Dao, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Com-
  bining recurrent, convolutional, and continuous-time models with linear state space layers. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 34:572–585, 2021b.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bing Han, Feifei Zhao, Yi Zeng, Wenxuan Pan, and Guobin Shen. Enhancing efficient contin-
  ual learning with dynamic structure development of spiking neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.04749, 2023.
Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William J. Dally. Learning both weights and connections for
  efficient neural networks, 2015.
LM Harrison, O David, and KJ Friston. Stochastic models of neuronal dynamics. Philosophical
 Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 360(1457):1075–1091, 2005.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel.          Gaussian error linear units (gelus).      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
AL Hodgkin and AF Huxley. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to
 conduction and excitation in nerve. Bulletin of mathematical biology, 52:25–71, 1990.
Weizhe Hua, Zihang Dai, Hanxiao Liu, and Quoc Le. Transformer quality in linear time. In Inter-
 national conference on machine learning, pp. 9099–9117. PMLR, 2022.
David H Hubel and Torsten N Wiesel. Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional archi-
  tecture in the cat’s visual cortex. The Journal of physiology, 160(1):106, 1962.
Dmitry Ivanov, Aleksandr Chezhegov, and Denis Larionov. Neuromorphic artificial intelligence
 systems. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 16:959626, 2022.
Patrick Kidger, James Morrill, James Foster, and Terry Lyons. Neural controlled differential equa-
  tions for irregular time series. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6696–
  6707, 2020.
Quoc V Le, Navdeep Jaitly, and Geoffrey E Hinton. A simple way to initialize recurrent networks
  of rectified linear units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.00941, 2015.
Jiaqi Lin, Malyaban Bal, and Abhronil Sengupta. Scaling snns trained using equilibrium propagation
   to convolutional architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02546, 2024.
Zeyu Liu, Gourav Datta, Anni Li, and Peter Anthony Beerel. Lmuformer: Low complexity yet
  powerful spiking model with legendre memory units. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04882, 2024.
Andrew Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts.
  Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the
  association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, pp. 142–150, 2011.
Paul A Merolla, John V Arthur, Rodrigo Alvarez-Icaza, Andrew S Cassidy, Jun Sawada, Filipp
  Akopyan, Bryan L Jackson, Nabil Imam, Chen Guo, Yutaka Nakamura, et al. A million spiking-
  neuron integrated circuit with a scalable communication network and interface. Science, 345
  (6197):668–673, 2014.
Emre O Neftci, Hesham Mostafa, and Friedemann Zenke. Surrogate gradient learning in spiking
  neural networks: Bringing the power of gradient-based optimization to spiking neural networks.
  IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 36(6):51–63, 2019.
Alessandro Pierro, Philipp Stratmann, Gabriel Andres Fonseca Guerra, Sumedh Risbud, Timothy
  Shea, Ashish Rao Mangalore, and Andreas Wild. Solving qubo on the loihi 2 neuromorphic
  processor. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03076, 2024.
Zhen Qin, Xiaodong Han, Weixuan Sun, Dongxu Li, Lingpeng Kong, Nick Barnes, and Yiran
  Zhong. The devil in linear transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10340, 2022.
Abhronil Sengupta, Yuting Ye, Robert Wang, Chiao Liu, and Kaushik Roy. Going deeper in spiking
  neural networks: Vgg and residual architectures. Frontiers in neuroscience, 13:95, 2019.
Sumit B Shrestha and Garrick Orchard. Slayer: Spike layer error reassignment in time. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Matei Ioan Stan and Oliver Rhodes. Learning long sequences in spiking neural networks. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2401.00955, 2023.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Yikang Shen, Dara Bahri, Philip Pham, Jinfeng Rao,
  Liu Yang, Sebastian Ruder, and Donald Metzler. Long range arena: A benchmark for efficient
  transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.04006, 2020.
Jonathan Timcheck, Sumit Bam Shrestha, Daniel Ben Dayan Rubin, Adam Kupryjanow, Garrick
  Orchard, Lukasz Pindor, Timothy Shea, and Mike Davies. The intel neuromorphic dns challenge.
  Neuromorphic Computing and Engineering, 3(3):034005, 2023.
Arnold Tustin. A method of analysing the behaviour of linear systems in terms of time series. Jour-
  nal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers-Part IIA: Automatic Regulators and Servo Mecha-
  nisms, 94(1):130–142, 1947.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2017.
Aaron Voelker, Ivana Kajić, and Chris Eliasmith. Legendre memory units: Continuous-time repre-
  sentation in recurrent neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Aaron R Voelker, Daniel Rasmussen, and Chris Eliasmith. A spike in performance: Training hybrid-
  spiking neural networks with quantized activation functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03553,
  2020.
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
Pete Warden. Speech commands: A dataset for limited-vocabulary speech recognition. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1804.03209, 2018.
Kashu Yamazaki, Viet-Khoa Vo-Ho, Darshan Bulsara, and Ngan Le. Spiking neural networks and
  their applications: A review. Brain Sciences, 12(7):863, 2022.
Zhaokun Zhou, Yuesheng Zhu, Chao He, Yaowei Wang, Shuicheng Yan, Yonghong Tian, and
  Li Yuan. Spikformer: When spiking neural network meets transformer. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.15425, 2022.
Rui-Jie Zhu, Qihang Zhao, and Jason K Eshraghian. Spikegpt: Generative pre-trained language
  model with spiking neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13939, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     D ERIVING C ONVOLUTIONAL R EPRESENTATION OF P-S PIKE SSM
      N EURONAL DYNAMICS
At time step t, the discretized neuronal model exhibits transition dynamics described as follows:

                                             h[t] = Ah[t − 1] + Bxs [t]
                                                                                                      (S1)
                                                       ps [t] = σ(Ch[t])

where, h[t] is the hidden state of the neuron, ps [t] is the probability of the spiking event St . A, B,
C are the discretized parameters of the time-invariant system. Considering at time step 0, h[0] = 0,
we get,

                                                          h[1] = Bxs [1]
                                              h[2] = ABxs [1] + Bxs [2]                               (S2)


Unrolling like this to time step i we get,
                                                                                      i
               i−1                 i−2                                                X   i−j
    h[i] = A         Bxs [1] + A         Bxs [2] + · · · + ABxs [i − 1] + Bxs [i] =     (A Bxs [j])   (S3)
                                                                                      j=1


Thus, the convolutional kernel K̂, whose length is given by the length of the input sequence L, is
defined as,
                                                          L−1
                                   K̂ = (B, AB, . . . , A     B)                             (S4)

Now H, i.e., sequence of hidden states can be computed as a non-circular convolution given as,
H = K̂ ∗ Xs , where Xs is the input sequence of spikes.
                                  Pt                                                      L−1
Thus, ps [t] = σ((K ∗ Xs )t ) = σ( j=1 Kj xs [t − j + 1]), where K = (CB, CAB, . . . , CA     B).

B     H I PPO- LEG S M ATRIX
HiPPO (high-order polynomial projection operators) (Gu et al., 2020a) is a versatile framework that
enables the analysis of various families of measures. Utilizing this operator as either a closed-form
ordinary differential equation (ODE) or a linear recurrence, we can efficiently update the optimal
polynomial approximation as the input function unfolds over time. HiPPO-legS can generalize to
different time scales. HiPPO enables the hidden state to effectively memorize the historical pattern
of input spikes (in our paper). The elements of the HiPPO-legS (Scaled Legendre) matrix ∈ Rn×n
is given below,
                                      √      √
                                       2m + 1 2k + 1, if m > k
                               Amk = − m + 1,          if m = k                                       (S5)
                                      
                                        0,             if m < k

B.1   C OMPUTING K ERNEL K

The efficient computation of K has been proposed in literature (Gu et al., 2021a), thus speeding up
the parallel training of SSM based neuronal architectures. We briefly go over the overview on how it
is achieved. The primary concern in computing K is the repeated multiplication of the state matrix
to create the individual terms Ki . Thus to compute K, the time complexity for a simple approach
of chained multiplication is O(n2 L), where n is the hidden state dimension and L is the sequence
length. Now the idea is that, if we had the state matrix to be a diagonal matrix, then theoretically
we could compute K efficiently using Vandermonde product. Thus, the goal is to diagonalize the
matrix A. Now, the ideal scenario is if A is a normal matrix, i.e., it is diagonalizable with a unitary


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table S1: Hyper-parameters used for obtaining the best result on individual datasets used for evalu-
ating P-SpikeSSM-based SNN models.
                            psMNIST     SC10    ListOps   Text      Retrieval   Image   Pathfinder
    K: #Encoder Layers      2           4       4         4         4           6       4
    N : Neurons per Layer   400         256     256       256       200         512     256
    n: Hidden State Dim.    64          32      16        16        32          32      64
    lr: Learning Rate       0.01        0.002   0.005     0.0005    0.003       0.005   0.0005
    Batch Size              64          32      32        64        32          32      32
    Epochs                  200         200     200       200       200         200     200


matrix (U AU −1 is a diagonal matrix, where U is a square matrix such that U H = U −1 ). A is
initialized to HiPPO matrices which are not normal matrices. However, HiPPO can be decomposed
into a diagonal matrix and a low-rank matrix. Following this, we can leverage previous theoretical
results (Gu et al., 2021a) on reducing the underlying SSM to the computation of Cauchy kernels and
calculate K, in linear order of time complexity w.r.t the sequence length L.

C    DATASET D ETAILS
Permuted Sequential MNIST: To heighten the complexity of the classification task, permuted se-
quential MNIST (psMNIST) (Le et al., 2015) reconfigures the presentation of images compared to
the original MNIST dataset. While MNIST has each 28 × 28 grayscale image as a unified entity,
psMNIST arranges the pixels in a sequence and in a permuted order. Thus, tackling this task de-
mands more sophisticated models capable of effectively retaining and synthesizing information over
time.
Speech Command Dataset (SC10): We use the 10-class subset of Speech Command dataset (War-
den, 2018) following previous works (Kidger et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2021a) and evaluate our model
on the raw unprocessed signals of length 16000.
Long range Arena Benchmark: To demonstrate the long-range dependency analysis capability of
our spiking architecture, we leverage the Long Range Arena (LRA) benchmark (Tay et al., 2020),
spanning various classification tasks from textual to image domains. Following are the five tasks
utilized for evaluation,

       • ListOps: In this task, our focus lies in modeling hierarchically structured data within a
         long-context framework. The sequence length for this task is upto 2K.
       • Text: In this task, we process the IMDB dataset (Maas et al., 2011) of movie reviews
         and perform the task of sentiment analysis in a byte-level. This is done to ensure a long
         sequence length of 4K.
       • Retrieval: In this task, we assess the model’s capacity to encode and retain compressed rep-
         resentations essential for matching and retrieval purposes. The input consists of byte-level
         sequences (of length 4K) from two documents, and the goal is to analyze their similarity.
       • Image: In this task, we perform an image classification task based on a sequence of pixels
         of the original image. The dataset is CIFAR-10 and the sequence length is 1K.
       • Pathfinder: In this task, we treat a 32×32 image as a sequence of pixels of length 1K. Our
         objective is to make a binary decision regarding whether two points, depicted as circles, are
         linked by a path composed of dashes.

D    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In Table S1, we list the optimal set of hyper-parameters used for each of the tasks. We have used
a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler with a warmup phase. As mentioned in the main text,
the state matrix A is initialized to the HiPPO-legS matrix as shown in Eqn. S5. The step size for
discretization (∆) is restricted between [0.001, 0.1]. The memory footprint ranges from ≈ 6GB
for psMNIST to ≈ 23GB for SC10. The dataset splits are aligned with prior literature (Tay et al.,
2020).


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Additional Experiments: We also tested our model on the sequential CIFAR-10 dataset, achieving
an accuracy of 85.6%. The hyper-parameters used are similar to the one used for LRA Image dataset,
as shown in Table S1. If we pass real valued probabilities instead of spikes, we achieve improved
accuracy (87.2%). However, this approach sacrifices the energy efficiency advantages provided by
the spiking sparsity in our original model. Our model processes the input as a sequence of pixels, yet
it achieves performance comparable to other state-of-the-art models, such as PSN Fang et al. (2024)
(PSN: 88.45% and Sliding PSN: 86.70%), which processes the image as a sequence of columns.
Memory Footprint: Based on previous analysis (Tay et al., 2020) on LRA tasks, the Transformer
models in Table 2 are configured with 4 layers, hidden dimension of 256 and 4 attention heads,
resulting in approximately 600K parameters in total. Our models establish state-of-the-art per-
formance in the spiking domain and comprehensively outperforms non-spiking transformer based
architectures as shown in Table 2. Furthermore, considering identical parameters (A, B) for neurons
in the same layer, the average parameter count of our models on LRA ListOps dataset is around
≈ 280K, representing a reduction of ≈ 2.1× compared to the parameter count of the transformers
used for comparison.


                                                 16
