Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARDS U NDERSTANDING T EXT H ALLUCINATION OF
D IFFUSION M ODELS VIA L OCAL G ENERATION B IAS
 Rui Lu1∗, Runzhe Wang2∗ , Kaifeng Lyu3 , Xitai Jiang4 , Gao Huang1 , Mengdi Wang2
 1
   Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
 2
   Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University
 3
   Simons Institute, UC Berkeley
 4
   Qiuzhen College, Tsinghua University
 {r-lu21, jiang-xt21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
 {runzhew, mengdiw}@princeton.edu
 kaifenglyu@berkeley.edu, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn



                                                  A BSTRACT
             Score-based diffusion models have achieved incredible performance in generating
             realistic images, audio, and video data. While these models produce high-quality
             samples with impressive details, they often introduce unrealistic artifacts, such as
             distorted fingers or hallucinated texts with no meaning. This paper focuses on tex-
             tual hallucinations, where diffusion models correctly generate individual symbols
             but assemble them in a nonsensical manner. Through experimental probing, we
             consistently observe that such phenomenon is attributed it to the network’s local
             generation bias. Denoising networks tend to produce outputs that rely heavily on
             highly correlated local regions, particularly when different dimensions of the data
             distribution are nearly pairwise independent. This behavior leads to a generation
             process that decomposes the global distribution into separate, independent distribu-
             tions for each symbol, ultimately failing to capture the global structure, including
             underlying grammar. Intriguingly, this bias persists across various denoising net-
             work architectures including MLP and transformers which have the structure to
             model global dependency. These findings also provide insights into understanding
             other types of hallucinations, extending beyond text, as a result of implicit biases in
             the denoising models. Additionally, we theoretically analyze the training dynamics
             for a specific case involving a two-layer MLP learning parity points on a hypercube,
             offering an explanation of its underlying mechanism.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Inspired by the diffusion process in physics (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), diffusion models learn to
generate samples from a specific data distribution by fitting its score function, gradually transforming
pure Gaussian noise into desired samples. These models (Song et al., 2020a; Song & Ermon,
2019; Song et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020) demonstrate remarkable capability in generating high-
quality samples with significant diversity, establishing them as the de facto standard generative
models for various tasks, including image generation, video generation (Brooks et al., 2024),
inpainting (Lugmayr et al., 2022), super-resolution (Gao et al., 2023), and more. However, despite
the impressively realistic details produced, diffusion models consistently exhibit artifacts in their
outputs. One common issue is the generation of plausible low-level features or local details while
failing to accurately model complex 3D objects or the underlying semantics (Borji, 2023; Liu et al.,
2023). This phenomenon, known as hallucination, occurs when the generated samples either do not
exist in real-world distributions or contain content that lacks semantic meaning. In practice, even
large generative models like StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), trained on enormous datasets,
still suffer from these issues—often generating hands with extra, missing, or distorted fingers. In this
work, we primarily focus on a special type of artifacts called text hallucinations, where generative
model can correctly generate individual symbol in syllabus but assemble them in nonsensical manner.
This naturally raises the following question.
    ∗
        Equal contribution, work done during Rui’s visit at Princeton


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (a)                     (b)                        (c)                        (d)

Figure 1: An illustration for local generation bias. We construct a synthetic dataset (a) that all images
satisfy the rule that sum of first row equals second row, i.e. 2+9=7+4. Diffusion model starts from
noise xt (b) and using denoising network to generate digit images in four quarters. We found that the
top-left region’s denoising primarily depends on its own data, depicted by saliency map (c). This
means the diffusion model independently generates each digit without caring any other digits, ends
up with x0 (d) failing to capture the relation between four digits.


Why do diffusion models typically struggle with generating images that include text content? How
do they learn these distributions and end up generating hallucinated samples?
This study identifies a critical limitation in diffusion models termed Local Generation Bias, where
score networks trained via score matching exhibit a tendency to generate outputs based predominantly
on localized input regions. This bias leads to uncorrelated symbol generation, as denoising processes
for individual tokens operate independently, disregarding inter-token dependencies and underlying
rules. To measure the degree of local operation, we propose a probe called the Local Dependency
Ratio (LDR), which quantifies the gradient magnitude within the same local region compared with
the entire input. A higher LDR indicates a stronger local generation bias. Interestingly, we discover
that a high LDR emerges early in training and persists throughout extensive training steps. LDR thus
becomes a good indicator for the strength of local generation bias. Moreover, we find this bias is
intrinsic in training rather than architectural limitation. Even for models like transformers (Peebles
& Xie, 2023; Vaswani, 2017) or MLPs that are designed to capture global dependencies, the local
generation bias persists.
To gain a deeper understanding of this phenomenon, we probe into a simple case, providing insights
into its underlying mechanism. Specifically, we analyze a two-layer ReLU network learning a
distribution supported on the vertices of a hypercube {±1}d . This distribution can be among the
vertices that satisfy a parity constraint, where the product of all x entries is 1. When fitting the target
denoising function for this distribution, we find that the network has certain training bias, inducing it
to separately learn d univariate target function for marginal distributions on each dimension, sampling
independently over {±1} for each entry. Eventually, the generation process samples uniformly
over the entire hypercube rather than parity subset, where hallucination happens. This introduces
an instance for how training bias may result in hallucinatory generations, and offers insights into
hallucinations across other domains and modalities.
In summary, this paper contributes in three key folds.
Identification of Local Generation Bias: We define and analyze the phenomenon of local generation
bias in diffusion models, which leads to artifacts like text hallucinations.
Mechanistic Explanation: We provide a detailed theoretical and empirical investigation into the
causes of hallucinations, revealing that they stem from the implicit bias in the training process.
New Analytical Tools: We introduce the Local Dependency Ratio (LDR) as a measure of local bias
and apply it to explore the diffusion model’s behavior across training stages.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Diffusion Model. Diffusion models, initially introduced by Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015), are
probabilistic generative models that iteratively add and remove noise from data. Early work Ho et al.
(2020) laid the foundation and proposed Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) Ho
et al. (2020), which significantly improved sample quality and stability. Song et al. (2020b) also


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Some examples of deformed hands artifacts and text hallucination in images generated by
StableDiffusion Rombach et al. (2022) and Midjourney. Images from prompting “woman showing
her hands”, “a road sign in a grassland” and “a Chinese traditional calligraphy art”.



proposed Score-Based Generative Models (SGMs), unifying diffusion models with other generative
frameworks. To address efficiency, Song et al. (2021) introduced Denoising Diffusion Implicit
Models (DDIM), reducing sampling steps without quality loss. Diffusion models have since been
applied beyond image generation, including video generation Brooks et al. (2024), text-to-image
models Rombach et al. (2022), and audio synthesis Kong et al. (2020). Despite advancements,
challenges remain, particularly in improving sampling speed and generalization to unseen data, as
highlighted by recent experiments in video generation and physics-informed modeling.
Hallucination in Language Generative Models. Hallucinations in large language models (LLMs)
are a significant challenge, particularly in safety-critical applications, where factually incorrect or
logically inconsistent outputs can have severe consequences Ye et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023).
LLMs may generate erroneous facts, misinterpret instructions, or introduce entirely new information
not present in the input, a phenomenon known as input-conflicting hallucination Zhang et al. (2023).
Mitigating these hallucinations has become a focus of research, with strategies such as enhancing
models with factual data Gunasekar et al. (2023) and integrating retrieval-based mechanisms to
ground responses in external knowledge Ram et al. (2023).
Hallucination in Diffusion Models. One common artifact of diffusion models is the generation of
distorted or deformed body parts, such as hands and legs, which is frequently observed in models
like Stable Diffusion Rombach et al. (2022) and Sora Brooks et al. (2024). Additionally, diffusion
models struggle with learning rare concepts, particularly those with fewer than 10,000 samples in the
training set Samuel et al. (2024). Other common failure modes include models neglecting spatial
relationships or confusing attributes, as discussed in prior research Borji (2023); Liu et al. (2023).
These issues highlight the limitations of diffusion models when tasked with generating realistic,
complex scenes, especially when dealing with rare data or intricate spatial compositions. Recent
work Aithal et al. (2024) explains the hallucination of diffusion model via the perspective of mode
interpolation, arguing that the improper interpolation between modes yields non-zero density between
them, which is the main cause for hallucination.


3    N OTATIONS


Denote set {0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 1} as [n]. To compute the cardinality of a set S we write |S|. For a vector
x, we use x(i) = x⊤ ei to denote its ith dimension, and we use ei to denote the unit vector along the
i-th dimension. N (µ, Σ) means a Gaussian distribution with mean µ and covariance Σ, N (x; µ, Σ)
denotes its density at position x. Sampling x from distribution D is denoted as x ∼ D. Asymptotic
notation follows the common practice where f = O(g) means there exists a constant C > 0 and
x0 such that f (x) < C · g(x) for any x > x0 . Similarly we write f = Ω(g) when f (x) > C · g(x)
for any x > x0 and f (x) = Θ(g(x)) if f = Ω(g)       R and f = O(g). And ∗ stands for convolution
operation between two distributions, f ∗ g(t) = Ω f (τ )g(t − τ )dτ . We use ∆(S) to denote the set
of valid probability distributions over a compact set S. We use sgn(x) = 1[x > 0] − 1[x < 0] to
denote the sign function.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     E XPERIMENT S TUDY

In this section, we introduce the experimental setup and results of our study on text hallucination
in diffusion models. We first reproduce text hallucination phenomenon across different modalities
and text rules in our simple synthetic setting. To understand how it originates, a key probe called
Local Dependency Ratio (LDR) is introduced to quantitatively measure the denoising function’s
input dependency on local regions. With LDR as a probing tool, we discover the following important
observations.

• High LDR value is always observed when hallucination happens. This indicates that the
  denoising model predicts noise by each symbol’s region itself, therefore conducting denoising
  and generation iteration respectively with almost zero entanglement between different symbols.
  Since the starting Gaussian distribution is also isotropic, the entire generation process for different
  symbols becomes independent, resulting in incorrect assembly and hallucination.
• Such phenomenon is ubiquitous across different distributions and architectures, even for those
  models with global receptive field such as MLP and DiT(Peebles & Xie, 2023). This indicates such
  bias is related to ubiquitous implicit bias in training dynamics rather than architectural limitation.
• As training progresses, LDR decreases and the denoising model starts to overfit. After
  extensive training, denoising network overfit to training dataset. This requires it to coordinate
  different symbols to exact replicate training data, resulting in a drop in LDR.

4.1   F ORMULATION OF T EXT D ISTRIBUTION

The process of constructing a synthetic text-like distribution is as follows. First, we define a
set of discrete symbols, S = s1 , s2 , . . . , sK , as the syllabus. Next, we define a symbol index list,
I = (i1 , i2 , . . . , iL ) ⊆ [K]L , which represents a sequence of symbols (si1 , si2 , . . . , siL ). A grammar
rule is a probability distribution PG that defines the validity of a symbol sequence by its probability
density, PG (I). The symbol sequence is then mapped to an ambient space by a function h : S 7→ Rd ,
which assigns each symbol to a vector, such as an image pixel or a scalar. The full signal is formed by
concatenating these vectors. Examples of such signals include images with text, time series, and text
sequences. We aim to learn the distribution of these signals for generation purposes. For simplicity,
we use h(I) : S L 7→ Rd×L to represent the rendering process, where a list of tokens is transformed
into the input space. We can first sample a token list I ∼ PG and then apply the rendering function h.
Throughout the experiments, we fix L to maintain a consistent symbolic system.
In this paper, we mainly test two synthetic symbol assembling rules, including (i) Parity Parenthesis,
each sample image contains L parenthesis where left symbol “(” and right “)” both have even
numbers; (ii) Quarter MNIST, each sample image consists of four MNIST digits in the corners and
the sum of first row equals the second. More details are in appendix.

4.2   T EXT H ALLUCINATION R ESULTS

After constructing synthetic text distributions h(PG ). The denoising model is trained to fit the score
function of these distributions in the ambient space. For embedding vector ambient space, we employ
MLP to learn the score function. For image sample, we use modern denoising network including
UNet Ronneberger et al. (2015) and DiT (Peebles & Xie, 2023). Note that both MLP and DiT have
global receptive field in its function, enabling them to model long range correlations. UNet also
embraces attention module in its pipeline.
Parity Parenthesis. Our initial attempt starts with parity rule with parenthesis symbol. We fix
L = 8, 16 and use image of left and right parenthesis to represent symbol 1 and −1. A UNet model
(with attention) is trained on this image distribution and learn to generate samples. The details of
model architecture is in the appendix. We are interested in whether diffusion model can find clues
about parity rule and faithfully reproduce it. An OCR function is utilized to transform the generated
image into binary sequences and test whether it satisfies the parity rule. For L = 8 we use half
fraction of the valid parity images and 5% for L = 16. The generated images are categorized into
four types, including (i) Invalid, the low level detail for each symbol is ambiguous and fuzzy hence
OCR fails; (ii) Hallucination, each symbol is clear but the overall combination does not fit in rules;


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Experimental Result for UNet learning parity parenthesis L = 16 (left) and L = 8 (right).


(iii) In Dataset, the model exactly reproduce dataset images; (iv) Extrapolation, the model generates
data sample that satisfy the rule while not presented in the dataset.
The diagram for different categories’ proportion is in figure 3. Note that random guess has 50%
chance of satisfying parity requirement. We can see the model quickly learn to generate individual
symbol’s appearance, and the proportion of invalid drops immediately. However, the diffusion model
fails to capture the parity rule, half of whose generated images are hallucination. The situation
diverges according to the sequence length. In L = 8 case the model eventually successfully overfits
to the training dataset, but still generates 25% hallucinated samples. For L = 16, The model
continues to generate correct samples only by chance till the end of training. This simple experiment
demonstrates the difficulty for pure-vision based model to learn underlying rule unconditionally.
Detailed generated samples is left in appendix.

Quarter-MNIST: We also test another symbol system, where four MNIST digit images are assigned
in four quarters of an image and satisfy simple arithmetic relations. To achieve low divergence
between generation distribution and real distribution, the diffusion model not only needs to generate
reasonable digits, but also understands the global relations between these digits.
Simple combinatorics tells there are total 670 combination of symbols (s1 , s2 , s3 , s4 ) ∈ S 4 satisfying
s1 + s2 = s3 + s4 . We randomly leave out 200 combinations as test set and render the images of the
rest. Both UNet and DiT undergo a phase that most of its generated samples do not satisfy the addition
requirement, which means hallucination. As the training progresses, both models gradually learn
to reproduce sample within dataset. DiT performs better accuracy (∼ 90%) in generating samples
satisfying addition relations compared with UNet (20.6%). However, none of them is able to generate
valid symbol tuple beyond the training dataset, with a fraction only less than 0.5%. Therefore there is
no extrapolation region in figure 4. In other words, for such text distribution, diffusion model can
only struggle between hallucination and overfitting, if no prior knowledge is provided.


   Figure 4: Experimental Result for learning Quarter-MNIST using UNet (left) and DiT (right).



                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.3   LOCAL D EPENDENCY R ATIO A NALYSIS


Figure 5: LDR trend for UNet (left) and DiT (right) at different denoising timestep and training itera-
tions. The LDR for UNet remains high throughout the training, therefore it stucks with hallucination.
While DiT successfully progress to reduce the√LDR, meaning it starts to overfit and memorize the
dataset. We select timestep t corresponding to ᾱt ≈ 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9.

To investigate the mechanism behind text hallucination. We propose a novel probe called Local
Dependency Ratio, or LDR in abbreviation. LDR quantitatively measures the degree of the diffusion
network that performs denoising and generation locally. Given a trained network sθ (·) and certain
fixed timestep t with corresponding parameter ᾱt . In the total input space Rd×L , denote the region
of interest as R ⊆ [d × L] referring to the set of entries corresponding to one (or few) symbol’s
area. Define indicator matrix PR = [ei ]i∈R that filters out entries of R. We compute gradient of the
                              ⊤
filtered entries fR,θ (x) := PR sθ (x) and get Jacobian matrix
                                                  ∂fR,θ
                                    JR,θ (x) :=         ∈ R|R|×d .                                   (1)
                                                   ∂x
Define local Dependency Ratio (LDR) function for model sθ and region R as
                                               ⊤
                                                 JR,θ (x)⊤ JR,θ (x)PR )

                                          Tr(PR
                   LDR(θ, R) = Ex∼pt                                      .                          (2)
                                              Tr(JR,θ (x)⊤ JR,θ (x))
Intuitively, matrix J measures dependency of each output’s entry in R with respect to the input,
which is commonly known as saliency map (Simonyan, 2013). The difference to conventional
saliency map is that each input dimension x(i) receives a gradient vector gi ∈ R|R| rather a single
scalar. It records the sensitivity of output region R with respect to a certain input entry x(i) .
Therefore, Tr(J ⊤ J ) computes the Frobenius norm of J , which is the total sum of all gradient vectors’
                                                                                           ⊤ ⊤
squared norm. Meanwhile, J PR filters dependency gradient within R itself, thus Tr(PR        J J PR )
measures the total summation of squared gradient norms within the same local region R. The LDR is
thus within range [0, 1], where a higher value indicates a more local denoising and generation manner.
With LDR, we can probe the model trained on different datasets at various checkpoints. Here
we mainly present our probing result for Quarter-MNIST dataset. More visualization and other
experimental detail is left to appendix. We select R to be the top left region, namely the first digit’s
position, and compute LDR for this region at different denoising steps and training iterations. As
shown in figure 5, UNet’s LDR remains more than 0.75 throughout the entire training process, which
means it highly focuses on region R itself to conduct denoising and generation. This could explain
why UNet ends up with a much lower accuracy. DiT also presents similar trend, showing a high LDR
value at initial stage of training, therefore generating hallucinated samples. However, due to strong
approximation power of transformer architecture, its LDR decreases at 30k to 50k iteration, and this
synchronizes with the rapid increase of the generated sample’s accuracy (see figure 4).
This result provides evidence for the local generation bias. Despite the capacity to modeling global
long-range relations, both attention version UNet and DiT appears to rely on information confined
within local regions. This is reasonable because in these symbolic systems PG , any two symbol’s
distribution is independent, namely PG (si = a, sj = b) = PG (si = a)PG (sj = b). Such
independence leads denoising network to treat symbols as uncorrelated. As a consequence of such
local generation preference, the denoising network separately learns and samples from each symbol
token’s marginal distribution at early training stage, resulting in text hallucination.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This finding is consistent and universal across different denoising architectures and grammar rules.
More experiment details for different distributions are left in appendix. We also visualize J as
heatmap of each pixel’s gradient magnitude and verify its concentration near the selected region
R. For real-world distributions that do not satisfy independent condition, please refer to discussion
section.

5     D ISTRIBUTIONS O N A H YPER C UBE : A T HEORETICAL C ASE S TUDY
In this section, we give an instance that illustrates why high LDR values predict hallucinatory
generations, and why the learned score network is biased towards high LDR scores. We consider
the case of |S| = 2, e.g. the generation of distributions on the hypercube {±1}d , or equivalently on
a sequence of d binary tokens. We find that in early training stage neural networks prefer to learn
the tokens in their marginal distributions and fails to learn correlations that mark the semantic rules.
The theoretical analysis explains why high LDR can be a signal for bad model and defective training
process. While the set of score functions with LDR value 1 have restricted generation capacity, under
certain grammar rules they form an invariant set of the optimization process. Namely, the gradient
component that lower the LDR value vanishes when LDR approaches 1. Therefore in the view of
optimization the network will struggle in escaping a high LDR region. Moreover we show that in the
instance of a two-layer ReLU network, early training dynamic actually biases the network to a LDR
level close to 1 with small initialization, exhibiting the presence of such a struggle in the training
process. As a result, the network creates hallucinatory generations.

5.1     P RELIMINARIES

5.1.1    P ROBABILITY ON THE HYPERCUBE
A spelling/grammar rule PG over binary sequences specifies a probability distribution function p0
on the hypercube {±1}d . We Q can express p0 in terms of the Fourier expansion on the hypercube, as
the indicator functions xI = i∈I xi for all possible I ⊂ [d] forms an orthonormal basis over the
uniform distribution D over the hypercube (namely, Ex∼D xI xJ = 1[I = J]). Then we can expand
p0 : {±1}d → R in the Fourier basis as
                              X
                     p0 (x) =    (p̄0 )I xI (x),   (p̄0 )I = Ex∼D p0 (x)xI (x).

As p0 is a probability function, there is (p̄0 )∅ = 2−d . The set PS = {(p̄0 )I : I ⊂ S} gives the
marginal distribution of (xi : i ∈ S). For instance, when (p̄0 ){i,j} = (p̄0 ){i} (p̄0 ){j} , xi and xj are
independent in their marginal distribution.

5.1.2    D IFFUSION MODELS
We adopt the conventions for diffusion models from Ho et al. (2020). Let p0 be the distribution
density we wish to sample from. While direct sampling from p0 is computationally hard, We define a
forward process xt where the signal gradually shrinks and Gaussian noise is added at each timestep
for total T steps.
                                                p
               x0 ∼ p0 (x), p(xt | xt−1 ) = N ( 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I), t = 1, 2, . . . , T.      (3)
Here 0 < βt < 1 is a scale schedule of adding noise. Denote the distribution of xt as pt =
√                                                 QT
  ᾱt p0 ∗ N (0, (1 − ᾱt )I), αt = 1 − βt , ᾱt = t=1 αt . We choose the schedule so that ᾱt → 0 as
t → T , so pt → N (0, I). If we can undo the forward noising process, then we can sample from p0
by applying the reverse process on the samples from pT = N (0, I), which is more computationally
efficient. The reverse process is well-approximated by the following (Ho et al., 2020).

                                                  1           1 − αt
                xT ∼ N (0, I), xt−1 ∼ N √              xt − √          s (xt , t) , β̃t I         (4)
                                                   αt          1 − ᾱt
                       √
where s(xt , t) = xt − √ᾱ1−
                           t E(x0 |xt )
                              ᾱ
                                        predicts the backwards direction.
                              t

Score Learning Setting. The backwards direction s(xt , t) requires the computation of the term
E(x0 |xt ) which may not be tractable in practice. Instead, we approximate the direction with a neural


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                  √           √
network sθ (xt , t). For any t > 0, the training data is drawn from pt as xt = ᾱt · x0 + 1 − ᾱt · ξ,
where x0 ∼ p0 and ξ ∼ N (0, I), and the network is trained by minimizing
                                                          √                     2
                                      2            xt − ᾱt x0
    Lt (θ) = Ex0 ,ξ ∥ξ − sθ (xt , t)∥ = Ex0 ,ξ       √           − sθ (xt , t)
                                                        1 − ᾱt
                             √                             2            √                           2
                        xt − ᾱt E(x0 |xt )                                 ᾱt
            = Ex0 ,ξ         √               − sθ (xt , t) + Ex0 ,ξ √             (x0 − E(x0 |xt ))
                               1 − ᾱt                                  1 − ᾱt
                                                                                                 √
Therefore the loss can be viewed as the square loss on the target score vector yt (x) = xt − √ᾱ1−
                                                                                                 t E(x0 |xt )
                                                                                                    ᾱt
                                                                                                              .
In practices like natural images generation where p0 is approximated by the empirical distribution
of the training dataset, if the network sθ (x, t) overfits by recovering the empirical target, then the
diffusion model reproduces the training dataset. In this way the model memorizes the training data
but cannot generate anything outside the training set. While ideal generation require the network to
generalize properly, improper generalization causes hallucinatory samples. In the remaining part
of the section, we present an example of such a bad generalization, which is manifested by the
discrepancy of the LDR values.

5.2   LDR OF AN ACTUAL NEURAL NETWORK

In the following theoretical analysis, we use a two-layer neural network of hidden dimension m as our
                                                            (i)        P                ⊤
score network. The i-th entry of the network output is sθ (x, t) = j∈[m] ai,j,t σ(wi,j,t   x + bi,j,t )
where σ(x) = max(x, 0) is the ReLU function, and the parameters θ = (ai,j,t , wi,j,t , bi,j,t ) are
                                     d
updated via gradient flow (GF) as ds   θs = −∇θ Lt (θs ).
Notice that for t > 0, Lt is a smooth function as the data x has a smooth probability density function
over the space. For a starting point θ0 , we use Φ(θ0 , s) to denote the endpoint θs of gradient flow at
time s, which is unique given the smoothness of the loss function. We will show that starting from a
small initialization, the gradient flow boosts the LDR of the network, crossing the ground-truth LDR,
and drives the network parameters close to an invariant set of LDR 1. Thereby, the resulting diffusion
model of high LDR value creates hallucinatory generations.

5.3   H IGH LDR I S H ARD T O L OWER F OR O PTIMIZATION

The experimental evidence hints a pattern of grammar rules that complicate the training process. We
summarize such a pattern in AssumptionP 5.1. By Fourier transformation
                                                                   Q on the hypercube, we can
expand the target probability p0 (x) = I⊂[d] p̄0 (I)xI where xI = i∈I xi are the Fourier basis.
Assumption 5.1. The grammar rule p0 satisfies, for any i, j ∈ [d], p̄0 (i) = 0 and p̄0 (i, j) = 0.
This means that the marginal distribution for any digit in the sequence is uniform, and for any pair
of digits is independent. An example
                                   Q     of such distributions are valid sequences uniformly drawn
from a parity rule (e.g. satisfies i∈I xi = 1 for any I that |I| > 2). When the pairwise correlation
disappears, we observe that the network is no longer able to escape an invariant set that has LDR 1.
Theorem 5.2. Under Assumption 5.1, let M = {θ : ai,j,t (I − ei e⊤       i )wi,j,t = 0}, then M is an
invariant set under gradient flow. Namely, from any θ ∈ M , gradient flow Φ(θ, t) ∈ M , ∀t > 0. For
any θ ∈ M , there is LDR(θ, R) = 1 for any R ⊂ [d].
                                     (i)         P                 ⊤
We observe that for any θ ∈ M , sθ (x, t) = j∈[m] ai,j,t σ(wi,j,t      x + bi,j,t ) is irrelevant to the
                               (i)
dimensions of x other than x , therefore it cannot represent the true target score for any distribution
that involves correlations over multiple dimensions. Actually since the reverse process starts from a
Gaussian distribution that enjoys independent entries on different dimensions, the denoised sample
will always have independent entries. For instance, for the generation of the parity rule, the best
model in M can only generate the uniform distribution over all of the hypercube, giving a half chance
of hallucination. Therefore it is favorable to avoid optimizing the model into the set M . However,
we will show that driving towards M is implicitly induced by running gradient flow with small
initialization.

5.4   E ARLY T RAINING I S B IASED T OWARDS H IGH LDR


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A series of previous works (Woodworth et al., 2020; Jin
et al., 2023) adopts small initialization to assist representa-
tion learning for MLP networks, as opposed to the kernel
regime where the network representations barely changes.
We adopt the idea to check how network’s representation
change in the early phase of training. As exhibited in Fig-
ure 6, the network parameter will bias towards a 1-sparse
feature extraction that marks the invariant set M (Theo-
rem 5.2), which we will prove in theory in the remaining
part of the section.                                                                            (1)
                                                                  Figure 6: When learning sθ (xt , t), the
For a small constant σinit and constant r > 0, we use the average norm of neurons’ 1st dimension
initialization scheme for θ = (ai,j,t , wi,j,t , bi,j,t ) as      weight |aw(1) | increase much faster than
                                                                                              (1)
                       2
  wi,j,t (0) ∼ N (0, σinit ), bi,j,t (0) ∼ N (0, σinit  2
                                                            r2 ), ∥a(w − w(1) )∥. It means sθ (xt , t) be-
                                                                                                   (1)
                             q                                    comes a univariate function in xt .
                                             2
     ai,j,t (0) ∼ Unif({±1}) ∥wi,j,t (0)∥ + bi,j,t (0) .      2



Inspired by the G-function (Maennel et al., 2018; Lyu
et al., 2021), when the initialization is very small, the neural network output sθ (x, t) ≈ 0, so we can
expand the loss as
    Lt (θ) = Ext ∥sθ (xt , t) − yt (xt )∥2 = Ext [∥yt (xt )∥2 − 2sθ (xt , t)⊤ yt (xt )] + O(Ext (s2θ (xt )))

So the initial trajectory of the neural network aims to optimize a surrogate loss L̃(θ) =
Ext [−2sθ (xt , t)⊤ yt (xt )]. For the simplicity of reasoning we will consider the trajectory
(ãi,j,t , w̃i,j,t , b̃i,j,t ) on such a surrogate loss, which can always well-approximate the early trajectory
on the actual loss when σinit is small enough. We observe the following.
Theorem 5.3. Under Assumption 5.1, for any 0 < c < 1, there are real number Mc , tc that for a
2-layer ReLU network     with width m > Mc , with high probability over the initialization, the network
                                          ⊤
                 P
s̃θ̃(τ ) (x, t) = i∈[d],j∈[m] ãi,j,t σ(w̃i,j,t x + b̃i,j,t )ei has high LDR for any time τ > tc and any
region R ⊂ [d]. Specifically,
                                          LDR(θ̃(τ ), R) > 1 − c.

The proof of the theorem actually implies something stronger: not only does the network have LDR
close to 1, its parameters go arbitrarily close to the set M . For statement conciseness we omit the
details to Appendix A.2. The theorem depicts the representation learning process in the early phase
of training: for a neuron along the direction w̃i,j,t (0) = ±∥w̃i,j,t (0)∥ei , with proper bias b̃i,j,t , the
growth rate of its norm (or ãi,j,t ) is maximal and its direction does not alter, and therefore after a
fixed training period it will have an exponentially larger impact to the network output than a neuron
of suboptimal direction. Therefore after a few epochs, a neuron either still has a small magnitude
(|ai,j,t |), or its weight will be close to the optimal direction w̃i,j,t (s) ≃ ei , making the whole network
close to the saddle set M introduced in Theorem 5.2 and having high LDR. While it may take a
long time for the network to escape the neighborhood of M , the network can operate inside M
to learn denoising functions that recovers each marginal distribution of p0 . In this way the model
independently conducts denoising on each individual dimension, performing local generation that
introduces hallucination in cases like the parity.

6    D ISCUSSION
Does local generation bias still hold for real world distribution? In our analysis and synthetic
text distribution, the condition that different token symbols are independent plays a critical role. Is
our discovered bias and mechanism still robust when the distribution does not strictly satisfy this
requirement? We conduct experiments on real world text distributions to answer these concerns. We
construct two datasets, one rendering 1,000 common English words and the other contains 1,000
common Chinese characters. When using diffusion model to learn score matching and generate
samples, we observe similar phenomenon persists to happen. Both models go through the “fuzzy-
hallucination-overfitting” three phases, randomly assembling radicals and letters in nonsensical way


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


at intial stage, and overfit to duplicate training data after long period of training.
                                                                                √      We also test LDR in
these scenarios, finding the same decreasing pattern. Note that we selcet ᾱt = 0.2 because signal-
noise-ratio increase significant at this stage and it is critical for determining the final content. Result
shows the same local generation bias still exists at early stage of training and leads to hallucination
for real text distribution. It also confirms that the decrease of LDR implies overfitting.


Figure 7: LDR trend for UNet learning Chinese and English texts (left). Hallucination example for
misspelling words (middle) and Chinese characters (right).

Moreover, we also conduct the LDR analysis on real-world models such as FLUX1 (Labs, 2024)
and StableDiffusion 3.5 (Podell et al., 2023). Since exact calculation the Jacobian matrix JR,θ (x)
requires large memory consumption for these enormous models, we use zeroth order approximation
to calculate LDR. We verify that it also exhibits high LDR in generating images with text content,
which corroborates our finding. For more details please refer to the appendix.


7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we have presented a detailed investigation into the phenomenon of hallucinations in
generating text-related contents. By combining empirical observations with theoretical analysis, we
have demonstrated it to be closely related to the implicit bias of denoising network called local-
generation bias. We find that such bias is not a mere consequence of the model’s architecture but
rather an inherent property of the training dynamics driven by score matching. It is shown that
the trained diffusion models, despite their global receptive field capabilities, tend to rely on local
information during the denoising process, generating symbols independently without capturing the
global structure. The key to form this bias is the near pairwise independence between marginal
distributions for each token symbol. We further introduce the Local Dependency Ratio (LDR) as a
novel metric to quantify the extent of this local generation bias and applied it to various diffusion
models, showing that this bias emerges early in training and persists through extensive training phases,
even in real-world distribution where independent condition does not strictly hold. This study may
shed light on the mechanisms behind hallucinations in diffusion models, highlighting the importance
of addressing local generation bias for more accurate and coherent generation in tasks requiring
complex global structure understanding.


R EFERENCES
Sumukh K Aithal, Pratyush Maini, Zachary C Lipton, and J Zico Kolter. Understanding hallucinations
  in diffusion models through mode interpolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09358, 2024.

Ali Borji. Qualitative failures of image generation models and their application in detecting deepfakes.
  Image and Vision Computing, 137:104771, 2023.

Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe
  Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh. Video
  generation models as world simulators. 2024. URL https://openai.com/research/
  video-generation-models-as-world-simulators.

Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Sicheng Gao, Xuhui Liu, Bohan Zeng, Sheng Xu, Yanjing Li, Xiaoyan Luo, Jianzhuang Liu,
  Xiantong Zhen, and Baochang Zhang. Implicit diffusion models for continuous super-resolution.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  10021–10030, 2023.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are all
  you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jikai Jin, Zhiyuan Li, Kaifeng Lyu, Simon Shaolei Du, and Jason D Lee. Understanding incremental
   learning of gradient descent: A fine-grained analysis of matrix sensing. In International Conference
   on Machine Learning, pp. 15200–15238. PMLR, 2023.
Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761, 2020.
Black Forest Labs. Flux. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux, 2024.
Qihao Liu, Adam Kortylewski, Yutong Bai, Song Bai, and Alan Yuille. Intriguing properties of
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00974, 2, 2023.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Kaifeng Lyu, Zhiyuan Li, Runzhe Wang, and Sanjeev Arora. Gradient descent on two-layer nets:
  Margin maximization and simplicity bias. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:12978–12991, 2021.
Hartmut Maennel, Olivier Bousquet, and Sylvain Gelly. Gradient descent quantizes relu network
  features. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08367, 2018.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.01952.
Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon Shashua, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and
  Yoav Shoham. In-context retrieval-augmented language models. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 11:1316–1331, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI
  2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III
  18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Dvir Samuel, Rami Ben-Ari, Simon Raviv, Nir Darshan, and Gal Chechik. Generating images of rare
  concepts using pre-trained diffusion models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 4695–4703, 2024.
Karen Simonyan. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image classification models and
  saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034, 2013.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.

Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.

Yang Song, Conor Durkan, Iain Murray, and Stefano Ermon. Maximum likelihood training of
  score-based diffusion models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:1415–1428,
  2021.

A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.

Blake Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Edward Moroshko, Pedro Savarese, Itay Golan,
  Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Kernel and rich regimes in overparametrized models. In
  Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3635–3673. PMLR, 2020.

Hongbin Ye, Tong Liu, Aijia Zhang, Wei Hua, and Weiqiang Jia. Cognitive mirage: A review of
  hallucinations in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06794, 2023.

Yue Zhang, Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Lemao Liu, Tingchen Fu, Xinting Huang, Enbo Zhao,
  Yu Zhang, Yulong Chen, et al. Siren’s song in the ai ocean: a survey on hallucination in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01219, 2023.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1      P ROOF FOR THE SADDLE POINT T HEOREM 5.2

For any θ ∈ M , we can set wi,j,t = ci,j,t ei for any neuron that ai,j,t ̸= 0, where ci,j,t ∈ R are
                                   (i)
                                                  ai,j,t σ(ci,j,t x(i) + bi,j,t ) depend only on the i-th
                                              P
scalars. Then the network outputs sθ (x) =
coordinate of the input x.
Now we compute the gradient for wi,j,t as
              d                      (i)
                 wi,j,t = −2Ext (sθ (xt ) − yi (xt ))ai,j,t σ ′ (wi,j,t ⊤
                                                                          xt + bi,j,t )xt
              ds
                                      (i)                          (i)
                        = −2Ex0 ,ξ sθ (xt )ai,j,t σ ′ (ci,j,t xt + bi,j,t )xt
                                                    √            (i)   √
                        + 2Ex0 ,ξ ai,j,t ξ (i) σ ′ ( ᾱt ci,j,t x0 + 1 − ᾱt ci,j,t ξ (i) + bi,j,t )xt
                            d
Now we wish to show that ds   wi,j,t is still along the direction of ei , thereby gradient flow does not
escape the region of M . This is done by the following two lemmas.
Lemma A.1. For any k ̸= i,
                                      (i)                      (i)
                             Ex0 ,ξ sθ (xt )ai,j,t σ ′ (ci,j,t xt + bi,j,t )e⊤
                                                                             k xt = 0.


Proof.
                           (i)                 (i)
                   Ex0 ,ξ sθ (xt )σ ′ (ci,j,t xt + bi,j,t )e⊤ k xt
                                                         (i)                         (i)          (k)
                             X
                   = Ex0 ,ξ       ai,j ′ ,t σ(ci,j ′ ,t xt + bi,j ′ ,t )σ ′ (ci,j,t xt + bi,j,t )xt
                                 j′



                                                          12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               (i)           (k)
Notice that by Assumption 5.1, x0 and x0 are independent, and for standard Gaussian ξ (i) and
                                     (k) √     (k)  √
ξ (k) are independent. Furthermore Ext = ᾱt Ex0 + 1 − ᾱt Eξ (k) = 0. Therefore,
                         (i)                     (i)
               Ex0 ,ξ sθ (xt )σ ′ (ci,j,t xt + bi,j,t )e⊤  k xt
                                                      (i)                         (i)                  (k)
                  X
               =        ai,j ′ ,t [Ex(i) σ(ci,j ′ ,t xt + bi,j ′ ,t )σ ′ (ci,j,t xt + bi,j,t )][Ex(k) xt ]
                                     t                                                              t
                    j′

                = 0.


Lemma A.2. For any k ̸= i,
                                     √            (i) √
                   Ex0 ,ξ ξ (i) σ ′ ( ᾱt ci,j,t x0 + 1 − ᾱt ci,j,t ξ (i) + bi,j,t )e⊤
                                                                                      k xt = 0.

                       (k)     √         (k)         √                                       (k)              (i)
Proof. Similarly, xt =             ᾱt x0 +              1 − ᾱt ξ (k) has mean 0. Since (x0 , ξ (k) ) and (x0 , ξ (i) ) are
independent, we know
                                √            (i) √
              Ex0 ,ξ ξ (i) σ ′ ( ᾱt ci,j,t x0 + 1 − ᾱt ci,j,t ξ (i) + bi,j,t )e⊤
                                                                                 k xt
                                 (i) ′ √          (i) √                   (i)          (k)
              = [Ex(i) ,ξ(i) ξ σ ( ᾱt ci,j,t x0 + 1 − ᾱt ci,j,t ξ + bi,j,t )][Ex(k) xt ]
                         0                                                                           t

               = 0.



Besides, for a neuron that ai,j,t = 0, from Lemma A.3 we know wi,j,t = 0 and bi,j,t = 0, so
 d
ds ai,j,t = 0. So ai,j,t will keep zero along the trajectory. Thus M is indeed an invariant set under
gradient flow.
Finally we calculate the LDR value for the network. Notice that
                          ∂ (i)       X
                            sθ (x) =      ai,j,t σ ′ (ci,j,t x(i) + bi,j,t )ci,j,t ei
                         ∂x
is always along the direction ei , for any R ⊂ [d] and j ̸∈ R there is
                                                         ∂ (R)
                                                     (     s (x))⊤ ej = 0|R| .
                                                         ∂x θ

Therefore by definition there is LDR(θ, R) = 1.

A.2    P ROOF FOR THE IMPLICIT TRAINING BIAS T HEOREM 5.3

Here we consider a fixed t and target dimension i, and  Pwe omit the subscripts of t and i for the
simplicity of notations. Thus for the network sθ (x) = j∈[m] aj σ(wj⊤ x + bj ), we optimize it via
GF on the square loss L(θ) = Ext =x (sθ (x) − yi (x))2 as


                                d
                                   aj = −2Ex (sθ (x) − yi (x))σ(wj⊤ x + bj )
                               ds
                               d
                                  wj = −2Ex (sθ (x) − yi (x))aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )x
                               ds
                                d
                                   bj = −2Ex (sθ (x) − yi (x))aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )
                                ds


We write θ(s) to denote the value of the parameters at time s. First we observe that the two layers of
the network stay balanced throughout the course of the training process.
           d
Lemma A.3. ds (a2j − ∥wj ∥2 − b2j ) = 0.


                                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. This is obtained directly as
                        d 2                             d             d          d
                           (aj − ∥wj ∥2 − b2j ) = 2aj aj − 2wj⊤ wj − 2bj bj
                        ds                             ds            ds          ds
                                                = −4Ex (sθ (x) − y(x))aj σ(wj⊤ x + bj )


                                                −σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )(wj⊤ x + bj )


                                                         = 0.


                       q
Therefore aj = sgn(aj ) ∥wj ∥2 + b2j through out the process.

A.2.1       G ROWTH R ATE F OR THE F IRST L AYER W EIGHT
Inspired by the G-function (Maennel et al., 2018; Lyu et al., 2021), when the initialization is very
small, the neural network output sθ (x) ≈ 0, so we can expand the loss as
                     L(θ) = Ex (sθ (x) − yi (x))2 = Ex yi (x)2 − 2sθ (x)yi (x) + O(s2θ (x))
So the initial trajectory of the neural network aims to optimize a surrogate loss L̃(θ) = Ex −
2sθ (x)yi (x). We define the parameters θ̃ = (ãj , w̃j , b̃j ) to be the parameters run specifically for the
surrogate loss, namely, let θ̃(0) = θ(0) and
                                                d
                                                   ãj = 2Ex yi (x)σ(w̃j⊤ x + b̃j )
                                               ds
                                               d
                                                  w̃j = 2Ex yi (x)ãj σ ′ (w̃j⊤ x + b̃j )x
                                               ds
                                                d
                                                   b̃j = 2Ex yi (x)ãj σ ′ (w̃j⊤ x + b̃j ).
                                                ds
                                                                           q
                        d
We will have similarly, ds (ã2j − ∥w̃j ∥2 − b̃2j ) = 0, so ãj = sgn(ãj ) ∥w̃j ∥2 + b̃2j through out the
process. Then we can actually show that the scale of ãj grows exponentially as a function of the
                   w̃     b̃
direction of ( |ãjj| , |ãjj | ) as
Theorem A.4. Under Assumption 5.1, the weight of each neuron |ai,j,t | grows exponentially in time:
for every i, t, there exists a function Ki,t : S d → R such that
                                                            Z s                                    ! !
                                                                      w̃i,j,t (τ ) b̃i,j,t (τ )
        |ãi,j,t (s)| = |ãi,j,t (0)| exp 2sgn(ãi,j,t (0))     Ki,t               ,                dτ
                                                             0       |ãi,j,t |(τ ) |ãi,j,t |(τ )

The function Ki,t marks the growth rate. The rate satisfy
                          √                                          √
       • 0 < Ki,t (w, b) < 1 − ᾱt when w(i) > 0; 0 > Ki,t (w, b) > − 1 − ᾱt , when w(i) < 0.

         • When w(i) > 0, the maximal value of Ki,t (w, b) is uniquely achieved at (w, b) =
           √ 1 ∗ 2 (ei , D∗ ) for some D∗ > 0; When w(i) < 0, the minimal value of Ki,t (w, b)
                1+(D )
            is uniquely achieved at (w, b) = √                  1
                                                                        (−ei , D∗ ).
                                                              1+(D ∗ )2

                                                         w̃i,j,t (τ )   b̃i,j,t (τ )
         • the maximally-growing neuron directions |ãi,j,t     |(τ ) |ãi,j,t |(τ ) =
                                                                      ,                √ 1 ∗ 2 (ei , D∗ ) for
                                                                                        1+(D )

                           w̃i,j,t (τ ) b̃i,j,t (τ )      1                     ∗
           ai,j,t > 0 and |ã |(τ ) , |ã |(τ ) = √           ∗ 2
                                                                    (−ei , D ) for ai,j,t < 0 are invariant
                                       i,j,t          i,j,t             1+(D )
           under gradient flow.

                   d       w̃i,j,t (τ )   b̃i,j,t (τ )
         • ai,j,t dτ Ki,t |ãi,j,t |(τ ) |ãi,j,t |(τ ) ≥ 0.
                                        ,

We will break the theorem by parts. First let’s define the function K with the following lemma.


                                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma A.5. There exists a function K : S d → R such that
                                             Z s                         ! !
                                                    w̃j (τ ) b̃j (τ )
                 |ãj (s)| = |ãj (0)| exp 2     K           ,            dτ
                                              0    |ãj |(τ ) |ãj |(τ )
when ãj (0) > 0, and
                                                        Z s                                !        !
                                                                    w̃j (τ ) b̃j (τ )
                      |ãj (s)| = |ãj (0)| exp −2            K              ,                 dτ
                                                         0         |ãj |(τ ) |ãj |(τ )
when ãj (0) < 0.

Proof. We know
                                    d
                                       ãj = 2Ex yi (x)σ(w̃j⊤ x + b̃j )
                                    ds
                                                                 w̃j ⊤     b̃j
                                           = 2|ãj |Ex yi (x)σ(        x+        )
                                                                |ãj |    |ãj |
The proof is then done by taking K(w, b) = Ex yi (x)σ(w⊤ x + b). Notice that we only query K
when ∥w∥2 + b2 = 1.

Proof of Theorem A.4. Now we take a closer examination of the function K. Let ei be the unit vector
along the i-th dimension and Pi = I − ei e⊤
                                          i be the projection
                                                       √         √ removing the i-th dimension.
                                                              matrix
Since the data x is sampled through the process x = ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ξ for x0 ∈ {±1}d and
ξ ∼ N (0, I), we know
          K(w, b) = Ex yi (x)σ(w⊤ x + b)
                                    √           √                 √
                  = Ex0 ,ξ (ξ (i) σ( ᾱt w⊤ x0 + 1 − ᾱt w⊤ Pi ξ + 1 − ᾱt w(i) ξ (i) + b))

             √                 √                              √
Define A =       ᾱt w⊤ x0 +       1 − ᾱt w⊤ Pi ξ + b, B =       1 − ᾱt w(i) . since both A, B are independent
to ξ (i) ,
                               K(w, b) = Ex0 ,ξ ξ (i) σ(A + Bξ (i) )
                                           1                     A
                                         = EA (B + |B|erf( √ ))
                                           2                      2B
                                                         2
                                                           R x −s2
where we use the standard error function as erf(x) = √π 0 e ds ∈ [−1, 1]. Furthermore, define
     √                √                                        √       ⊤   √        ⊤
C = ( ᾱt w⊤ Pi x0 + 1 − ᾱt w⊤ Pi ξ + b)2 + (w(i) )2 , D = ᾱt w Pi x0 +w(i)1−ᾱt w Pi ξ+b , we know
           q
                         C
B = sgn(B) (1 − ᾱt ) 1+D   2 , and

           √                      r                       r                               r               !
             1 − ᾱt                    C               1      C              D                   ᾱt
K(w, b) =              Esgn(B)               + Ex(i) =1               erf p             +
               2                     1 + D2       0     2 1 + D2            2(1 − ᾱt )       2(1 − ᾱt )
                      r                                 r              !!
                    1      C                D                 ᾱt
        +Ex(i) =−1              2
                                  erf p               −
            0       2 1+D                 2(1 − ᾱt )      2(1 − ᾱt )
Observe that as x0 and ξ are independent with Ex0 = Eξ = 0, and x0 have pairwise independent
entries,
             (i)
       EC|x0 = Eᾱt (w⊤ Pi x0 )2 + (1 − ᾱt )(w⊤ Pi ξ)2 + (w(i) )2 + b2 = ∥w∥2 + b2 = 1.
When w(i) > 0, since erf(x) ∈ [−1, 1], we always have K(w, b) > 0. In this case, by Jensen’s
inequality,
                    √                                                      r             !
                      1 − ᾱt            1           1         D                ᾱt
         K(w, b) ≤             sup √           1 + erf p                 +
                        2     D∈R    1 + D2          2       2(1 − ᾱt )     2(1 − ᾱt )
                                            r             !!
                   1             D               ᾱt
                 + erf p                  −
                   2          2(1 − ᾱt )     2(1 − ᾱt )


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Symmetrically as erf is an odd function, when w(i) < 0, there is K(w, b) < 0, and
                       √                                                                    r                       !
                      1 − ᾱt          1           1          D                                      ᾱt
         K(w, b) ≥ −          sup √           1 − erf p                 +
                        2     D∈R     1+D  2       2        2(1 − ᾱt )                           2(1 − ᾱt )
                                         r             !!
                  1           D               ᾱt
                 − erf p               −                  .
                  2        2(1 − ᾱt )     2(1 − ᾱt )

Since erf is odd, K(w, b) = −K(−w, b), so we only need √         to consider the case where w(i) > 0. In
this case, the maximum of |K| is achieved when EC = (E C)2 and D = D∗ > 0 that maximizes
the above functions, namely when w⊤ Pi = 0 and |wb(i) | = D∗ . By the first-order condition of
optimality, let
                                                   r                !                             r              !!
               1           1            D                   ᾱt           1           D                 ᾱt
f (D) = √              1 + erf p                 +                      + erf p                −
             1 + D2        2         2(1 − ᾱt )       2(1 − ᾱt )        2        2(1 − ᾱt )      2(1 − ᾱt )
                                                                                                       (5)
then we know dD  d
                   f (D∗ ) = 0, namely
                                                                !2                                               !2 
    1 + (D∗ )2                         ∗                                                  ∗
                                                 r                                                   r
                   exp − p         D                  ᾱt           + exp − p       D                    ᾱt
    p                                          +                                                  −                     
D∗ 2π(1 − ᾱt )                    2(1 − ᾱt )     2(1 − ᾱt )                        2(1 − ᾱt )      2(1 − ᾱt )
                                                                            !                                           !!
                                               D∗                                          D∗
                                                           r                                            r
                                  1                                 ᾱt         1                                ᾱt
                         = 1 + erf p                    +                     + erf p                −
                                  2         2(1 − ᾱt )         2(1 − ᾱt )     2        2(1 − ᾱt )        2(1 − ᾱt )
                             √
Lemma A.6. |K(w, b)| ≤           1 − ᾱt .


Proof. By symmetry, WLOG we consider the case where w(i) > 0. Then
                      √                                                                    r                       !
                       1 − ᾱt            1           1         D                                   ᾱt
          K(w, b) ≤             sup √           1 + erf p                 +
                         2     D∈R    1+D    2        2       2(1 − ᾱt )                        2(1 − ᾱt )
                                             r             !!
                    1             D               ᾱt
                  + erf p                  −
                    2          2(1 − ᾱt )     2(1 − ᾱt )
                     √
                       1 − ᾱt      1 1
                  ≤            (1 + + )
                    √ 2             2 2
                  = 1 − ᾱt .


                                                                                                       w̃j (τ )     b̃j (τ )
Next we examine the dynamics of a neuron along this optimal direction                                 |ãj |(τ ) , |ãj |(τ )       =
√     1
              (ei , D∗ ) with w⊤ Pi = 0 and wb(i) = D∗ . By Theorem 5.2 we know that the gradient of
    1+(D ∗ )2
w̃j is also along the direction of ei ; furthermore, direct calculation plugging the above first-order
condition, we arrive at
            d                                    √            √
            ds b                   Ex0 ,ξ ξσ ′ (( ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ξ + D∗ )w(i) )
          d
                   =           √           √                   √
                                                           ′ (( ᾱ x +
                                                                       √               ∗ )w (i) )
                                                                                                  = D∗ .
         ds  w (i)   Ex0 ,ξ ξ(   ᾱ x
                                   t 0  +     1  − ᾱt ξ)σ        t 0    1 − ᾱt ξ + D


                                                    w̃j (τ )     b̃j (τ )
This shows that a neuron along the direction       |ãj |(τ ) , |ãj |(τ )       = (w, b) = √     1
                                                                                                          (ei , D∗ ) keeps
                                                                                                1+(D ∗ )2
the same direction during the course of the dynamics, thus the weight ãj can maintain the maximum
growing rate.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally we calculate the rate of change of the function K. Since for the vector z(τ ) = (w̃j (τ ), b̃j (τ )),
 z(τ )       w̃j (τ )     b̃j (τ )       d
∥z(τ )∥ = ( |ãj |(τ ) , |ãj |(τ ) ) ∈ S , we know

                        d z(τ )         zz ⊤         1     d
                                  = (I − ⊤ (τ ))             z(τ )
                       dτ ∥z(τ )∥       z z      ∥z(τ )∥ dτ
                                        zz ⊤ 1
                                  = (I − ⊤ )       2Ex yi (x)ãj σ ′ (w̃j⊤ x + b̃j )(x, 1).
                                        z z |ãj |
Meanwhile, as we calculate ∇K in the tangent space of z/∥z∥ on S d ,
                                 z(τ )          zz ⊤                 w̃j ⊤       b̃j
                       ∇K(              ) = (I − ⊤ )Ex yi (x)σ ′ ((        ) x+        )(x, 1)
                                ∥z(τ )∥         z z                 |ãj |      |ãj |
                                                       zz ⊤
                                              = (I −        )Ex yi (x)σ ′ (w̃j⊤ x + b̃j )(x, 1)
                                                       z⊤z
Therefore

                     d          z(τ )                            z(τ )             d z(τ )
         ãj (τ )      K                     = ãj (τ )∇K
                    dτ         ∥z(τ )∥                          ∥z(τ )∥           dτ ∥z(τ )∥
                                                                                                               2
                                                                   zz ⊤
                                             = 2|ãj (τ )| (I −         )Ex yi (x)σ ′ (w̃j⊤ x + b̃j )(x, 1)        ≥ 0.
                                                                   z⊤z



A.2.2     T HE LDR DYNAMICS
Here we provide a proof for the main theorem Theorem 5.3. First we give a characterization of the
LDR for models near the invariant set M .
                          (i)
Lemma A.7. If a network sθ (x) = j aj σ(wjT x + bj ) has for k1 > 0, k2 > k0 , 1 > k4 > k3 > 0,
                                    P


        • For all j, a2j = ∥wj ∥2 + b2j .
                                                                      (i)                      (i)
        • For all j, either |aj | ≤ k0 or |aj |∥wj − wj ei ∥ ≤ k1 aj wj .
                                                                             bj         bj ′
        • There is j, j ′ such that aj ≥ k2 , aj ′ ≤ −k2 ,                    (i)   ,    (i)   ∈ [k3 , k4 ].
                                                                            |wj | |wj ′ |


Then there is function P such that the LDR for the network can be bounded as
                                                                  p
                                                        k22 − mk02 1 + k42
               LDR(θ, {i}) ≥ P (k1 , k3 , k4 ) max( 2                 p        , 0)2 .
                                                   k2 (1 + k1 ) + mk02 1 + k42
Furthermore P is continuous with limk1′ to0 P (k1 , k3 , k4 ) = 1.

Namely, a network will have high LDR when

        • any neuron j either has small weight |aj | (thus does not contribute much to the network
          output) or its weight wi align with ei well;
        • for the majority of data, at least one neuron with large weight is activated.

Specifically, the first condition states that the network parameter is close to some parameters in
the invariant set M , and the second ensures that such a closeness is on a function level, so that
the closeness in the parameter space can be converted into the closeness in the function space, and
eventually into the closeness in the LDR measure which only depends on the functions.

Proof. We calculate
                                             ∂           X
                                                sθ (x) =   aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )wj .
                                             ∂x          j


                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore by the definition of LDR, we have for the numerator,
                      ∂              X                         (i)
                ∥e⊤i     sθ (x)∥2 = (   aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )wj )2
                     ∂x               j
                                                                       (i)
                                          X
                                  ≥ max(          aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )wj − mk02 , 0)2 ,
                                                    |aj |≥k0

and for the denominator,
                       ∂               X
                   ∥      sθ (x)∥2 = ∥    aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )wj ∥2
                       ∂x               j
                                          X
                                   ≤ [∥        aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )wj ∥ + mk02 ]2
                                             |aj |≥k0
                                                                           (i)
                                              X
                                     ≤ [(               aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )wj )(1 + k1 ) + mk02 ]2
                                             |aj |≥k0



Furthermore there is
             X                          (i)   k2
                   aj σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj )wj ≥ p 2 2 [σ ′ (wj⊤ x + bj ) + σ ′ (wj⊤′ x + bj ′ )]
           |a |≥k
                                             1 + k4
              j    0



Therefore by definition we have
                                                                                              p
                                                                k 2 − mk02 1 + k42
  LDR(θ, {i}) ≥ Pr(wj⊤ x + bj > 0 ∨ wj⊤′ x + bj ′ > 0) max( 2 2               p        , 0)2 .
                                                           k2 (1 + k1 ) + mk02 1 + k42
Let the function
     P (k1 , k3 , k4 ) = inf{Pr(w⊤ x + b > 0 ∨ (w′ )⊤ x + (b′ ) > 0) :
                       ∥w∥ = ∥w′ ∥ = 1, ∥w − w(i) ei ∥ ≤ k1 w(i) , ∥w′ − (w′ )(i) ei ∥ ≤ −k1 (w′ )(i) ,
                       b, b′ ∈ [k3 , k4 ]}
Then we know Pr(wj⊤ x + bj > 0 ∨ wj⊤′ x + bj ′ > 0) ≥ P (k1 , k3 , k4 ).
Finally, as k1 → 0, there is ∥w − w(i) ei ∥, ∥w′ − (w′ )(i) ei ∥ → 0. Since b, b′ , w(i) > 0 and (w′ )(i) <
0, so the set
   {w⊤ x + b > 0 ∨ (w′ )⊤ x + (b′ ) > 0} → {w(i) x(i) + b > 0 ∨ (w′ )(i) x(i) + (b′ ) > 0} = Rd .
By the continuity of the probability measure for x, we know the function P has limit Pr(x ∈ Rd ) =
1.

Proof of Theorem 5.3. Since LDR(θ, R1 ∪ R2 ) ≥ LDR(θ, R1 ) + LDR(θ, R2 ), WLOG we con-
sider the case that R = {i} to be of size 1.
                                                                                      √
For any c > 0, let K0 = max(sup{K(w, b) : ∥w − w(i) ei ∥ > 8c w(i) }, 1− ᾱt
                                                                             ). From the discussion
                                                           √           2
of the function K from Theorem A.4, we know 0 < K0 < 1 − ᾱt . Since the √         function K has
a unique maximum at √ 1 ∗ 2 (ei , D∗ ), we can choose a real number δ ∈ (0, 1 − α̃t − K0 )
                               1+(D )
and a neighborhood Oϵ = {(w, b) : ∥w − w(i) ei ∥ < ϵw(i) , | wb(i) − D∗ | < ϵ} such that for all
                             √
(w, b) ̸∈ Oϵ , K(w, b) ≤ 1 − ᾱt − δ. Pick k3 = D∗ − ϵ, k4 = D∗ + ϵ, and k1 < 8c such that
                        c
P (k1 , k3 , k4 ) > 1 − 2 in Lemma A.7.
Now pick Mc so that with high probability, at initialization there are neurons j ,j ′ such that aj > 0,
   w     b      √                                     w ′   b ′       √
K( ajj , ajj ) > 1 − α̃t − δ and aj ′ < 0, K( |a j′ | , |aj ′ | ) < − 1 − α̃t + δ. Since the neuron
                                                       j     j
parameters follow i.i.d. initial distributions, this is always possible with enough network width.
From Theorem A.4, we have the following facts:


                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                √                                         √
       • ãj (τ ) ≥ ãj (0)e2τ ( 1−ᾱt −δ) ; ãj ′ (τ ) ≤ ãj ′ (0)e2τ ( 1−ᾱt −δ) .
                                               w̃k (τ )
       • For any neuron k, if sgn(ãk (τ ))K( |ã       , b̃k (τ ) ) > K0 , from the definition of K0
                                                 k |(τ ) |ãk |(τ )
                                              (i)                   (i)
         there must be ∥w̃k (τ ) − w̃k (τ )ei ∥ ≤ 8c |w̃k (τ )|; otherwise for all 0 ≤ s ≤ τ there
                            w̃k (s)
         is sgn(ãk (s))K( |ã       , b̃k (s) ) ≤ sgn(ãk (τ ))K( |ã
                               k |(s) |ãk |(s)
                                                                    w̃k (τ )
                                                                             , b̃k (τ ) ) ≤ K0 , so we will have
                                                                      k |(τ ) |ãk |(τ )

                                                    |ãj (τ )| ≤ |ãj (0)|e2τ K0 .
                                                                     64m supk |ãk (0)|
Now pick τc so that τc > 2(√1−ᾱ1−δ−K ) ln                                                √        , then we can apply
                                          t         0     min(|aj (0)|,|aj ′ (0)|)(4c+c2 )    1+k42
                                                                                                     √
                                                                                                 2τ ( 1−ᾱt −δ)
Lemma A.7 with k0 = supk |ãk (0)|e2τ K0 and k2 = min(|aj (0)|, |aj ′ (0)|)e                                      , then the
LDR score for τ > τc is
                                                                2
                                        c   c
                                 c 1 − 16 − 64          c     c
               LDR(θ, {i}) ≥ (1 − )(   3c   c2
                                               )2 ≥ (1 − )(1 − )2 > 1 − c.
                                 2 1 + 16 + 64          2     4



A.3    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

The details of experiment formulation is as below. Recall that a text distribution includes a set of
discrete symbols S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sK } and a spelling/grammar rule PG . A list of symbol tokens are
further rendered into ambient space by a function h : S 7→ Rd which maps each symbol to a vector
in ambient space like image pixels or a single scalar. The full signal is obtained by concatenating
these vectors. We describe S and PG we used in experiments.
Parity: There are only two symbols S =
                                     hQ{1, −1}. Thei rule is that there needs to be even number of
                               1        L
symbol s1 . Namely PG (I) = 2L−1 · I    j=1 sij = 1 . The ambient space rendering function can
either by a single scalar h(si ) = si . It can also be two pixel image or embedding vector templates in
ambient observation space {o−1 , o1 } and h(si ) = osi .
Quarter-MNIST: We combine four MNIST digits’ image to become a whole figure. the symbol
system is all digits S = [9]. We fix the length L = 4 and requires that s1 + s2 = s3 + s4 , and we
have PG (I) = Z1 · I [s1 + s2 = s3 + s4 ], Z = 670 is some normalization constant. The ambient
space rendering function is a probabilistic image drawing function h : {0, . . . , 9} 7→ Rd which maps
each digit to its hand-writing image.
Dyck: We also test dyck grammar, where S = {+1, −1}. A dyck sequence must have even number
                                        Pi                                        P2k
of tokens s1 , . . . , s2k , and satisfy j=1 si ≥ 0 for i ∈ [2k]. Also it requires j=1 si = 0. This
can be regarded as a valid operation sequence for a stack where +1 means push and −1 means pop.
The requirement essentially means the stack cannot pop if it is empty, also it needs to be empty at
start and end. The rendering function is similar as parity. In our experiment we use left and right
parenthesis to represent +1 and −1, respectively.
As for denoising networks, we use attention-augmented UNet, where each block is equipped with
linear attention and middle bottleneck equipped with full attention. The image size is 64 and the initial
hidden width is 64, which means the bottleneck dimension is 512. We also adopted standard DiT-B
model with hidden size 384 and patch size 8. We train with Adam optimizer with lr = 8 × 10−5 ,
batch size bs = 16, total schedule ranging from 160k to 700k iterations.
Training Schedule and Model Details We use mainly two types of model for training in our
experiments, namely DiT and UNet augmented with attention. The DiT is standard DiT-S model,
with 33M parameter. The UNet initial channel is 64, and total parameter is ∼ 35.7M . We training
the score matching objective with equal λt . The training batch size is 16, 180k iteration for Quater-
MNIST and 1.1M iteration for parity parathensis images.

A.4    T HE R ESULTS ON R ECENT M ODELS

We also conduct experiment on most recent models such as StableDiffusion 3.5-medium (Esser et al.,
2024) and FLUX1-dev. We use prompt that requires the model to generate rich text content without


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


specifying concrete words. For instance, “A piece of calligraphy art”, “A newspaper reporting news”,
“A blackboard with formulas”. And here are the test results, we can see that text hallucination is still
ubiquitous. The seeds of six images of each model under same prompt are from 0 to 2, so all people
can reproduce these results.
We also tried prompt to specify the content, i.e. “A paper saying ’To be or not to be, it is a question’.”
The results are plotted below. We can see both SD3.5 and FLUX1 still have text issues. SD3.5 has
missing words or incorrect spelling more often.


 Figure 8: Visualizations of StableDiffusion 3.5’s results on prompt “A blackboard with formulas”


  Figure 9: Visualizations of StableDiffusion 3.5’s results on prompt “A piece of calligraphy art.”


Figure 10: Visualizations of StableDiffusion 3.5’s results on prompt “A newspaper reporting news.”


A.5    V ISUALIZATIONS

In this part, we will show detailed visualizations of our experiments. For each experiment, we
visualize following

• Generated hallucination samples.
• The trend of LDR along training process.
• The heatmap of LDR at some critical denoising timestep.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Figure 11: Visualizations of FLUX1’s results on prompt “A blackboard with formulas”


       Figure 12: Visualizations of FLUX1’s results on prompt “A piece of calligraphy art.”


     Figure 13: Visualizations of FLUX1’s results on prompt “A newspaper reporting news.”


Figure 14: Visualizations of StableDiffusion 3.5’s results on prompt “A paper saying ’To be or not to
be, it is a question’.”



                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Visualizations of FLUX1’s results on prompt “A paper saying ’To be or not to be, it is a
question’.”


A.6     LDR A NALYSIS FOR FLUX-1- DEV AND S TABLE D IFFUSION 3.5

we also conduct proposed LDR analysis on current models such as SD3.5 and FLUX1. However,
Exact calculation the Jacobian matrix JR,θ (x) requires large memory consumption for these enormous
models with billions of parameters. We use zeroth order approximation to test LDR.
Note that Eϵ [∥f (x0 + ϵ) − f (x0 )∥2 ] ≈ Eϵ ⟨ϵ, ∇x0 f (x)⟩2 . Therefore, we can set ϵ1 ∼
N (0, ϵId ) and get Eϵ1 ⟨ϵ1 , ∇x0 f (x)⟩2 = ϵ2 d∥∇x0 f (x)∥2 . Then set ϵ2 ∼ N (0, ϵPR PR⊤ ) to get
Eϵ2 ⟨ϵ2 , ∇x0 f (x)⟩2 = ϵ2 dR ∥PR ∇x0 f (x)∥2 . Taking ratio of these two terms and multiplying d/dR ,
we obtain an approximation of LDR. We test the average LDR with prompting “A blackboard with
formulas”. Total reverse timesteps are 50. Here are the approximated LDR results:

                    Timestep       50        40         30       20        10
                     FLUX1       0.9253    0.8078     0.7992   0.8208    0.7994
                      SD3.5      0.9692    0.8283     0.7912   0.5726    0.4534

                           Table 1: LDR Results for FLUX1 and SD3.5

Apart from SD3.5 has a small LDR near the end (we do not know why), most LDR is relatively high,
which corroborates our finding. This means when generating text content images, the diffusion model
tend to care only local region for each part, without caring about underlying relation.

A.6.1    PARITY PARENTHESIS

Please refer to figure 7 for details of generated hallucination sample and LDR analysis. The LDR
heatmap is in figure 8.


Figure 16: Some examples of generated hallucination samples at 300k steps. Note
                                                                             √ that only half of
them satisfy parity constraint (even number of both parenthesis). The LDR at ᾱt = 0.1 is high
through all training procedure.



                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: An example of xt , x0 and LDR heatmap. The LDR in this image is 0.9736 and the
reference region is the second parenthesis. We can see the denoising model primarily only focues on
this parenthesis’ region to generate it. Therefore all the symbols are generated independent and fail
to satisfy parity constraint.


A.6.2    DYCK PARENTHESIS .
Perhaps surprisingly, we found that UNet model is capable of generating valid dyck sequences. After
60k iterations, the UNet model drops down and the accuracy for generated image increases. This can
also be validated from probing a parenthesis’ region to see which part of input noise the model is
looking at. We found that model will only focus on local noise at hallucination phase, resulting in a
high LDR. And when it overfits the data, the saliency map spreads globally and LDR decreases. See
figure 10 for more details.


Figure 18: Generation proportion graph and LDR for t = 96. The reference region is the position
at second parenthesis. Although seemed difficult, Dyck grammar is actually much easier to learn
and extrapolate, since there are strong correlations between parenthesis. Interesting, there is still a
hallucination phase, and hallucinations fades as LDR decreases.

A.6.3    Q UARTER MNIST.
The LDR analysis is shown in main content. Here we show some hallucinated generation and heatmap
of LDR. As shown in figure 11, we can see that both UNet and DiT generate the top-left digit solely
by local region’s noise. As a consequence, these four digits are generated independently, therefore
can not capture the innate relationship and rules.

A.6.4    E NGLISH WORD AND C HINESE CHARACTERS .
Does hallucination in real-world text distribution also stem from local generation bias? We run
experiments to verify this mechanism with image distribution contains common English words and
Chinese characters. These English words are
[a, abandon, ability, able, about, above, accept, according, account, across, act, action,activity, ac-
tually, add, address, administration, admit, adult, affect, after, again,against, age, agency, agent,
ago, agree, agreement, ahead, air, all, allow, almost, alone,along, already, also, although, always,
American, among, amount, analysis, and, animal, another, answer, any, anyone, anything, appear,
apply, approach, area, argue, arm, around,arrive, art, article, artist, as, ask, assume, at, attack, attention,
attorney, audience,author, authority, available, avoid, away, baby, back, bad, bag, ball, bank, bar, base,


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 19: The LDR analysis for 20k training steps (first row, in hallucination) and 170k training
steps (second row, correctly extrapolate). We can see a discrepancy for model’s behaviors in terms
of local v.s. global dependency. When model learns to correctly generate symbols, it will attend
to overall region for coordinating different symbols, which means LDR is low. From left to right
columns are xt , x0 and LDR heatmap.


Figure 20: DiT generated Hallucinated samples for Quarter-MNIST dataset. Each four digit form a
sample


be,beat,beautiful, because, become, bed, before, begin, behavior, behind, believe, benefit, best,better,
between, beyond, big, bill, billion, bit, black, blood, blue, board, body,book,born, both, box, boy,
break, bring, brother, budget, build, building, business, but,buy,by, call, camera, campaign, can,
cancer, candidate, capital, car, card, care, career,carry,case, catch, cause, cell, center, central, century,
certain, certainly, chair, challenge,chance, change, character, charge, check, child, choice, choose,
church, citizen, city,civil,claim, class, clear, clearly, close, coach, cold, collection, college, color,
come,commercial,common, community, company, compare, computer, concern, condition, confer-
ence, Congress,consider,consumer, contain, continue, control, cost, could, country, couple, course,
court, cover,create, crime, cultural, culture, cup, current, customer, cut, dark, data, daughter,day,dead,
deal, death, debate, decade, decide, decision, deep, defense, degree, Democrat,democratic,describe,
design, despite, detail, determine, develop, development, die, difference,different,difficult, dinner,
direction, director, discover, discuss, discussion, disease, do, doctor,dog, door, down, draw, dream,
drive, drop, drug, during, each, early, east, easy,eat,economic, economy, edge, education, effect,
effort, eight, either, election, else,employee,end, energy, enjoy, enough, enter, entire, environment,
environmental, especially,establish,even, evening, event, ever, every, everybody, everyone, everything,
evidence, exactly,example,executive, exist, expect, experience, expert, explain, eye, face, fact, factor,
fail,fall,family, far, fast, father, fear, federal, feel, feeling, few, field, fight, figure,fill,film, final, finally,
financial, find, fine, finger, finish, fire, firm, first, fish,five,floor, fly, focus, follow, food, foot, for,
force, foreign, forget, form, former,forward,four, free, friend, from, front, full, fund, future, game,
garden, gas, general,generation,get, girl, give, glass, go, goal, good, government, great, green, ground,


                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure
√      21: The LDR analysis for UNet (top row) and DiT (second) learning Quarter-MNIST dataset.
  ᾱt = 0.1 and the reference region is top-left quarter. From left to right columns are xt , x0 and
LDR heatmap.


group, grow,growth, guess, gun, guy, hair, half, hand, hang, happen, happy, hard, have, he,head,health,
hear, heart, heat, heavy, help, her, here, herself, high, him, himself, his,history,hit, hold, home, hope,
hospital, hot, hotel, hour, house, how, however, huge, human,hundred,husband, I, idea, identify,
if, image, imagine, impact, important, improve, in, include,including, increase, indeed, indicate,
individual, industry, information, inside, instead,institution,interest, interesting, international, in-
terview, into, investment, involve, issue, it, item,its,itself, job, join, just, keep, key, kid, kill, kind,
kitchen, know, knowledge, land,language,large, last, late, later, laugh, law, lawyer, lay, lead, leader,
learn, least, leave,left,leg, legal, less, let, letter, level, lie, life, light, like, likely, line, list,listen,little,
live, local, long, look, lose, loss, lot, love, low, machine, magazine, main,maintain,major, majority,
make, man, manage, management, manager, many, market, marriage, material,matter,may, maybe,
me, mean, measure, media, medical, meet, meeting, member, memory, mention,message,method,
middle, might, military, million, mind, minute, miss, mission, model, modern,moment,money, month,
more, morning, most, mother, mouth, move, movement, movie, Mr, Mrs,much, music,must, my,
myself, name, nation, national, natural, nature, near, nearly, necessary,need, network,never, new,
news, newspaper, next, nice, night, no, none, nor, north, not, note,nothing, notice,now, n’t, number,
occur, of, off, offer, office, officer, official, often, oh, oil,ok, old,on, once, one, only, onto, open,
operation, opportunity, option, or, order,organization, other,others, our, out, outside, over, own,
owner, page, pain, painting, paper, parent,part, participant,particular, particularly, partner, party,
pass, past, patient, pattern, pay, peace,people, per,perform, performance, perhaps, period, person,
personal, phone, physical, pick, picture,piece, place,plan, plant, play, player, PM, point, police,
policy, political, politics, poor,popular, population,position, positive, possible, power, practice, pre-
pare, present, president, pressure,pretty, prevent,price, private, probably, problem, process, produce,
product, production, professional,professor, program,project, property, protect, prove, provide, pub-
lic, pull, purpose, push, put, quality,question, quickly,quite, race, radio, raise, range, rate, rather,
reach, read, ready, real, reality,realize, really,reason, receive, recent, recently, recognize, record,
red, reduce, reflect, region,relate, relationship,religious, remain, remember, remove, report, repre-
sent, Republican, require, research,resource, respond,response, responsibility, rest, result, return,
reveal, rich, right, rise, risk, road,rock, role,room, rule, run, safe, same, save, say, scene, school,
science, scientist, score, sea,season, seat,second, section, security, see, seek, seem, sell, send, senior,
sense, series, serious,serve, service,set, seven, several, sex, sexual, shake, share, she, shoot, short,
shot, should,shoulder, show, side,sign, significant, similar, simple, simply, since, sing, single, sister,
sit, site,situation, six, size,skill, skin, small, smile, so, social, society, soldier, some, somebody,
someone,something, sometimes,son, song, soon, sort, sound, source, south, southern, space, speak,
special, specific,speech, spend,sport, spring, staff, stage, stand, standard, star, start, state, state-
ment, station,stay, step, still,stock, stop, store, story, strategy, street, strong, structure, student, study,
stuff,style, subject, success,successful, such, suddenly, suffer, suggest, summer, support, sure, surface,
system,table, take, talk, task,tax, teach, teacher, team, technology, television, tell, ten, tend, term,
test, than,thank, that, the, their,them, themselves, then, theory, there, these, they, thing, think, third,
this, those,though, thought, thousand,threat, three, through, throughout, throw, thus, time, to, today,


                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


together, tonight,too, top, total, tough, toward,town, trade, traditional, training, travel, treat, treatment,
tree, trial, trip, trouble,true, truth, try, turn,TV, two, type, under, understand, unit, until, upon, use,
usually, value, various,very, victim, view, violence,visit, voice, vote, wait, walk, wall, want, war,
watch, water, way, we, weapon,wear, week, weight, well, west,western, what, whatever, when, where,
whether, which, while, white, who, whole, whom,whose, why, wide, wife, will,win, wind, window,
wish, with, within, without, woman, wonder, word, work, worker,world, worry, would, write,writer,
wrong, yard, yeah, year, yes, yet, you, young, your, yourself].


Figure 22: Diffusion generated results when trained on English common words’ image (first row) and
Chinese characters (second row). We find similar misspelling phenomenon for English generation
and glyph by randomly assembling radicals in Chinese characters.

Also we construct a dataset using 3,000 common Chinese characters and render them in Kai font
images. We use UNet to learn to generate images of these texts. The early stage generation results are
shown in figure 14. Interestingly, we observe very similar pattern as in modern large scale diffusion
models like StableDiffusion and Midjourney in our synthetic experiment. We probe denoising model
at stage when it has hallucination, and finds that they all have very high LDR, indicating they generate
letter or radicals independently and combine them.

A.7    VALIDATION OF T HEORETICAL F INDINGS

In this section, we corroborate our theoretical findings by experiments. We set d = 8, 16 and learn
just the first dimension of score function for parity points using a two-layer ReLU-activated MLP.
The model has 2000 hidden neurons and we set initialization scheme σinit = 1e − 3, bi (0) = 0, ai =
∥wi ∥2 . We train with small learning rate η = 1e − 6 and discover following interesting phenomena.

       • The loss curves exhibit a stair-like shape, meaning it has three phases.


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: The LDR analysis for model √ at 20k steps (first row) and 200k steps (second row) learning
on common English words dataset. ᾱt = 0.1 and the reference region is the first and second letter.
We can see that when model hallucinates, it only attends to local region, therefore randomly spelling
the letters. It will account globally when overfitting to reproduce words within the training dataset.
From left to right columns are xt , x0 and LDR heatmap.


       • These three phases correspond to best linear interpolation, best univariate interpolation, and
         optimal approximator.
       • At initial stage, the network’s weight wi aligns well with e1 , and stick with this state through
         the first and second stage.


(a) Three stairs shape loss. Each stage represents a        (b) The average norm for the first dimension and the
saddle point.                                               rest of weight parameter among hidden neurons. In
                                                            the first stage, the model only extracts the input’s
                                                            first dimension’s information, resulting in a local and
                                                            sparse input dependency.


As shown in figure 17. While the ground truth score function is not a univariate function of x(1) as in
left. The shaded area near the origin means the score function has also dependency on other input
dimensions x(j) , j > 1. However,The MLP is biased towards learning a univariate function. Even
though MLP has access to value from all input dimensions. This results in a local generation bias and
let the model independently sample each dimension. Therefore this model essentially samples on all
vertices on hypercube rather than parity points.


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(c) Phase 1: optimal linear interpo- (d) Phase 2: optimal univariate in- (e) Phase 3: global optimal multi-
lation.                              terpolation.                        variate approximation.

Figure 24: Three-phase functionality of learned MLP score network. The x-axis is x(1) . The MLP
performs local generation, if its output against x(i) is nearly a function curve with no ambiguity in
mapping.


                             Figure 25: The local generation bias in MLP.


                                                    28
