Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ETA -DYNAMICAL S TATE S PACE M ODELS FOR I NTE -
GRATIVE N EURAL DATA A NALYSIS

 Ayesha Vermani1 , Josue Nassar2 , Hyungju Jeon1 , Matthew Dowling1 , Il Memming Park1
 1
   Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Champalimaud Foundation, Portugal
 2
   RyvivyR, USA
 {ayesha.vermani, memming.park}@research.fchampalimaud.org



                                             A BSTRACT

         Learning shared structure across environments facilitates rapid learning and adap-
         tive behavior in neural systems. This has been widely demonstrated and applied in
         machine learning to train models that are capable of generalizing to novel settings.
         However, there has been limited work exploiting the shared structure in neural
         activity during similar tasks for learning latent dynamics from neural recordings.
         Existing approaches are designed to infer dynamics from a single dataset and can-
         not be readily adapted to account for statistical heterogeneities across recordings.
         In this work, we hypothesize that similar tasks admit a corresponding family of
         related solutions and propose a novel approach for meta-learning this solution
         space from task-related neural activity of trained animals. Specifically, we capture
         the variabilities across recordings on a low-dimensional manifold which concisely
         parametrizes this family of dynamics, thereby facilitating rapid learning of latent
         dynamics given new recordings. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on
         few-shot reconstruction and forecasting of synthetic dynamical systems, and neural
         recordings from the motor cortex during different arm reaching tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Latent variable models are widely used in neuroscience to extract dynamical structure underlying
high-dimensional neural activity (Pandarinath et al., 2018; Schimel et al., 2022; Dowling et al., 2024).
While latent dynamics provide valuable insights into behavior and generate testable hypotheses of
neural computation (Luo et al., 2023; Nair et al., 2023), they are typically inferred from a single
recording session. As a result, these models are sensitive to small variations in the underlying
dynamics and exhibit limited generalization capabilities. In parallel, a large body of work in machine
learning has focused on training models from diverse datasets that can rapidly adapt to novel settings.
However, there has been limited work on inferring generalizable dynamical systems from data, with
existing approaches mainly applied to settings with known low-dimensional dynamics (Yin et al.,
2021; Kirchmeyer et al., 2022).
Integrating noisy neural recordings from different animals and/or tasks for learning the underlying
dynamics presents a unique set of challenges. This is partly due to heterogeneities in recordings across
sessions such as the number and tuning properties of recorded neurons, as well as different stimulus
statistics and behavioral modalities across cognitive tasks. This challenge is further compounded by
the lack of inductive biases for disentangling the variabilities across dynamics into shared and dataset-
specific components. Recent evidence suggests that learned latent dynamics underlying activity of
task-trained biological and artificial neural networks demonstrate similarities when engaged in related
tasks (Gallego et al., 2018; Maheswaranathan et al., 2019; Safaie et al., 2023). In a related line of work,
neural networks trained to perform multiple cognitive tasks with overlapping cognitive components
learn to reuse dynamical motifs, thereby facilitating few-shot adaptation on novel tasks (Turner &
Barak, 2023; Driscoll et al., 2024).
Motivated by these observations, we propose a novel framework for meta-learning latent dynamics
from neural recordings (Vermani et al., 2024a). Our approach is to encode the variations in the
latent dynamical structure present across neural recordings in a low-dimensional vector, e ∈ Rde ,
which we refer to as the dynamical embedding. During training, the model learns to adapt a common


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.                                                                     B.
                              Subject C
                                                   Embedding                Generative Model   Embedding
                                                    Manifold                   Overview


               rates
                                                                                                Hypernetwork
                                time                                         Latent
     Hand                                                                    State
                              Subject Je
    Position   rates   movement onset


                                time                  Subject Ni

                                                                            Observation


                                           rates
                                                                                                        Shared weights

                                                         time


Figure 1: A. Neural recordings display heterogeneities in the number and tuning properties of
recorded neurons and reflect diverse behavioral responses. The low-dimensional embedding manifold
captures this diversity in dynamics. B. Our method learns to adapt a common latent dynamics
conditioned on the embedding via low-rank changes to the model parameters.


latent dynamical system model conditioned on the dynamical embedding. We learn the dynamical
embedding manifold from a diverse collection of neural recordings, allowing rapid learning of latent
dynamics in the analysis of data-limited regime commonly encountered in neuroscience experiments.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

        1. We propose a novel parameterization of latent dynamics that facilitates integration and
           learning of meta-structure over diverse neural recordings.
        2. We develop an inference scheme to jointly infer the embedding and latent state trajectory, as
           well as the corresponding dynamics model directly from data.
        3. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method on few-shot reconstruction and forecasting for
           synthetic datasets and motor cortex recordings obtained during different reaching tasks.


2     C HALLENGES WITH J OINTLY L EARNING DYNAMICS ACROSS DATASETS

Neurons from different sessions and/or subjects A.                      Example observations
are partially observed, non-overlapping and ex-
hibit diverse response properties. Even chronic
                                                            time                time                 time
recordings from a single subject exhibit drift in
neural tuning over time (Driscoll et al., 2017).   B.
                                                                                                1         M=2
                                                                                                          M = 20
Moreover, non-simultaneously recorded neural
activity lack pairwise correspondence between                                                0.75
                                                                                                   r2


single trials. This makes joint inference of la-
tent states and learning the corresponding latent                                             0.5
                                                                                                  1   25   50
dynamics by integrating different recordings ill-                                                   k-step

posed and highly non-trivial.                      Figure 2: A. Three different example neural record-
As an illustrative example, let’s consider a case ings, where the speed of the latent dynamics varies
where these recordings exhibit oscillatory latent across them. B. One generative model is trained on
dynamics with variable velocities (Fig. 2A). One M = 2 or M = 20 datasets. While increasing the
possible strategy for jointly inferring the dynam- number of datasets allows the model to learn limit
ics from these recordings is learning a shared dy- cycle, it is unable to capture the different speeds
namics model, along with dataset-specific like- leading to poor forecasting performance.
lihood functions that map these dynamics to
individual recordings (Pandarinath et al., 2018). However, without additional inductive biases, this
strategy does not generally perform well when there are variabilities in the underlying dynamics.
Specifically, when learning dynamics from two example datasets (M = 2), we observed that a model


                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with shared dynamics either learned separate solutions or overfit to one dataset, obscuring global
structure across recordings (Fig. 2A). When we increased the diversity of training data (M = 20),
the dynamics exhibited a more coherent global structure, albeit with an overlapping solution space
(Fig. 2B). As a result, this model had poor forecasting performance of neural activity in both cases,
which is evident in the k-step r2 (Fig. 2B). While we have a priori knowledge of the source of
variations in dynamics for this example, this is typically not the case with real neural recordings.
Therefore, we develop an approach for inferring the variation across recordings and use it to define a
solution space of related dynamical systems (Fig. 1A).

3       I NTEGRATING N EURAL R ECORDINGS FOR M ETA -L EARNING DYNAMICS
      1:M
Let y1:T  denote neural time series datasets of length T , with yti ∈ Rdyi , collected from M different
sessions and/or subjects performing related tasks. We are interested in learning a generative model
that can jointly describe the evolution of the latent states across these datasets and rapidly adapt
to novel datasets from limited trajectories. In this work, we focus on nonlinear state-space models
(SSM), a powerful class of generative models for spatio-temporal datasets. An SSM is described via
the following pair of equations (we drop the superscript for ease of presentation),
                                              zt | zt−1 ∼ pθ (zt | zt−1 ),                               (1)
                                                 yt | zt ∼ pϕ (yt | zt ),                                (2)
where zt ∈ Rdz is the latent state at time t, pθ (zt | zt−1 ) is the dynamics model and pϕ (yt | zt ) is the
likelihood function that maps the latent state to observed data.
We parametrize the dynamics as a Gaussian distribution pθ (zt | zt−1 ) = N (zt | fθ (zt−1 ), Q), where
the mean is modeled by a deep neural network (DNN) fθ and Q is the covariance matrix1 . As
previous work has shown that highly expressive likelihood and dynamics can cause optimization
issues (Bowman et al., 2015), we model the mean of the likelihood as an affine function of zt . For
instance, the likelihood for real-valued observations is defined as pϕ (yt | zt ) = N (yt | Czt + D, R).

3.1       H IERARCHICAL S TATE -S PACE M ODEL FOR M ULTIPLE DATASETS

We introduce a hierarchical structure in the latent dynamical system model to capture variations
across datasets and jointly describe the spatiotemporal evolution across M neural recordings in a
unified SSM. A natural choice for learning this generative model is a fully Bayesian approach, where
each dataset would have its own latent dynamics, parameterized by θi , and a hierarchical prior would
tie these dataset-specific parameters to shared parameters, θ ∼ p(θ) (Linderman et al., 2019), leading
to the following SSM,
                                              θi | θ ∼ p(θi | θ),                                        (3)
                                      zti | zt−1
                                             i
                                                   , θi ∼ N (zti | fθi (zt−1 i
                                                                               ), Qi ),                  (4)
                                               yti | zti ∼ pϕi (yti | zti ),                             (5)
where dataset specific likelihoods, pϕi (yti | zti ), are used to account for different dimensionality
and/or recording modality. If we assume p(θi | θ) is Gaussian, i.e., p(θi | θ) = N (θi | θ, Σ), we can
equivalently express the dynamics for the hierarchical generative model as,
                                                 εi ∼ N (εi | 0, Σ),                                     (6)
                                  zti | zt−1
                                         i
                                             , θ, εi ∼ N     zti | fθ+εi (zt−1
                                                                           i
                                                                               ), Qi

                                                                                              ,          (7)
                                                                 i
where the dataset-specific dynamics parameter, θ , is expressed as a sum of the shared parame-
ters, θ, and a dataset-specific term, εi . While this formulation is intuitive, the latent dynamics are
approximated using a DNN, which introduces a substantial number of parameters and constrains scal-
ability. To address these limitations, we propose a modified hierarchical framework that significantly
improves both scalability and parameter efficiency, making it suitable for large-scale settings.
Specifically, we introduce a low-dimensional latent variable, ei ∈ Rde , Rde ≪ Rdε —which we
refer to as the dynamical embedding—that encodes dynamical variations across datasets (Rusu et al.,
    1
        We note that Q can also be parameterized via a neural network as well.


                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2019). This dataset-specific dynamical embedding subsequently maps to the parameter space of
                                                                               i       i
the latent dynamics function via a hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2016), hϑ : Rde → Rdε . Apart from
improving scalability, this formulation also facilitates efficient few-shot learning since it requires
simply inferring the embedding given trials from novel recordings. The generative model for this
hierarchical SSM is then described as,

                                                 ei ∼ N (0, I),                                             (8)
                                                     i                   i
                                                    θ = θ + hϑ (e ),                                        (9)
                                      zt | zt−1 , ei ∼ N (zti | fθi (zt−1
                                       i    i                               i
                                                                              ), Qi ),                     (10)
                                              yti | zti ∼ pϕi (yti | zti ),                                (11)

where we drop the prior over the shared dynamics parameter, θ, significantly reducing the dimension-
ality of the inference problem. Similar to the hierarchical Bayesian model, all datasets share the same
latent dynamics, θ, with the dataset-specific variation captured by the dynamical embedding, ei .
We encourage learning of shared dynamical structure and further improve parameter efficiency by
constraining hϑ to make low-rank changes to the parameters of fθ (Fig. 1B). For example, if we
parameterize fθ as a 2-layer fully-connected neural network and constrain the hypernetwork to only
make rank dr changes to the hidden weights, then fθi would be expressed as,

                     fθi (zti ) = Wo σ {Whh + hϑ (ei )} σ(Win zti )

                                                                                              (12)
                                                     | {z }
                                                              embedding modification

                                   = Wo σ {Whh + uϑ (ei ) · vϑ (ei )⊤ } σ(Win zti )

                                                                                                           (13)
                                     |{z}  | {z } | {z } | {z }           |{z}
                                     Rdz ×d2    R    d2 ×d1
                                                               Rd2 ×dr       dr ×d1
                                                                             R           Rd1 ×dz



where σ(·) denotes a point-nonlinearity, and the two functions vϑ (ei ) : Rde → Rd1 ×dr , uϑ (ei ) :
Rde → Rd2 ×dr map the embedding representation to form the low-rank perturbations. Both uϑ and
vϑ are parametrized via a neural network.


3.2   I NFERENCE AND L EARNING
            1:M                                             1:M
Given y1:T      , we want to infer both the latent states, z1:T  and the dynamical embeddings, e1:M =
[e , . . . , e ] as well as learn the parameters of the generative model, Θ = {θ, ϑ, ϕ1 , . . . , ϕM }. Exact
  1           M
                                                                     1:M 1:M     1:M
inference and learning requires computing the posterior, pΘ (z1:T        ,e   | y1:T ), and log marginal
                        1:M
likelihood, log pΘ (y1:T ), which are both intractable.
In this paper, we use a sequential variational autoencoder—an extension of variational autoencoders
for state-space models—specifically, the Deep Kalman Filter (DKF) (Krishnan et al., 2015), to
circumvent this issue. In order to learn the generative model, we maximize a lower-bound to the log
                                                                          1:M
marginal likelihood (commonly referred to as the ELBO). The ELBO for y1:T      is defined as follows
(trial indices are omitted for ease of notation),
               X
     1:M
                      Eqα,β log pϕi (yti | zti )

  L(y1:T )=
                t,i                                                                                        (14)
               − Eqβ DKL qβ (zti | ȳ1:T
                                     i
                                         , ei ) pθ,ϑ (zti | zt−1
                                                             i
                                                                 , ei ) − DKL qα (ei | ȳ1:T
                                                                                         i
                                                                                             ) p(ei )



where qα and qβ are encoders that approximate the posterior distributions over the dynamical
embedding and latent state for dataset i, respectively, and the joint expectation factorizes as Eqα,β ≡
Eqβ (zti |ȳ1:T
            i                  i
                ,ei )qα (ei |ȳ1:T ) . As described in Sec. 2, one of the challenges with integrating recordings
in a common latent space is different dimensionalities (number of recorded neurons) as well as the
dependence of neural activity on the shared latent space. We address this by training additional
                                       i
read-in networks Ωi : Rdy → Rdȳ for each dataset that map yti to an intermediate vector, which we
                  i       dȳ
denote by ȳt ∈ R . This read-in network ensures that the latent states and dynamical-embeddings
inferred from each dataset are aligned to live in the same space (Vermani et al., 2024b).


                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While there are many choices for parameterizing the encoders, we follow the parameterization
in (Krishnan et al., 2015) for simplicity2 , defined as follows,
                                                                   i
                                                                 ȳb,1:T = Ωi (yb,1:T
                                                                                i
                                                                                      ),                                        (15)
                           qα (ei | ȳb,1:T
                                      i
                                            ) = N (eib | agg[µα (ȳb,1:T
                                                                   i
                                                                         )], agg[σα2 (ȳb,1:T
                                                                                        i
                                                                                              )]),                              (16)
                                              T
                                              Y
                   i       i
              qβ (z1:T | ȳ1:T , eib ) =                 N (zti | µβ (concat[ȳb,1:T
                                                                               i
                                                                                     , eib ]), σβ2 (concat[ȳb,1:T
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                   , eib ])),   (17)
                                              t=1

where ybi denotes a randomly sampled mini-batch of trials b from dataset i, concat is the concatenation
operation, and agg is an aggregation operation. We aggregate the dynamical embedding over trials in
a mini-batch that belong to the same dataset since we are interested in capturing inter-dataset, rather
than intra-dataset variations, in the underlying dynamical systems. In practice, we parameterize µα (·),
σα2 (·) by a bidirectional recurrent neural network, and µβ (·), σβ2 (·) by a regular recurrent network,
and agg corresponds to a simple averaging function. We emphasize that µα , σα2 , µβ , and σβ2 are
shared across all datasets (See Fig. 14 for details on inference).

3.3      P ROOF OF C ONCEPT

A.             M=20               B. Inferred embedding                        As a proof of concept, we revisit the motivating
                                         2
                                                                               example presented in Section 2 as a means to
                                                                               validate the efficacy of our approach and inves-
                                    |e| 1                                      tigate how it unifies dynamics across datasets.
                                                                               For both M = 2 and M = 20 datasets, we
                                         0                                     used an embedding dimensionality of 1 and al-
                                                         Velocity
                                  C.                                           lowed the network to make a rank-1 change to
                                                         1
                                                             k-step = 50       the dynamics parameters.
                                       Prediction r2


                                                    After training, we observed that the shared dy-
                                                       0.9
          Central Dynamics                          namics (when e = 0) converged to a limit cy-
         Learnt by the Model                        cle with a slow velocity (Fig. 3A)—capturing
                                  0.8
                                      M = 2 =20     the global topology that is shared across all
                                           M
                                                    datasets—and the model learned to modulate
                                                    the velocity of the dynamics conditioned on the
Figure 3: A. Mean dynamical system correspond- dynamical embedding which strongly correlated
ing to the slowest velocity recording learned by with the dataset specific velocity3 (Fig 3B). This
the proposed approach when trained with M = 20 demonstrated that the proposed approach is able
datasets. B. Samples from the inferred dynamical to capture dataset-specific variability. Lastly,
embedding for each dataset (see eq. 16). C. Fore- Fig. 3C demonstrates that the proposed approach
casting r2 at (k = 50)-step for models trained with is able to forecast well for both M = 2 and
M = 2 or M = 20 datasets.                           M = 20 datasets. We include further validation
                                                    experiments when there is no model mismatch
                                                    as well as the generalization of the trained model
to new data in Appendix B. We additionally include results on these recordings from multi-session
CEBRA (Schneider et al., 2023) in Appendix B.

4        R ELATED W ORKS
Multi-Dataset Training in Neuroscience. Previous work has explored multi-dataset training for
extracting latent representations in neuroscience, especially across datasets recorded during the
same behavioral tasks. LFADS (Pandarinath et al., 2018), a variant of the seqVAE framework, used
session-stitching with dataset-specific likelihood functions, but focused on single-animal record-
ings. Linderman et al. (2019) used a hierarchical Bayesian state-space model with switching linear
dynamical systems, while Herrero-Vidal et al. (2021) developed a joint model with shared linear
dynamics and dataset-specific likelihoods. In contrast to these approaches, we incorporate a more
     2
    We evaluate alternative inference and learning formulations in Appendix D
     3
    Note that we plot the absolute embedding samples since the likelihood function can introduce arbitrary
invariance such as direction flipping, rotation, and so on.


                                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


expressive function to approximate the underlying family of dynamical systems which can disentan-
gle variabilities across recordings. CEBRA (Schneider et al., 2023) and CS-VAE (Yi et al., 2023)
have been developed for extracting latent representations by integrating multiple datasets. The
multi-session training objective in CEBRA promotes invariant feature learning across datasets, while
CS-VAE partitions the latent space to learn structured features from behavioral videos. In our frame-
work, we jointly infer latent trajectories from multi-session recordings and learn a unified generative
model that captures variations in dynamical systems from the inferred trajectories. Recently, there has
been growing interest in using diverse neural recordings for training large-scale foundation models in
neuroscience (Ye et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Caro et al., 2024; Azabou et al., 2024; Vermani et al.,
2024a). These models leverage transformer-based architectures which lack recurrent hidden states
and only incorporate temporal information indirectly via positional encoding. While our approach
shares the same broad goal of pretraining a single generative model for rapid learning on downstream
recordings, the focus of our work is on learning a family of dynamical systems underlying recordings.
Recurrent Neural Network Models in Neuroscience Integrative modeling of dynamical behaviors
has also been explored in RNN models of neural systems (Yang et al., 2019; Driscoll et al., 2024).
In Driscoll et al. (2024), the authors trained an RNN to perform multiple cognitive tasks and observed
motifs corresponding to distinct dynamical behaviors. The broad idea of dynamical structure re-use is
similar to our work but there are subtle differences—we are interested in capturing both topological
and geometrical differences, and the “context” is learned from data. The motifs in Driscoll et al.
(2024) corresponded to a distinct fixed point structure or topology with a pre-specified context input
that could push the dynamics to task-relevant regions in the state space. The embedding analysis
in Cotler et al. (2023), where a meta-model was trained to capture the activity of multiple trained
RNNs is quite similar to our main idea since they observed similar dynamical properties in models
that were close in the embedding space. Recent work on modeling motor adaptation (Pellegrino et al.,
2023) by low-tensor rank learning in RNNs is broadly similar to our work since the authors adapt
the weights in a low-rank RNN to capture variations in dynamics across trials. In contrast, we are
interested in modeling dynamical variations across recording sessions and/or tasks.
Additional related works can be found in Appendix A.


5    E XPERIMENTS


We first validate the proposed method on synthetic data and then test our method on neural recordings
from the primary motor and premotor cortex. We compare the proposed approach against the
following baselines for all experiments.
We train a separate Single Session model using the seqVAE framework on each dataset. Given
sufficient training data, this should result in the best performance, but will fail in trial-limited regimes.
We consider a multi-session Shared Dynamics model with dataset-specific likelihoods (Pandarinath
et al., 2018; Herrero-Vidal et al., 2021). We also compare against a baseline where the embedding is
provided as an additional input to the dynamics model (Embedding-Input), a similar formulation
to CAVIA (Concat) (Zintgraf et al., 2019) and DYNAMO (Cotler et al., 2023). We also test the
hypernetwork parametrization proposed in CoDA (Kirchmeyer et al., 2022), where the hypernetwork
adapts all parameters as a linear function of the dynamical embedding (Linear-Adapter).
We include additional baselines for the motor cortex experiment; we evaluate single session
LFADS (Pandarinath et al., 2018) with the controller as an alternative generative model comparison.
We also consider different methods for learning and inference. Specifically, we include single-session
models as well as our proposed generative model trained using Variational Sequential Monte Carlo
(VSMC) (Naesseth et al., 2018), and the Deep Variational Bayes Filter (DVBF) (Karl et al., 2016).
For all experiments, we split each of the M datasets into a training and test set and report recon-
struction and forecasting metrics on the test set. To measure the generalization performance, we also
report these metrics on held-out datasets. Further details on training and evaluation metrics can be
found in Appendix G.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1               B IFURCATING S YSTEMS

In these experiments, we test whether our method could capture variations across multiple datasets,
particularly in the presence of significant dynamical shifts, such as bifurcations commonly observed
in real neural populations. We selected two parametric classes of dynamical systems for testing: i) a
system undergoing a Hopf bifurication and, ii) the unforced Duffing system. We include the results
for training on datasets generated only from the Hopf system in Appendix C and we discuss the
results from joint training on both systems here. We briefly outline the data generation process for the
Duffing system (details of the data generation for the Hopf system can be found in Appendix E.2).
The latent trajectories for the Duffing system were generated from a family of stochastic differential
equations,
                     z˙1 = z2 + 5 dWt ,        z˙2 = ai z2 − z1 (bi + cz12 ) + 5 dWt             (18)
with c = 0.1, a, b ∈ R, and dWt denoting the Wiener process. In Fig. 4A, we visualize how the
dynamical system changes as a and b vary. We chose M = 20 pairs of (ai , bi ) values (Fig 13),

A.                      Example True Dynamics             Learned Dynamics
                                                                             B.      Generalization on Training Tasks
                        b = -0.1               b = -1.4                                                     1


                                                                                  Reconstruction r2
                                                                                                                                  Our Method
                                                                                                                                  Linear Adapter
             a = -0.1


                                                                                                       0.9                        Single Session
                                                                                                                                  Shared Dynamics
                                                                                                                                  Embedding Input
 varying a


                                                                                                       0.8

                                                                             C.                        1


                                                                                  Prediction r2
             a = -0.8


                                                                                                      0.5


                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                1    25      50
                                   varying b                                                                        k-step


Figure 4: A. (Left) True underlying dynamics from some example datasets used for pretraining as a
function of parameters a and b and (Right) the embedding conditioned dynamics learnt by our model.
B., C. Mean reconstruction and forecasting r2 of the observations for all datasets used for pretraining
on test trials.

and generated latent trajectories of length T = 300. Observations were generated according to
yti ∼ N (C i zti , 0.01I) with the dimensionality of the observations varying between 30 and 100.
In addition to these 20 Duffing system datasets, we included 11 datasets from the Hopf system
(Appendix C), and used 128 trajectories from each of these 31 datasets for training all methods. We
report performance on 64 test trajectories from each dataset. We used de = 2 for all embedding-
conditioned approaches and constrained the hypernetwork to make rank dr = 1 changes for our
approach.
Our approach learned a good approximation to the ground-truth dynamics of the Duffing oscillator
system, successfully disentangling different dynamical regimes (Fig. 4 B). Apart from learning the
underlying topology of dynamics, it also better captured the geometrical properties compared to
other embedding-conditioned baselines (Fig. 15). We observed similar results for datasets from
the Hopf system–while our approach approximated the ground-truth system well, the Embedding-
Input baseline displayed interference between dynamics and the Linear-Adapter learned a poor
approximation to the ground-truth system (Fig. 16). Consequently, our approach outperformed other
methods on forecasting observations with all methods having comparable reconstruction performance
(Fig. 4B, C). Notably, apart from the de , we used the same architecture as when training on only the
Hopf datasets, and did not observe any drop in performance for our approach, in contrast to baselines
(Fig. 11C (Bottom), Fig. 4C).
Next, we tested the few-shot performance of all methods on new datasets, two generated from the
Duffing oscillator system and one from the Hopf system, as a function of ns , the number of trials
used for learning the dataset specific read-in network, Ωi and likelihood. Our approach and the
Linear-Adapter demonstrated comparable forecasting performance when using ns = 1 and ns = 8
training trajectories. However, with ns = 16 training trials, unlike other methods, our approach
continued to improved and outperformed them (Table 1). This could be explained by looking at the


                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            ns = 1             ns = 8               ns = 16
               Our Method                               0.69 ± 0.072       0.78 ± 0.051          0.87 ± 0.037
               Linear-Adapter                            0.68 ± 0.08        0.79 ± 0.026          0.74 ± 0.039
               Single Session                           0.47 ± 0.119        0.79 ± 0.014          0.79 ± 0.047
               Shared Dynamics                          -0.31 ± 0.103      -0.34 ± 0.086         -0.13 ± 0.065
               Embedding-Input                          0.59 ± 0.084        0.77 ± 0.04           0.74 ± 0.039

Table 1: Few shot forecasting performance (k = 30-step) on 3 held-out datasets as a function of ns ,
the number of trials used to learn dataset specific read-in network and likelihood. (± 1 s.e.m)


inferred embedding on held-out datasets—as we increased the number of training trajectories, the
model was able to consistently align to the “correct” embedding (Fig. 17).

5.2   M OTOR C ORTEX R ECORDINGS

Next, we tested the applicability of the proposed approach on neural data. We used single and multi-
unit neural population recordings from the motor and premotor cortex during two behavioral tasks–the
Centre-Out (CO) and Maze reaching tasks (Perich et al., 2018; Gallego et al., 2020; Churchland
et al., 2012). In the CO task, subjects are trained to use a manipulandum to reach one of eight target
locations on a screen. In the Maze task, subjects use a touch screen to reach a target location, while
potentially avoiding obstacles. These recordings spanned different sessions, animals, and labs, and
involved different behavioral modalities, while still having related behavioral components, making
them a good testbed for evaluating various methods. For training, we used 40 sessions from the CO
task, from subjects M and C, and 4 sessions from the Maze task from subjects Je and Ni. We set the
dimensionality of latent dynamics to dz = 30, and used an embedding dimensionality of de = 2,
for all embedding-conditioned dynamics models. For our approach, we constrain the hypernetwork
to make rank dr = 6 changes, although we verified that the performance was not sensitive to dr
(Fig 18). As a proxy for how well the various approaches learned the underlying dynamics, we report
metrics on inferring the hand velocity using reconstructed and forecasted neural data from the models.
Note that we align all recordings to the movement onset (details in Appendix G).

                           Inferred embedding              Condition-averaged      Position
                                                               Dynamics         Monkey Predicted
                                    e1
                            -2         0        2
                      3                                                                                Maze session
                                           Centre-Out                                                    Sub Ni
                                            Sub C
                      1                                                                   r2 = 0.73
                 e2


                      -1
                                                                                                       CO session
                                 Centre-Out Sub M                                                        Sub C
                                 Maze Sub Ni
                                 Maze Sub Je                                               r2 = 0.82



Figure 5: Visualizing the embedding manifold. (Left) Each point corresponds to a sample from
the inferred embedding distribution (see eq. 16) corresponding to each recording. (Right) The
condition-averaged latent dynamics for a session from Maze (Sub Ni) (Top) and a CO Session
(Bottom) generated by the model, along with the corresponding real and forecasted behavior.

The inferred dynamical embedding displayed distinct structures across behavioral tasks and subjects
(Fig. 5, Left). While the CO task involves more stereotyped straight reaching behavior with the
same stimulus conditions across datasets, the Maze task has more complex stimulus statistics which
vary across sessions. The family of learned dynamics reflected this heterogeneity across recordings.
We visualize these learned dynamical systems for two example sessions, one from each task, in
Fig 5 (Right). Specifically, we used the trained encoders, qβ and qα to estimate the latent state and
embedding at the beginning of movement onset. We subsequently generate the latent dynamics
from that state using fθ,ei till the end of the movement onset. The condition-averaged principal
components (PCs) of these generated latents are shown in the figure.


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We observed that most of the approaches had adequate performance on reconstructing velocity from
neural recordings, with our method and Linear-Adapter outperforming single session reconstruction
performance on the CO task (Fig. 6A, top). Multi-Session CEBRA was not able to adequately capture
the variability in the Maze sessions and had low reconstruction r2 . In terms of forecasting, the
single-session model trained using the seqVAE framework had the best performance. Notably, our
approach managed to balance learning both the CO and Maze tasks relative to other multi-session
baselines, with all performing better on the CO task than the Maze (Fig. 6A, bottom). The generative
model learned from CEBRA had poor forecasting performance which resulted in a negative r2 value
(not plotted). Next, we tested if we can transfer these learned dynamics to new recordings as we
varied ns from 8 to 64 trials for learning the read-in network and likelihood. We used trials from 2
held-out sessions from Sub C and M, as well as 2 sessions from a new subject (Sub T) for evaluating
all methods. We observed that our approach consistently performed well on both reconstruction and
forecasting for held-out sessions from previously seen subjects, and reached good performance on
sessions from Sub T as we increased the training trials (Fig. 6B, C (ns = 32)). Moreover, our method
outperformed all other baselines on forecasting, especially in very low-sample regimes, while having
comparable reconstruction performance (Fig. 19).

  A.             0.9   Training sessions   B. Few Shot Performace          C.   Hand Velocity Trajectories
                                                                                        (ns = 32)
    Reconstruction


                 0.7                          0.7                                                                True
                                                                                                                 Reconstructed
                                              0.5


                                                                           vx
                 0.5                                                                                             Predicted
         r2


                                              0.3
                 0.3
                                                                                                             Held-out Session
                                                                           vy
                                                      Held out    New
                          Maze      CO
                                                      session    subject                                         Sub M
        2


                 0.6
                           Prediction r


                                              0.6

                 0.3
                                                                           vx

                                              0.4

                 0.0                          0.2
                                                                                                              Session from
              ar ion


                         a
                 Se r


               E yn


             M DS
              le te


                      br
               LF ut


                                                    8 16   32      64
                                                                           vy
         Si r Ad d


                                                                                                                 Sub T
                     o
           ng ap

           Sh ss

                    D


                   Ce
                    p
                   A
          ne th


                  In
                ed
        Li Me


                S-


                                                Training Samples (ns)                     trials
            a
           ur
         O


Figure 6: A. (top) r2 for hand velocity decoding from reconstructed and (bottom) forecasted neural
observations for Maze and Centre-Out sessions. B. Behavior reconstruction (top) and forecasting
(bottom) performance on held-out sessions and sessions from a new subject as a function of the
number of training samples. C. Hand velocity trajectories (400 ms after movement onset) predicted
by our approach on 17 test trials from held-out session (top) and 13 test trials from a session on a new
subject (bottom), after using ns = 32 trials for aligning to the pre-trained model.

Next, we evaluated the impact of the inference framework on effective learning and few-shot per-
formance. We specifically tested single session models as well as our proposed generative model
trained after performing inference using VSMC and DVBF (Details in Appendix D). In both cases,
we observed that the inferred embedding distribution learned the underlying dynamical structure
across datasets (Fig. 12A). Moreover, we were able to similarly exploit this learned structure for
few-shot forecasting on novel recording sessions (Fig. 12B). We additionally investigated the effect of
large-scale training for sample-efficient transfer on downstream tasks by only pretraining the model
on 128 trials from 4 sessions spanning different tasks and subjects. Even in this case, the embedding
distribution displayed clear clustering based on the task and subject. Moreover, the model performed
comparably to the Single-Session model on reconstruction, while outperforming it on prediction for
both tasks (Fig. 20 A, B). However, it demonstrated poor performance on new sessions given limited
trials for learning the read-in and likelihood parameters (Fig. 20 C), underscoring the importance of
large-scale training for generalizing to novel settings.
Finally, we probed the differences in the latent state evolution given the same initial condition while
interpolating across the learned embedding. In order to do this, we chose an example session from
the Maze and CO datasets and obtained their corresponding dynamical embedding from the model,
shown as a solid blue and green circle in Fig. 7 (middle), respectively. A grid of points was sampled
around each of these inferred embeddings (shown as shaded squares in Fig. 7 middle), and for each
point we obtained the corresponding low-rank parameter changes to generate the latent trajectories.
We observed that the embedding space learned a continuous representation of dynamics, which was
reflected in similar predicted behaviors close to the original learned embedding (Fig 7). Interestingly,


                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Interpolating across the embedding space


                                               3


                                               1


                                          e2
                                               -1
                                                    -2    0    2
                                                          e1
              Predicted behavior (Maze)                              Predicted behavior (CO)

Figure 7: The predicted behavior for a Maze (Sub Je) session and CO (Sub C) session at 9 grid points
around the original inferred embedding. The point closest to the original embedding is highlighted in
blue and green respectively.
when we interpolated through the entire embedding space, the predicted behavior and corresponding
dynamics continuously varied as well. Specifically, the predicted behavior and dynamics trajectories
on the CO session demonstrated similarities over a large portion of the embedding space, with the
trajectories shifting to more curved reaches further from the original embedding (Fig. 21). On the
Maze task, the trajectories demonstrated more heterogeneity in responses, and decayed to a fixed
point further away from the original embedding (Fig. 22).

6   D ISCUSSION
We present a novel framework for jointly inferring and learning latent dynamics from heteroge-
neous neural recordings across sessions/subjects during related behavioral tasks. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first approach that facilitates learning a family of dynamical systems from
heterogeneous recordings in a unified latent space, while providing a concise, interpretable manifold
over dynamical systems. Our meta-learning approach mitigates the challenges of statistical inference
from limited data, a common issue arising from the high flexibility of models used to approximate
latent dynamics. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that the learned embedding manifold provides a
useful inductive bias for learning from limited samples, with our proposed parametrization offering
greater flexibility in capturing diverse dynamics while minimizing interference. We demonstrate
that the few-shot performance of our proposed generative model is largely agnostic to the inference
method. We observe that the generalization of our model depends on the amount of training data—
when trained on smaller datasets, the model learns specialized solutions, whereas more data allows it
to learn shared dynamical structures. This work enhances our capability to integrate, analyze, and
interpret complex neural dynamics across diverse experimental conditions, broadening the scope of
scientific inquiries possible in neuroscience.

L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Our current framework uses event aligned neural observations; in the future, it would be useful to
incorporate task-related events, to broaden its applicability to complex, unstructured tasks. Further,
the model’s generalization to novel settings depends on accurate embedding inference, a challenge
noted in previous works that disentangle task inference and representation learning (Hummos et al.,
2024). However, we observe consistent improvement in embedding inference with increase in the
number of training samples from novel recordings. Our empirical observations demonstrate that
using a hypernetwork improves the expressivity of the dynamical systems model relative to other
parametrizations. It would be interesting to investigate the theoretical basis of this observation in the
future. While our latent dynamics parametrization is expressive, it assumes shared structure across
related tasks. Future work could extend the model to accommodate recordings without expected
shared structures (for instance, by adding explicit modularity (Márton et al., 2021)). Investigating the
performance of embedding-conditioned low-rank adaptation on RNN-based architectures presents
another avenue for future research. Finally, the embedding manifold provides a map for interpolating
across different dynamics. While we focus on rapid learning in this paper, our framework could have
interesting applications for studying inter-subject variability, learning-induced changes in dynamics,
or changes in dynamics across tasks in the future.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for providing helpful feedback on the manuscript.
This work was supported by NIH RF1-DA056404 and the Portuguese Recovery and Resilience
Plan (PPR), through project number 62, Center for Responsible AI, and the Portuguese national
funds, through FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia - in the context of the project
UIDB/04443/2020.

R EFERENCES
Mehdi Azabou, Vinam Arora, Venkataramana Ganesh, Ximeng Mao, Santosh Nachimuthu, Michael
 Mendelson, Blake Richards, Matthew Perich, Guillaume Lajoie, and Eva Dyer. A unified, scalable
 framework for neural population decoding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 36, 2024.
Samuel R Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew M Dai, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Samy Bengio.
  Generating sentences from a continuous space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06349, 2015.
Josue Ortega Caro, Antonio H. de O. Fonseca, Christopher Averill, Syed A. Rizvi, Matteo Rosati,
  James L. Cross, Prateek Mittal, Emanuele Zappala, Daniel Levine, Rahul M. Dhodapkar, Insu Han,
  Amin Karbasi, Chadi G. Abdallah, and David van Dijk. Brainlm: A foundation model for brain
  activity recordings. bioRxiv, 2024.
Mark M Churchland, John P Cunningham, Matthew T Kaufman, Justin D Foster, Paul Nuyujukian,
 Stephen I Ryu, and Krishna V Shenoy. Neural population dynamics during reaching. Nature, 487
 (7405):51–56, 2012.
Jordan Cotler, Kai Sheng Tai, Felipe Hernández, Blake Elias, and David Sussillo. Analyzing
  populations of neural networks via dynamical model embedding. arXiv [cs.LG], February 2023.
Arnaud Doucet, Nando De Freitas, and Neil Gordon. An introduction to sequential monte carlo
  methods. Sequential Monte Carlo methods in practice, pp. 3–14, 2001.
Matthew Dowling, Yuan Zhao, and Il Memming Park. eXponential FAmily dynamical systems
 (XFADS): Large-scale nonlinear gaussian state-space modeling. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), December 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=Ln8ogihZ2S.
Laura N Driscoll, Noah L Pettit, Matthias Minderer, Selmaan N Chettih, and Christopher D Harvey.
  Dynamic reorganization of neuronal activity patterns in parietal cortex. Cell, 170(5):986–999,
  2017.
Laura N. Driscoll, Krishna Shenoy, and David Sussillo. Flexible multitask computation in recurrent
  networks utilizes shared dynamical motifs. Nature Neuroscience, 27(7):1349–1363, 2024.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Juan A. Gallego, Matthew G. Perich, Stephanie N. Naufel, Christian Ethier, Sara A. Solla, and Lee E.
  Miller. Cortical population activity within a preserved neural manifold underlies multiple motor
  behaviors. Nature Communications, 9(1):4233, 2018.
Juan A Gallego, Matthew G Perich, Raeed H Chowdhury, Sara A Solla, and Lee E Miller. Long-term
  stability of cortical population dynamics underlying consistent behavior. Nature neuroscience, 23
  (2):260–270, 2020.
David Ha, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Hypernetworks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2016.
Pedro Herrero-Vidal, Dmitry Rinberg, and Cristina Savin. Across-animal odor decoding by proba-
  bilistic manifold alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:20360–20372,
  2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ali Hummos, Felipe del Río, Brabeeba Mien Wang, Julio Hurtado, Cristian B. Calderon, and
  Guangyu Robert Yang. Gradient-based inference of abstract task representations for generalization
  in neural networks, 2024.
Maximilian Karl, Maximilian Soelch, Justin Bayer, and Patrick Van der Smagt. Deep varia-
 tional bayes filters: Unsupervised learning of state space models from raw data. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1605.06432, 2016.
Matthieu Kirchmeyer, Yuan Yin, Jérémie Donà, Nicolas Baskiotis, Alain Rakotomamonjy, and
 Patrick Gallinari. Generalizing to new physical systems via context-informed dynamics model. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11283–11301. PMLR, 2022.
Rahul G Krishnan, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag.              Deep kalman filters.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1511.05121, 2015.
Zhenguo Li, Fengwei Zhou, Fei Chen, and Hang Li. Meta-sgd: Learning to learn quickly for few-shot
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09835, 2017.
Scott Linderman, Annika Nichols, David Blei, Manuel Zimmer, and Liam Paninski. Hierarchical
  recurrent state space models reveal discrete and continuous dynamics of neural activity in c. elegans.
  BioRxiv, pp. 621540, 2019.
Thomas Zhihao Luo, Timothy Doyeon Kim, Diksha Gupta, Adrian G Bondy, Charles D Kopec,
  Verity A Elliot, Brian DePasquale, and Carlos D Brody. Transitions in dynamical regime and
  neural mode underlie perceptual decision-making. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–10, 2023.
Niru Maheswaranathan, Alex Williams, Matthew Golub, Surya Ganguli, and David Sussillo. Uni-
  versality and individuality in neural dynamics across large populations of recurrent networks.
  In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Christian David Márton, Léo Gagnon, Guillaume Lajoie, and Kanaka Rajan. Efficient and robust
  multi-task learning in the brain with modular latent primitives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14108,
  2021.
Christian Naesseth, Scott Linderman, Rajesh Ranganath, and David Blei. Variational sequential
  monte carlo. In International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 968–977.
  PMLR, 2018.
Aditya Nair, Tomomi Karigo, Bin Yang, Surya Ganguli, Mark J. Schnitzer, Scott W. Linderman,
  David J. Anderson, and Ann Kennedy. An approximate line attractor in the hypothalamus encodes
  an aggressive state. Cell, 186(1):178–193.e15, 2023.
Alex Nichol and John Schulman. Reptile: a scalable metalearning algorithm. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.02999, 2(3):4, 2018.
Chethan Pandarinath, Daniel J. O’Shea, Jasmine Collins, Rafal Jozefowicz, Sergey D. Stavisky,
  Jonathan C. Kao, Eric M. Trautmann, Matthew T. Kaufman, Stephen I. Ryu, Leigh R. Hochberg,
  Jaimie M. Henderson, Krishna V. Shenoy, L. F. Abbott, and David Sussillo. Inferring single-trial
  neural population dynamics using sequential auto-encoders. Nature Methods, 15(10):805–815,
  2018.
Arthur Pellegrino, N Alex Cayco Gajic, and Angus Chadwick. Low tensor rank learning of neural
  dynamics. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:11674–11702, 2023.
Matthew G Perich, Juan A Gallego, and Lee E Miller. A neural population mechanism for rapid
 learning. Neuron, 100(4):964–976, 2018.
Andrei A. Rusu, Dushyant Rao, Jakub Sygnowski, Oriol Vinyals, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero,
  and Raia Hadsell. Meta-learning with latent embedding optimization, 2019.
Mostafa Safaie, Joanna C. Chang, Junchol Park, Lee E. Miller, Joshua T. Dudman, Matthew G. Perich,
 and Juan A. Gallego. Preserved neural dynamics across animals performing similar behaviour.
 Nature, 623(7988):765–771, 2023.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Marine Schimel, Ta-Chu Kao, Kristopher T Jensen, and Guillaume Hennequin. iLQR-VAE : control-
 based learning of input-driven dynamics with applications to neural data. In International Confer-
 ence on Learning Representations, 2022.

Steffen Schneider, Jin Hwa Lee, and Mackenzie Weygandt Mathis. Learnable latent embeddings for
  joint behavioural and neural analysis. Nature, 617(7960):360–368, 2023.

Andrew R Sedler and Chethan Pandarinath. lfads-torch: A modular and extensible implementation of
  latent factor analysis via dynamical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01230, 2023.

Elia Turner and Omri Barak. The simplicity bias in multi-task RNNs: Shared attractors, reuse
  of dynamics, and geometric representation. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko,
  M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
  pp. 25495–25507. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.

Ayesha Vermani, Matthew Dowling, Hyungju Jeon, Ian Jordan, Josue Nassar, Yves Bernaerts, Yuan
  Zhao, Steven Van Vaerenbergh, and Il Memming Park. Real-time machine learning strategies for a
  new kind of neuroscience experiments. In European Signal Processing Conference, 2024a.

Ayesha Vermani, Il Memming Park, and Josue Nassar. Leveraging generative models for unsupervised
  alignment of neural time series data. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), May 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9zhHVyLY4K.

Rui Wang, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Meta-learning dynamics forecasting using task inference.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21640–21653, 2022.

Guangyu Robert Yang, Madhura R Joglekar, H Francis Song, William T Newsome, and Xiao-Jing
 Wang. Task representations in neural networks trained to perform many cognitive tasks. Nature
  neuroscience, 22(2):297–306, 2019.

Joel Ye, Jennifer L. Collinger, Leila Wehbe, and Robert Gaunt. Neural data transformer 2: Multi-
  context pretraining for neural spiking activity. bioRxiv, 2023.

Daiyao Yi, Simon Musall, Anne Churchland, Nancy Padilla-Coreano, and Shreya Saxena. Disentan-
  gled multi-subject and social behavioral representations through a constrained subspace variational
  autoencoder (cs-vae). eLife, 12, 2023.

Yuan Yin, Ibrahim Ayed, Emmanuel de Bézenac, Nicolas Baskiotis, and Patrick Gallinari. Leads:
  Learning dynamical systems that generalize across environments. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:7561–7573, 2021.

Daoze Zhang, Zhizhang Yuan, YANG YANG, Junru Chen, Jingjing Wang, and Yafeng Li. Brant:
  Foundation model for intracranial neural signal. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko,
  M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
  pp. 26304–26321. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.

Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarli, Vitaly Kurin, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Fast context
  adaptation via meta-learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7693–7702.
  PMLR, 2019.


C ONTENTS

A Additional Related Works                                                                        13

B Proof-of-Concept Experiment                                                                     14

C Hopf Bifurcation Systems                                                                        14


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D Alternative Inference and Learning Approaches                                                                    15
    D.1 Variational SMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      16
    D.2 Deep Variational Bayes Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    16

E Data Generation Details                                                                                          17
    E.1 Limit Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    17
    E.2 Hopf Bifurcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                     17
    E.3 Duffing System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                     18
    E.4 Motor Cortex Recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      18

F Additional Figures                                                                                               18

G Experiment Details                                                                                               22
    G.1 Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   22
    G.2 Figure Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    22
    G.3 Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    22
    G.4 Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      23

A    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS
Several meta-learning approaches have been developed for few-shot adaptation, including gradient-
based methods (Finn et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Nichol & Schulman, 2018; Zintgraf et al., 2019).
Amongst these, LEO (Rusu et al., 2019) shares the same idea of meta-learning in low-dimensional
space of parameter embeddings. However, gradient-based approaches require fine-tuning during
test-time, and have had limited success for meta-learning dynamics. Similar to our work (Cotler
et al., 2023) also learns an embedding space of dynamics learned from trained RNNs, however, we
are interested in learning dynamics directly from data. Some methods for learning generalizable
dynamics been previously proposed—DyAD (Wang et al., 2022) adapts across environments by
neural style transfer, however it operates on images of dynamical systems, LEADS (Yin et al., 2021)
learns a constrained dynamics function that is directly added to some base dynamics function, and
CoDA (Kirchmeyer et al., 2022) which learns task-specific parameter changes conditioned on a low-
dimensional context similar to our approach. However, these approaches were applied in supervised
settings on low-dimensional systems whereas we operate in an unsupervised setting.

B    P ROOF - OF -C ONCEPT E XPERIMENT
                                                                                 1-shot performance
1-shot Performance. We evaluated the generalization performance
                                                                                 True Observations
of our approach on a new dataset with ω M +1 = 4.1, which was
not included in the training set, by using 1 training trajectory to
train a new read-in network, ΩM +1 and likelihood pM    ϕ
                                                          +1
                                                             . After
training, the model displayed similar prediction performance on the             reconstructed    predicted
               2
new dataset (rk=50  = 0.94 ± 0.001) (Fig. 8).
No Model Mismatch. Here, we investigated the performance of
our approach when there is no mismatch between the proposed
generative model and the true system. For this experiment, we               0              100               200
                                                                                          time
generated synthetic data from the model trained on M = 20 datasets.
We used the observations from validation trials till t = 100 to          Figure 8: (Top) True observa-
infer the embedding, ei , and latent state, zti . We subsequently used   tions on new data with ω =
the dynamics model to generate latent trajectories of length 250,        4.1 and (Bottom) the corre-
 i
zt+1:t+250 and mapped them back to the observations via the learned      sponding reconstructed and
                                                                         predicted observations after
                                                                         aligning to the trained model.
                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


likelihood function. We re-trained a model with the same architecture while keeping the likelihood
readout and read-in parameters fixed since the likelihood could arbitrarily flip the direction of the
flow field.
Similar to the ground truth generative model, the inferred embedding co-varied with the different
velocities (Fig. 9A, left). Further, the model recovered the correct topology of the ground truth
dynamics (Fig. 9B), reflected in the forecasting performance on held out test trials (Fig. 9A, right).

                   A.                                        Ground Truth         B.
                         2                                   Learnt

                                                     1
                   |e|


                                                r2
                         1

                                                   0.8
                         0                               1      25     50
                                 Velocity                     k-step
                                                                                       Ground Truth                      Recovered

Figure 9: A. (Left) Samples from the inferred embedding (see eq. 16) after training on trajectories
generated from our model overlaid on the ground truth embeddings. (Right) Forecasting performance
of the trained and ground truth model on held out trials. B. Ground truth dynamics generated from an
embedding sample and the corresponding recovered dynamics.

Multi-Session CEBRA. We evaluate the performance of multi-session CEBRA, an approach for
inferring latents by integrating datasets. This variant of CEBRA is designed to learn invariant latent
features across datasets, and has not been evaluated on recordings with variations in underlying
dynamical features. In this experiment, we fit M = 20 datasets using CEBRA and post-hoc trained
a generative model with shared dynamics and dataset-specific likelihood functions, since it does
not learn a generative model. After training CEBRA on these datasets, we observed that the model
recovered oscillatory latent trajectories; however, these trajectories were jagged and did not capture
the characteristics of the true latents (Fig. 10A). Next, we trained a generative model using these
latent trajectories. We observed that the learned dynamical system managed to capture a global
limit-cycle like structure (Fig. 10B, left). However, this limit cycle also contained a fixed-point like
structure causing rapid slow-down or noise-induced oscillations, capturing the characteristics of
the latent trajectories inferred by CEBRA. Due to this behavior, we observed poor forecasting and
reconstruction of observations (Fig. 10B, right).

A.                            Example                B.                                Generative Model Learning
                          Latent Trajectories
     True
                                                                                                                                        Prediction r2



              z1                                                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                           reconstructed     predicted
Multi-Session                                                                                                                                            0
              z1                                                                                                                                              0    15 30
  CEBRA
                                                                                                                                                                  k-step
                                                                        stable
                   0            100   0            100                  fixed point    0                   100    150 0          100   150
                         time               time                                                  time                        time

Figure 10: A. Example latent trajectories from two datasets (Top) and inferred latent trajectories from
Multi-Session CEBRA trained on M = 20 datasets. B. The dynamics learned by a generative model
trained on the latent trajectories (Left). Example reconstructed and predicted observations on the two
datasets by using the learned generative model (Middle). The k-step prediction r2 of the forecasted
observations for M = 20 datasets.

C     H OPF B IFURCATION S YSTEMS
For all embedding conditioned approaches, we set de = 1 and learned a rank-1 change to the dynamics
for our approach. Our approach successfully learned both dynamical regimes present in the datasets
and the embedding distribution encoded differences in these dynamics with high certainty given
limited time bins on test trials(Fig. 11A, B). While all approaches performed well on reconstructing
observations on these datasets, our approach and the Embedding-Input outperformed other multi-
session baselines on forecasting (Fig 11C). We also evaluated the generalization performance of all
methods on the 2 held-out datasets as a function of training data used for training the read-in network


                                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and observed similar trends as demonstrated by the reconstruction and k-step = 20 r2 on test trials
from these datasets, shown in Table 2.

                      A.          Example                C.            Performance on
                                 Observations                          Training Tasks
                                                  True             1

                                                  Ours

                                                              0.75



                                                               0.5
                             0        30     60
                                     time
                      B.    3
                                                               1                            Our Method
                                                                                            Linear Adapter
                                                                                            Shared Dynamics
                                                                                            Single Session
                           1.5                                0.5                           Embedding Input
                        e


                            0
                                                                   0         15     30
                                 0    60    120
                                     time                                  time

Figure 11: A. Example observations along with the reconstructed and predicted observations from
our approach for the fixed point (Top) and limit cycle (Bottom) dynamical regimes. B. Samples from
the embedding as a function of the number of time bins in the test trials for 4 example datasets. C.
Reconstruction (Top) and forecasting (Bottom) performance of all approaches on the datasets used
for pretraining.
                             Reconstruction                                             Forecasting
                                ns = 1                       ns = 8                       ns = 1                ns = 8
    Ours                     0.85 ± 0.054                  0.89 ± 0.04                  0.64 ± 0.1            0.69 ± 0.07
    Linear-Adapter           0.84 ± 0.059                  0.89 ± 0.04                  -0.1 ± 0.34           0.55 ± 0.08
    Single Session            0.8 ± 0.054                 0.88 ± 0.044                  0.27 ± 0.08           0.77 ± 0.03
    Shared Dynamics          0.83 ± 0.068                  0.89 ± 0.04                  0.32 ± 0.08           0.32 ± 0.04
    Embedding-Input          0.86 ± 0.049                  0.89 ± 0.04                  0.61 ± 0.09           0.56 ± 0.11

Table 2: Few-shot reconstruction and forecasting performance (k-step=20) for held-out datasets in C
where ns is the number of trials used for learning the dataset specific read-in network and likelihood.

D     A LTERNATIVE I NFERENCE AND L EARNING A PPROACHES
While we focus on the DKF method for performing inference in the main text, we evaluate the
efficacy of our proposed generative model with alternative inference and learning schemes.

D.1    VARIATIONAL SMC

We considered the variational sequential monte carlo (VSMC) framework proposed by Naesseth et al.
(2018) for learning and inference. VSMC is a combination of variational inference and sequential
Monte Carlo (SMC) (Doucet et al., 2001), allowing for optimization of the parameters of the proposal;
for simplicitiy, unlike traditional SMC, no resampling was performed after every time step, t. Given
                                       1              N
N samples from the encoder, i.e., z1:T     , . . . , z1:T  , VSMC optimizes the following lower bound to the
log marginal likelihood,
                      Z Y T                                                      T
                                                                                           "       N
                                                                                                        !#
                                                                                X               1 X i
  log p(y1:T ) = log         p(zt | zt−1 )p(yt | zt )dz1:T ≥ L̃vsmc =               Eq(zt ) log      w     ,
                         t=1                                                    t=1
                                                                                                N i=1 t
where,                                                                                                   (19)
                                                             i      i     i
                                                   p(y t | z t )p(z   |
                                                                   t t−1z   )
                                         wti =                                .                          (20)
                                                         q(zti | y1:T )
As the proposed formulation requires inference of the dynamical embedding, e—which is constant
over time—we have to modify VSMC as it non-trivial to infer constants in state-space models using


                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SMC (Doucet et al., 2001). We can express the log marginal likelihood of the proposed generative
model as
                                  Z      Y T
                log p(y1:T ) = log p(e)      p(zt | zt−1 , e)p(yt | zt )dz1:T de,           (21)
                                                                                   t=1
                                                      Z                                    T
                                                                                         Z Y
                                            = log         p(e)de                                    p(zt | zt−1 , e)p(yt | zt )dz1:T ,                        (22)
                                                                                              t=1
                                                      Z
                                            = log         p(e)p(y1:T | e)de,                                                                                  (23)
                                                      Z
                                            p(e)
                                       q(e) = log p(y1:T | e)de,                                                                                              (24)
                                            q(e)

                                            p(e)
                              = log Eq(e)        p(y1:T | e) .                                                                                                (25)
                                            q(e)
Applying Jensen’s inequality to (25),

                                                       p(e)
                          log p(y1:T ) ≥ Eq(e) log           p(y1:T | e) ,                                                                                    (26)
                                                       q(e)
            log p(y1:T ) ≥ Eq(e) [log p(y1:T | e)] + Eq(e) [log p(e)] − Eq(e) [log q(e)] .                                                                    (27)
As expectations respect inequalities, we can lower bound Eq [log p(y1:T | e)] using the VSMC lower-
bound (19), leading to the following lower-bound that we optimize
                                                h      i
                            log p(y1:T ) ≥ Eq(e) L̃vsmc + Eq(e) [log p(e)] − Eq(e) [log q(e)] , (28)
                  T
                                  "          N
                                                     !#
                 X                        1 X i
  log p(y1:T ) ≥     Eq(zt |e)q(e) log          w (e)    + Eq(e) [log p(e)] − Eq(e) [log q(e)] , (29)
                 t=1
                                         N i=1 t
where
                                                                             p(yt | zti )p(zti | zt−1
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                      , e)
                                                 wti (e) =                                                 .                                                  (30)
                                                                                  q(zti | y1:T , e)

          A.                                              B.                                                                      0.6
                    2                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                               VSMC
               e2


                                                               Reconstruction r2


                    0                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                  Prediction r2


                                                                                                                                   0
                     -1.5     0    1.5                                              0
                                                                                                                                  0.6
                    3                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                  0.3
                    1                          dVBF
               e2


                                                                                   0.3
                                                                                                                                   0
                    -1
                                                                                    0
                         -2   0     2                                                     8    16    32   64                            8    16    32    64
                              e1                                                         Training Samples                               Training Samples
               Centre-Out Sub M         Maze Sub Ni
               Centre-Out Sub C         Maze Sub Je                                                  Our Method                         Single Session



Figure 12: A. Samples from the learned embedding distribution using VSMC (Top) and dVBF
(Bottom). B. Behavior decoding performance from reconstructed (Left) and forecasted trajectories
(Right) using the two inference methods with a single session generative model vs aligning to our
pretrained generative model.

D.2     D EEP VARIATIONAL BAYES F ILTER

We additionally considered the DVBF framework proposed in (Karl et al., 2016) for performing
learning and inference. This framework explicitly ties the inference network to the generative model
by forcing the samples from the inference network through the dynamical systems model. In our
implementation, we defined the inference network as follows,
               qβ (uit | ȳ1:T
                           i
                               , eib ) = N (uit | µβ (concat[ȳb,t:T
                                                               i
                                                                     , eib ]), σβ2 (concat[ȳb,t:T
                                                                                             i
                                                                                                   , eib ])),


                                                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where qβ encoded the observations backward in time and was parametrized by an RNN to infer
the parameters of the Gaussian distribution, ut ∼ q(ut ). The latent trajectory for each dataset was
subsequently sampled as,
                                   zti = fθ,ei (zt−1
                                                 i
                                                     ) + Q1/2 uit .
Parameters of the generative model and inference networks were learned jointly by optimizing the
following ELBO,
          XX
     L=           Eqα,β [log p(yti | zti )] − Eqβ [DKL (q(ut )||p(ut ))] − [DKL (qα (q i )||p(e))], (31)
             i   t

where p(ut ) ∼ N (0, I).

E     DATA G ENERATION D ETAILS
E.1    L IMIT C YCLE

For the experiments in Sections 2, 3.3, we simulated data from the following system of equations,
                                              ṙ = r(1 − r)2 ,
                                                  θ̇ = ω i ,
                            z1i = r cos θ + 5 dWt ,       z2i = r sin θ + 5 dWt ,
where ω i , i ∈ {1, · · · , M } is the dataset specific velocity and dWt is the Wiener process. Specifically,
for the experiment with M = 2 datasets, we set ω 1 = 2 and ω 2 = 5; for the experiment with M = 20
datasets, we uniformly sampled 20 values for ω i between 0.25 and 5. For each value of ω i , we
generated 128 latent trajectories for training, 64 for validation and 64 for testing, each of length
T = 300, where we used Euler-Mayurama with ∆t of 0.04 for integration. Observations were
generated according to yti ∼ N (C       i i
                                      √ zt , R) where R = 0.01 ∗ I and the elements of the readout matrix
  i
C were sampled from N (0, I/ dz ); the dimensionality of the observations varied between 30 and
100. with R ∼ N (0, 0.01), where the dimensionality of the observations varied between 30 and 100.

E.2    H OPF B IFURCATION

Latent trajectories were generated from the following two-dimensional dynamical system,
                     z˙1 = z2 + 5 dWt ,          z˙2 = −z1 + (µi − z12 )z2 + 5 dWt ,                    (32)
where the parameter µ controls the topology of the dynamics. Specifically, when µi < 0, this system
                        i

follows fixed point dynamics, and when µ > 0 the system bifurcates to a limit cycle.
We uniformly sampled M = 21 values of µi between -1.5 and 1.5, and for each µi , we generated 128
trajectories for training and 64 for testing, each trajectory was T = 350. Observations were generated
according to yti ∼ N (C√i zti , R) where R = 0.01 ∗ I and the elements of the readout matrix C i were
sampled from N (0, I/ dz ); the dimensionality of the observations varied between 30 and 100. For
evaluating few-shot performance, we generated two additional novel datasets where µM +1 = −0.675
and µM +2 = 1.125 (both values were not included in the training set).

E.3    D UFFING S YSTEM

For the Duffing system described in 18, we set c = 10   1
                                                          and varied        -0.1
values of a and b (shown in blue, Fig. 13) for generating 20 datasets.    b
We additionally used 11 datasets from C obtained by uniformly
sampling µ between -1.5 and 1.5. For few shot evaluation of various          -1.5
                                                                                  1    -0.6 -0.2
approaches, we used two held-out datasets from the Duffing system                        a
(shown in orange, Fig. 13), as well as a dataset from the Hopf            Training Data Held-Out Data
example generating by setting µ = −1.8. All empirical evaluation
                                                                       Figure 13: (ai , bi ) values used
was performed on 64 test trials from each dataset.
                                                                       to generate different datasets
                                                                       from the Duffing system.



                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4    M OTOR C ORTEX R ECORDINGS

We binned the spiking activity in 20ms bins and smoothed it with a 25ms causal Gaussian filter to
obtain the rates for all datasets. We further removed neurons that had a firing rate of less than 0.1Hz
and aligned the neural activity to movement onset. We used 512 trials when available or 80 percent
of the trials, each of length 36, for training all methods.

F     A DDITIONAL F IGURES

              A.1                                       Read-in                A.2                        agg
                                                       networks
                                                                                                            Embedding Encoder


                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                Neural Recordings


                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                                                               A.3
                                                                      .
                                                                      .
                                                                                                            Latent State Encoder


                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                                   .                  .

                                              ls   .
                                        tria       .


                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                    neurons


                                                                                                           trials from recording i,
                                                                  Recordings


                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                  .
                                               time               in common                                inferred embedding
                                                                     space

                                                           i                                    i
Figure 14: Inference Overview. A.1. Each recording y1:T      is projected into a common space ȳ1:T by
                                        i   dyi        dȳ
recording specific read-in networks Ω : R       → R . A.2. After being projected in this common
space, the recording is processed by an RNN (qα ) which infers the distribution over the dynamical
embedding. Note that the dynamical embedding is aggregated across trials belonging to the same
recording session. A.3. This inferred embedding is concatenated with ȳ1:T to obtain the latent state
trajectories for each recording via the encoder qβ , parametrized by a bi-directional RNN.


      A.      True Dynamics                                   B.               Learnt Dynamics         Learnt Dynamics
                                                                               (Linear Adapter)       (Embedding Input)


Figure 15: (Left) Dynamics learnt by Linear-Adapter and (Right) Embedding-Input corresponding to
the example dynamics on the true system shown in Fig. 4A.


                                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             A. True Dynamics               B. Our Approach            Embedding Input                         Linear Adapter


                                                                                                                                       stable
                                                                                                                                       fixed point
                                                                                                                                       unstable


Figure 16: (Left) True dynamics from example datasets used for pretraining in experiment 5.1. (Right)
Dynamics Learnt by different embedding-conditioned parametrizations.


                    Example dataset                                Example dataset
                     (Interpolation)                               (Extrapolation)

                                                                                                                       Closest embedding
          ns=1


                                                                                                                       on train tasks
                                                                                                                       Inferred embedding
          ns= 8
          ns= 16


                                                       e2


                                                              e1


Figure 17: Samples from the embedding distribution as a function of the number of training trajecto-
ries on 3 seeds on held-out datasets from the Duffing system (denoted by orange, Fig. 13)


                    A.               Inferred embedding                     B.                             Training sessions
                            dr = 6            dr = 3          dr = 4
                                                                                 Reconstruction r2


                                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                                     0.4


                         Centre-Out Sub M                                                            0.0
                         Centre-Out Sub C                                                                       Maze          CO
                         Maze Sub Je          dr = 5          dr = 8
                         Maze Sub Ni
                                                                                 Prediction r2


                                                                                                     0.4

                                                                                                     0.2

                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                                           3    4      5      6    8
                                                                                                                    Rank dr


Figure 18: A. Sample from the inferred embedding for different ranks (best of 3 seeds).B. The
behavior reconstruction (Top) and prediction (Bottom) r2 for different ranks averaged over 3 training
seeds.



                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        0.9                                                    0.6                                                             Our Method
                                                                                                                                                                               Linear Adapter
                    Held-out                            0.6                                                    0.3                                                             Single Session


                                    Reconstruction r2
                    Sessions                            0.3                                                                                                                    Shared Dynamics


                                                                                               Prediction r2
                                                                                                                 0                                                             Embedding Input
                                                         0                                                                                                                     LFADS Single Session
                                                                                                               0.6
                                                        0.9

                    Held-out                            0.6                                                    0.3
                    Subject                             0.3
                                                                                                                 0
                                                         0
                                                              8 16    32          64                                      8     16          32                     64
                                                             Training Samples                                                   Training Samples


Figure 19: Behavior reconstruction (Left) and forecasting (Right) for all methods as a function of
the number of training samples for held-out sessions from Sub M and C, and two sessions from a
held-out Subject.



     A.              Inferred embedding                              B.             Training sessions                                  C.                     Few Shot Performace
                                                                                                                                                                                            Held out session
                                                                                                                                                             0.5                            New subject


                                                                                                                                        Reconstructed
                                                                                                                                Maze
               1                                                           0.8                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                             0.3


                                                                                                                                             r2
               0
                                                                     r2


                                                                           0.4
      e2


                                                                                                                                                             0.1

               -1                                                                                                                                            0.3
                                                                           0.0

                                                                                                                                            Prediction r2
                                                                              Reconstruction                   Prediction                                   0.15
                    -1.5       0                          1.5
                               e1                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                 Our Method                    Single Session
          Centre-Out Sub M             Maze Sub Je                                                                                                                 8 16   32       64
          Centre-Out Sub C             Maze Sub Ni
                                                                                                                                                              Training Samples (ns)


Figure 20: A. Samples from the embedding distribution after training our approach using 2 CO
sessions from Sub C and M, and 2 Maze sessions from Sub Je and Ni. B. Reconstruction and
forecasting performance of the model on held out test trials relative to the Single Session models. C.
Few-shot reconstruction and forecasting performance on held out sessions and a new subject (Sub T).



                                                                Predicted behavior                                                                                   Predicted dynamics
e2


          e1


Figure 21: (Left) Grid points used for generating the latent dynamical trajectories and with the
inferred embedding distribution overlaid. The embedding of the CO session from Sub C used to infer
the initial condition of the latent state is highlighted in green. (Right) Single trials of the predicted
hand position and PC projections of the corresponding latent dynamics trajectories. The initial latent
state is denoted by the black points.



                                                                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Predicted behavior                          Predicted dynamics
e2


      e1


           Figure 22: Same as 21 but for a Maze session from Sub Je (highlighted in blue).


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

G.1    T RAINING

Since CAVIA (Concat) (Zintgraf et al., 2019), DYNAMO (Cotler et al., 2023) and CoDA (Kirchmeyer
et al., 2022) have not been developed for joint inference and learning of dynamics, we use our
framework for inference with modifications to the parametrization of the embedding conditioned
dynamics function on all experiments. We used the official implementation of LFADS in PyTorch to
obtain the results reported in the paper (Sedler & Pandarinath, 2023).
For our method and CoDA, we restricted parameter changes to the input, Win , and hidden weights,
Whh . We additionally included the Frobenius norm on the embedding-conditioned weight change
∥hφ (ei )∥P along with the ELBO (eq. 14) for both approaches.
Synthetic Experiments. For the results reported in C and 5.1, we used the Adam optimizer with
weight decay and a Cosine annealing schedule on the learning rate for pretraining all approaches.
Motor Cortex Recordings. We used the LAMB optimizer for pretraining all multi-session methods
on the motor cortex recordings and used Adam with weight decay for the single-session models, with
a Cosine annealing schedule on the learning rate in both cases. We also incorporated masking during
training for all approaches to encourage learning better latent dynamics. Specifically, we sampled the
latent state from the dynamics instead of the state inference network on randomly masked time bins
to compute the likelihood.
Aligning New Data. We pretrained all multi-session approaches for 3 seeds and picked the best
performing model to evaluate few-shot performance. When aligning new data to this pre-trained
model, we trained the dataset-specific read-in network, Ωi and likelihood functions piϕ for the new
dataset, in addition to the state noise, Qi , by optimizing the ELBO for new data (eq. 14). We used
Adam with weight decay for aligning, and additionally incorporated masking when aligning held-out
motor cortex datasets.


G.2    F IGURE G ENERATION

Vector Field. We generated all the vector field plots for synthetic experiments by sampling random
points on a 2-D grid to obtain zt . We used the mean dynamics learned by the model to estimate the
velocity at zt as, zt−1 = fθ (zt ) − zt . In the embedding-conditioned methods, we additionally used
the inference network, qα to estimate the dynamical embedding corresponding to each dataset, which
was used to conditionally generate the vector field plots.
We additionally align all learned vector field plots to the true system for ease of visual comparison
(Fig. 4A, 15, 16). We do do this by learning a linear transformation from the true latent trajectories to
the latent trajectories learned by the model. Note that we follow the same procedure when visualizing
latent trajectories inferred by multi-session CEBRA (Fig. 10A)
Context Interpolation. We fed the neural recordings up till movement onset time to the latent state
encoder, qβ , to obtain the latent state at movement onset, zt . We sampled points on a 2-D grid and
simulated the corresponding samples from the embedding distribution as e ∼ N (e, 0.1I). Given the
latent state at movement onset for a particular recording session, we were able to obtain different
dynamical trajectories by giving these embedding samples to the latent dynamics model fθ,e (zt )
along with zt . We used this procedure to obtain the results in in Fig. 7, 21 and 22.


G.3    M ETRICS

Synthetic Experiments. We report the r2 on observation reconstruction for test trials over the
entire length of the trial for all approaches. In order to evaluate the forecasting performance, we
                                                                                i
use observations till time t and sample the corresponding latent trajectories, z0:t , from the inference
network and the corresponding ei for the embedding-conditioned methods. We subsequently use
                                                                  i
the learned dynamics model to generate K steps ahead from zt+1:t+K          and map these generated


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


trajectories back to the observations. The k-step r2 for each dataset is computed as,
                                                PM
                                                      (yk − ŷk )2
                                     rk2 = 1 − Pi=1M            2
                                                   i=1 (yk − ȳ)

where ȳ is the mean activity during the trial, and M is the number of test trials.
Motor Cortex Recordings. On the motor cortex experiments, we report behavior decoding from the
reconstructed and forecasted observations for all methods. Specifically, for each session, we trained a
linear behavior decoder from the neural observations to the hand velocity of the subject, assuming a
uniform delay of 100ms between neural activity and behavior for all sessions.
After training all methods, we use reconstructed observations from the test trials to evaluate the
behavior reconstruction r2 . For evaluating the decoding performance from forecasted observations,
we used the first 13 time bins (around time till movement onset) to estimate the latent state and
embedding, and subsequently use the trained dynamics model to forecast the next 20 time bins. The
observations corresponding tp these forecasted trajectories were used to evaluate the prediction r2 .

G.4    H YPERPARAMETERS

Synthetic Examples. We used the following architecture for pretraining all methods, with de = 1
for the Motivating example and Hopf bifurcating system, and de = 2 for the combined Duffing and
Hopf example.

       • Inference network
            – Ωi : MLP(dyi , 64, 8)
            – qα : [GRU(16), Linear(16, 2 × de )]
            – qβ : [biGRU(64), Linear(128, 4)]
       • Generative model
            – fθ : MLP(2, 32, 32, 2)
            – hϑ : MLP(de , 16, 16, (64 + 33) × dr )
            – pϕi : [Linear(2, dyi )]
       • Training
            – lr: 0.005
            – weight decay: 0.001
            – batch size: 8 from each dataset

Motor Cortex Experiment.

       • Inference network
            – Ωi : MLP(dyi , 128, Dropout(0.6), 64)
            – qα : [GRU(64), Linear(64, 2 × de )]
            – qβ : [biGRU(128), Linear(128, 60)]
       • Generative model
            – fθ : MLP(30, 128, 128, 30)
            – hϑ : MLP(de , 64, 64, (256 + 158) × dr )
            – pϕi : [Linear(30, dyi )]
       • Training
            – lr: 0.01
            – weight decay: 0.05
            – batch size: 64 trials from 20 datasets


                                                  24
