Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


V IDEO G RAIN : M ODULATING S PACE -T IME ATTEN -
TION FOR M ULTI - GRAINED V IDEO E DITING

 Xiangpeng Yang 1 Linchao Zhu 2 Hehe Fan 2 Yi Yang 2∗
 1
   ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2 ReLER Lab, CCAI, Zhejiang University
 Project Page: https://knightyxp.github.io/VideoGrain_project_page

 Class level                                                    Instance level
         Editing to same class objects                             Separated editing to different instances


                                                                6


                             → Iron Man                               left cat   → Samoyed, right cat → Tiger，
                                                                                  background → sunrise
                       man


                         man → Batman,                              left cat →  Panda, right cat    →
                                                                                                 Toy poodle      ，
       clay court   → snow court, stone wall → iced wall       ground  →  grassy meadow, background      →
                                                                                                      starry night


  Part level          Adding new objects or modifying existing attributes at the part-level


                       man   → Superman Superman + cap         gray, half-sleeve     gray   → blue half-sleeve→full suit
 Figure 1: VideoGrain enables multi-grained video editing across class, instance, and part levels.
                                                      A BSTRACT
           Recent advancements in diffusion models have significantly improved video gen-
           eration and editing capabilities. However, multi-grained video editing, which
           encompasses class-level, instance-level, and part-level modifications, remains a
           formidable challenge. The major difficulties in multi-grained editing include se-
           mantic misalignment of text-to-region control and feature coupling within the
           diffusion model. To address these difficulties, we present VideoGrain, a zero-
           shot approach that modulates space-time (cross- and self-) attention mechanisms
           to achieve fine-grained control over video content. We enhance text-to-region
           control by amplifying each local prompt’s attention to its corresponding spatial-
           disentangled region while minimizing interactions with irrelevant areas in cross-
           attention. Additionally, we improve feature separation by increasing intra-region
           awareness and reducing inter-region interference in self-attention. Extensive ex-
           periments demonstrate our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in real-
           world scenarios. Our code, data, and demos are available on the project page.
  ∗
      Corresponding author


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1      I NTRODUCTION
                                                                           T2I class-level:   T2I instance-level:   T2V based:     T2V based:
    Source Video     Class Level       Instance Level    Part Level
                                                                            TokenFlow          Ground-A-Video         DMT            Pika


                                    left man→Spiderman, Polar bear
                   man   →Spiderman right man→Polar bear +sunglasses
                                                                                  "A Spiderman and a polar bear are jogging on grassy meadow
                                                                                                    before cherry trees"

         Figure 2: Definition of multi-grained video editing and comparison on instance editing

Recent advances in Text-to-Image (T2I) and Text-to-Video (T2V) diffusion models (Rombach et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Brooks et al., 2024) have enabled video manipulation through natural
language prompts. In practical applications, enabling users to edit regions at various levels of gran-
ularity based on textual prompts offers greater flexibility. To investigate this, we introduce a new
task called multi-grained video editing, which encompasses class-level, instance-level, and part-
level editing, as shown in Fig. 2 left. Class-level editing refers to modifying objects within the same
class. Instance-level editing means editing different instances into distinct objects. Part-level going
further, requires adding new objects or modifying existing attributes at part-level.
While existing methods employ various visual consistency techniques, such as optical flow (Cong
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023), control signals (Zhang et al., 2023b), or feature correspondence
(Geyer et al., 2023). These methods remain instance-agnostic, often mixing features of different
instances during editing (see Fig. 2 right). Ground-A-Video (Jeong & Ye, 2023), which inherits
text-to-bounding box generation priors (Li et al., 2023), should be instance-level editing but still
suffer from artifacts. Similarly, recent T2V-based methods like DMT (Yatim et al., 2024) and Pika
(pik), although equipped with video generation priors, struggle with multi-grained edits. We find that
the core issue is that diffusion models tend to treat different instances as the same class segments,
leading to strong feature coupling across instances, as illustrated in Figure 3.
To address this problem, our primary insight is to 1) enable text-to-region control and 2) keep feature
separation between regions. In the typical diffusion models, the cross-attention layer serves as a key
component to update textual features control over each spatial region, while the self-attention layer
generates globally coherent structures by connecting each frame token across time. Therefore, we
propose Spatial-Temporal Layout-Guided Attention (ST-Layout Attn), which modulates both space-
time cross- and self-attention in a unified manner to achieve the above goals.
In the cross-attention layer, the uniform application of global text prompts across all frame tokens
leads to severe semantic misalignment, which reduces the precision of multi-grained text-to-region
control. To address this, we modulate cross-attention to amplify each local prompt’s focus on its
corresponding spatial-disentangled region while suppressing attention to irrelevant areas. In the
self-attention layer, pixels from one region may attend to outside or similar regions within the same
class, leading to feature coupling and texture mixing, which is an inherent limitation of diffusion
models that complicates multi-grained video editing. To mitigate this, we modulate self-attention to
enhance feature separation by increasing intra-region focus and reducing inter-region interactions,
ensuring each query attends only to its target region.
Our key contributions can be summarized as follows:

          • To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt at multi-grained video editing. Our
            method enables both class-level, instance-level and part-level editing.

          • We propose a novel framework, dubbed VideoGrain, which modulates spatial-temporal
            cross- and self-attention for text-to-region control and feature separation between regions.

          • Without tuning any parameters, we achieve state-of-the-art results on existing benchmarks
            and real-world videos both qualitatively and quantitatively.


                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   T EXT- TO -I MAGE E DITING /G ENERATION

In the realm of single attribute text-to-image editing, various approaches have been explored, from
manipulating attention maps in Pix2Pix-Zero (Parmar et al., 2023) and Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al.,
2022) to employing masks in DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2023) and Latent Blend (Avrahami et al.,
2022; 2023) for foreground modifications while preserving the background.
For multi-grained editing, efforts like Attention and Excite (Chefer et al., 2023) and DPL (Wang
et al., 2023b) focus on maximizing attention scores for each subject token and reducing attention
leakage. In image generation, (Kim et al., 2023) modulates attention based on layout masks and
dense captions, while (Phung et al., 2023) proposed an attention refocus loss for regularization.
However, using single-frame layout masks and dense captioning alone is insufficient for video edit-
ing, as it fails to maintain the original video’s integrity and temporal consistency.


2.2   T EXT- TO -V IDEO E DITING

Video Editing based on Image Diffusion Models. Tune-A-Video (TAV) (Wu et al., 2022) is the
first work to extend latent diffusion models to the spatial-temporal domain and encode the source
motion implicitly by one-shot tuning but still fails to preserve local details. Fatezero (Qi et al.,
2023) and Pix2Video (Ceylan et al., 2023) fuse self- or cross-attention maps in the inversion pro-
cess for temporal consistency. However, (Qi et al., 2023) requires extensive RAM usage and suffers
from layout preservation even when equipping TAV for local object editing. (Chai et al., 2023) and
(Ouyang et al., 2023), following the Neural Atlas (Kasten et al., 2021) or dynamic Nerf’s defor-
mation field (Pumarola et al., 2021), struggle with non-grid human motion. Subsequent methods
like Rerender-A-Video (Yang et al., 2023), FLATTEN (Cong et al., 2023) ControlVideo (Zhang
et al., 2023b) achieve strict temporal consistency via optical-flow, depth/edge maps, but failed in
multi-grained editing while preserving original layouts. Tokenflow (Geyer et al., 2023) enforces a
linear mix of nearest key-frame features to ensure consistency but results in detail loss. Ground-A-
Video (Jeong & Ye, 2023) leverages groundings for multi-grained editing, but it suffers from feature
mixing when bounding boxes overlap.
Video Editing based on Video Diffusion Models. Previous video editing work primarily utilized
text-to-image SD model (Rombach et al., 2022). Recent advancements in video foundation mod-
els (Yu et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Yang et al., 2024e) have led efforts like
VideoSwap (Gu et al., 2023) to employ temporal priors for customized motion transfer or motion
editing (Mou et al., 2025). Yet, current video foundation models are limited to fixed views and
struggle with non-grid human motions. Additionally, these editing methods require tuning parame-
ters, which poses a challenge for real-time video editing applications. In contrast, our VideoGrain
method requires no parameter tuning, enabling zero-shot, multi-grained video editing.


3     M ETHOD

3.1   M OTIVATION

To investigate why previous methods failed in instance-level video editing (see Fig. 2), we begin
with a basic analysis of the self-attention and cross-attention features within the diffusion model.
As shown in Fig. 3 (b), we apply K-Means clustering to the per-frame self-attention features during
DDIM Inversion. Although the clustering captures a clear semantic layout, it fails to distinguish be-
tween distinct instances (e.g., “left man” and “right man”). Increasing the number of clusters leads
to finer segmentation at the part level but does not resolve this issue, indicating that feature homo-
geneity across instances limits the diffusion model’s effectiveness in multi-grained video editing.
Next, we attempt to edit the same class of two men into different instances using SDEdit (Meng
et al., 2022). However, Fig. 3 (d) shows that the weights for “Iron Man” and “Spiderman” overlap
on the left man, and “blossoms” weight leaks onto the right man, resulting in the failed edit in (c).


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Frame 1           Frame 2            Frame 3               segment = 3        segment = 4         segment =5


                (a) Source video input                             (b) K-Means cluster Self-Attention feature


  (c) Instance-level failed case (d) Cross-Attention Map: "An Iron Man and a Spiderman are jogging under cherry blossoms"
Figure 3: Analysis of why the diffusion model failed in instance-level video editing. Our goal is
to edit left man into “Iron Man,” right man into “Spiderman,” and trees into “cherry blossoms.” In
(b), we apply K-Means on self-attention, and in (d), we visualize the 32x32 cross-attention map.

Thus, for effective multi-grained editing, we pose the following question: Can we modulate attention
to ensure that each local edit’s attention weights are accurately distributed in the intended regions?
To answer this, we propose VideoGrain with two key designs: (1) Modulate cross-attention to induce
textual features to congregate in corresponding spatial-disentangled regions, thereby enabling text-
to-region control. (2) Modulate self-attention across the spatial-temporal axis to enhance intra-
region focus and reduce inter-region interference, avoiding feature coupling within diffusion model.

3.2    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

The purpose of this work is to perform multi-grained video editing across multiple regions based on
the given prompts. This involves three hierarchical levels:
(1) Class-level editing: Editing objects within the same class. (e.g., changing two men to “Spider-
man,” where both belong to the human class, as seen in Fig. 2 second column)
(2) Instance-level editing: Editing each individual instance to distinct object. (e.g., editing left man
to “Spiderman,” right man to “Polar Bear,” as shown in Fig. 2 third column).
(3) Part-level editing: Applying part-level edit to specific elements of individual instances. (e.g.,
adding “sunglasses ”when editing the right man to “Polar Bear” in Fig. 2 fourth column).
Given a source video V ∈ RN ×3×H×W , where N is the number of frames, our goal is to obtain an
edited video V′ based on specified edits. We aim to improve multi-grained control in video editing
by conditioning on each region’s location and its text prompt. More formally, we optimize a video
editing model f (τg , (τ1 , m1 ), . . . , (τk , mk )), where τg is a global prompt, and (τk , mk ) are the kth
region’s prompt and corresponding location.

3.3    OVERALL F RAMEWORK

The proposed zero-shot multi-grained video editing pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 4 top. Initially,
to retain high fidelity, we perform DDIM Inversion (Song et al., 2021) over the clean latent x0 to
get the noisy latent xt . After the inversion process, we cluster the self-attention features to get
the semantic layout as in Fig. 3 (b). Since self-attention features alone cannot distinguish between
individual instances, we further employ SAM-Track (Cheng et al., 2023) to segment each instance.
Finally, in the denoising process, we introduce ST-Layout Attn to modulate cross- and self-attention
for text-to-region control and keep feature separation between regions, as detailed in Sec. 3.4.
Different from one global text prompt control of all frames, VideoGrain allows paired instance- or
part-level prompts and their locations to be specified in the denoising process. Our method is also
versatile to ControlNet condition e, which can be depth or pose maps to provide structure conditions.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                    Spatial-Temporal Layout Attention Intergration                                                                                                            Conv Block   Self Attention     Cross Attention

                                       semantic void condition
                                                                                                         DDIM denoising
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Predicted noise


                                                                                                          ...                                               ...                                                                                                             ...
                                          Inverted Latents

                                      DDIM
                                     Inversion
                                                                                                         Noise predictor                                                                                                                          " Spiderman and Polar Bear are jogging on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    grassy meadow before cherry trees "



                                                                                                            Modulating Cross Attention                                                                                                     Before Cross-Attention
   Cross-Attention Layer                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Modulation


                                                                                                                      Spiderman


                                                                                                                                                                                                               jogging
                                                                                                                                                                  Polar

                                                                                                                                                                          Bear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ...


                                                                                                                                  and


                                                                                                                                                                                 are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tokens of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                interest


                                                                                                                                                                                 Negative Pair Positive Pair
                                                                                                                                  Positive Pair Negative Pair
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Spiderman (w =1 ) Polar ( w = 3)    Bear (w = 4)
                                                 Spiderman


                                                                                        jogging
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ↑positive
                                                                   Polar
                                                                           Bear

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           After Cross-Attention
                                                             and



                                                                                  are
                                                                                                  ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Modulation           ↓negative

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tokens of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                interest

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Spiderman (w = 1)      Polar (w = 3)                 Bear (w = 4)
       : original cross attention.      : positive score.             : negative score


      Self-Attention Layer                                                                                                                          Modulating Self Attention                                                              Before Self-Attention
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Modulation
                                                                                                                                                                           Key(                                            )


                                         Positive Pair                        Positive Pair


                                                                                                                ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           After Self-Attention
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ↑positive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Modulation                         ↓negative
                                                                                                                             Query


                                                    Negative Pair                           Negative Pair


      : original self attention.       : positive score.            : negative score



Figure 4: VideoGrain pipeline. (1) we integrate ST-Layout Attn into the frozen SD for multi-grained
editing, where we modulate self- and cross-attention in a unified manner. (2) In cross-attention, we
view each local prompt and its location as positive pairs, while the prompt and outside-location
areas are negative pairs, enabling text-to-region control. (3) In self-attention, we enhance positive
awareness within intra-regions and restrict negative interactions between inter-regions across frames,
making each query only attend to the target region and keep feature separation. In the bottom two
figures, p denotes original attention score and w, i denotes the word and frame index.
3.4        S PATIAL -T EMPORAL L AYOUT-G UIDED ATTENTION

Based on the observation in Sec.3.1, cross-attention weight distribution adheres to the edit result.
Meanwhile, self-attention is also crucial to generate temporal consistent video. However, the pixels
in one region may attend to outside or similar regions, which poses an obstacle for multi-grained
video editing. Therefore, we need to modulate both self- and cross-attention to make each pixel or
local prompt only focus on the correct region.
To achieve this goal, we modulate both cross- and self-attention mechanisms via a unified increase
positive and decrease negative manner. Specifically, for the ith frame of the query feature, we
modulate the query-key QK ⊤ condition map as follows:

                                                                              self/cross      QK ⊤ + λM self/cross
                                                                           Ai                         √ = softmax( ),
                                                                                                        d                                                                                                                                                                                                      (1)
                                                                       M self/cross = Ri ⊙ Mipos − (1 − Ri ) ⊙ Mineg ,

where Ri ∈ R|queries|×|keys| indicates the query-key pair condition map at frame i, manipulating
whether to increase or decrease the attention score for a particular pair. And λ = ξ(t) · (1 − Si ) is a
regularization term. We follow the conclusion from (Kim et al., 2023), the ξ(t) controls the modu-
lation intensity across time-steps, allowing for gradual refinement of shape and appearance details.
The latter is a size regulation term, making smaller region mk subjected to larger modulation, en-
abling dynamic attention weight adjustments to layout size variations.


                                                                                                                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Modulate Cross-Attention for Text-to-Region Control. In the cross-attention layer, the textual
feature serves as key and value, and interacts with the query feature from the video latent. Since
each instance’s appearance and location are closely related to the cross-attention weight distribution,
we aim to encourage each instance’s textual features to congregate in the corresponding location.
As shown in Fig. 4 mid, given the layout condition (τk , mk ). For example, for τ1 = Spiderman,
within the query-key cross-attention map, we can manually specify that the portion of the query
feature corresponding to m1 is positive, while all the remaining parts are designated as negative.
Therefore, for each frame i, we can set the modulation value in cross attention layer as:

                                    Mipos = max(QK ⊤ ) − QK ⊤ ,
                                                                                                   (2)
                                    Mineg = QK ⊤ − min(QK ⊤ ),

                                                        mi,k , if y ∈ τk
                                                    n
                                 Ricross [x, y] =                        ,                         (3)
                                                        0,     otherwise

where x and y are the query and key indices, and Ricross is the query-key condition map in the cross
attention layer. We regularize this condition map by initially broadcasting each region’s mask mi,k
to its corresponding text key embedding Kτk , resulting in a condition map Ricross ∈ R(H×W )×L .
Each sub-region intensity then adjusts gradually in the generation process. We set Mipos/neg based
on the gap between max/min values and the original scores, to keep modulated values within the
original range. Our modulation is applied to all frames to achieve spatial-temporal region control.
As shown in Fig. 4 (mid right), after adding positive and subtracting negative values, the original
cross-attn weight of “Spiderman” (e.g., p) is amplified and focused on the left man. While the dis-
tract weight of “polar” “bear” become concentrated on the right man. These indicate our modulation
redistributes each prompt’s weight align with target areas, enabling precise text-to-region control.
Modulate Self-Attention to Keep Feature Separation. To adapt the T2I model for T2V editing,
we treat the full video as ”a larger picture,” replacing spatial attention with spatial-temporal self-
attention while retaining the pretrained weights. This enhances cross-frame interaction and provides
a broader visual context. However, naive self-attention can cause regions to attend to irrelevant or
similar areas (e.g., Fig. 4 bottom, before modulation query p attend to two-man), which leads to
mixed texture. To address this, we need to strengthen positive focus within the same region and
restrict negative interactions between different regions.
As shown in Fig. 4 (bottom left), the maximum cross-frame diffusion feature indicates the strongest
response among tokens within the same region. Note that DIFT (Tang et al., 2023) uses this to
match different images, while we focus on cross-frame correspondences and intra-region attention
modulation in the generation process. Nevertheless, negative inter-region correspondence is equally
crucial for decoupling feature mixing. Beyond DIFT, we find that the minimum cross-frame dif-
fusion feature similarity effectively captures the relations between tokens across different regions.
Therefore, we define the spatial-temporal positive/negative values as:

                      Mipos = max(Qi [K1 , · · · , Kn ]⊤ ) − Qi [K1 , · · · , Kn ]⊤ ),
                                                                                 ⊤
                                                                                                   (4)
                      Mineg = Qi [K1 , · · · , Kn ]⊤ − min(Qi [K1 , · · · , Kn ] ).

To ensure each patch attends to intra-regions feature while avoiding interaction in inter-regions fea-
ture. We define the spatial-temporal query-key condition map:

                                        0, ∀j ∈ [1 : N ], if mi,k [x] ̸= mj,k [y]
                      Riself [x, y] =                                             .                (5)
                                        1, otherwise

For frame indices i and j, the value is zero when tokens belong to different instances across frames.
As shown in the right part of Fig. 4 bottom, after applying our self-attention modulation, the query
feature from the left man’s nose (e.g., p) attends only to the left instance, avoiding distraction to
the right instance. This demonstrates that our self-attention modulation breaks the diffusion model’s
class-level feature correspondence, ensuring feature separation at the instance level.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              " A cute pig in the autumn forest "                        " A firetruck and a school bus are driving on the road "


          " A Spider Man and a Wonder Woman are playing                 " An Iron Man pushes a Stormtrooper in the soapbox
               badminton before charcoal grey wall "                       on mossy stone bridge over lake in the forest "


" An Iron Man and a Spiderman are jogging under cherry blossoms "        " Superman spins moon under cherry blossoms "


 Instances swap identity + bg -> asphalt road with building under sky        Part-level editing: Superman + sunglasses

Figure 5: Qualitative results. VideoGrain achieves multi-grained video editing, including class-
level, instance-level, and part-level. We refer the reader to our project page for full-video results.
4       E XPERIMENTS

4.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

In the experiment, we adopt the pretrained Stable Diffusion v1.5 as the base model, using 50 steps
of DDIM inversion and denoising. Our VideoGrain operates in a zero-shot manner, requiring no
additional parameter tuning. To enhance memory efficiency, we re-engineer slice attention within
our ST Layout Attn. ST Layout Attn is applied during the first 15 denoising steps. We set ξ(t) =
0.3·t5 for self-attention and ξ(t) = t5 for cross-attention, where the timestep t ∈ [0, 1] is normalized.
All The experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA A40 GPU. We evaluate our VideoGrain using a
dataset of 76 video-text pairs, including videos from DAVIS (Perazzi et al., 2016), TGVE1 , and the
Internet2 , with 16-32 frames per video. Four automatic metrics are employed for evaluation: CLIP-
T, CLIP-F, Warp-Err, and Q-edit, following (Wu et al., 2022; Cong et al., 2023). All metrics are
scaled by 100 for clarity. For baselines, we compare against T2I-based methods, including FateZero
(Qi et al., 2023), ControlVideo (Zhang et al., 2023b), TokenFlow (Geyer et al., 2023), GroundVideo
(Jeong & Ye, 2023) and T2V-based DMT (Yatim et al., 2024). To ensure temporal consistency,
we employ FLATTEN (Cong et al., 2023) and PnP (Tumanyan et al., 2023). For fairness, all T2I
baselines are equipped with the same ControlNet conditions.
    1
        https://sites.google.com/view/loveucvpr23/track4
    2
        https://www.istockphoto.com/ and https://www.pexels.com/



                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Animal Instances                           Human Instances                               Part level


                  A Panda and a toy poodle are playing   An Iron Man and a monkey are riding bikes   Thor in sunglasses, punching red boxing
                 toys in starry night on grassy meadow   on the snowy ground under cherry blossoms          gloves in starry night sky
  FateZero
  ControlVideo
 TokenFlow
Groud-A-Video
DMT
VideoGrain


Figure 6: Qualitative comparisons. We refer the reader to our project page for detailed assessment.

4.2               R ESULTS

We evaluate VideoGrain on videos covering class-level, instance-level, and part-level edits. Our
method demonstrates versatility in handling animals, such as transforming a “wolf” into a “pig”
(Fig. 5, top left). For instance-level editing, we can modify vehicles separately (e.g., transforming
an “SUV” into a “firetruck” and a “van” into a “school bus”) in Fig. 5, top right. VideoGrain
excels at editing multiple instances in complex, occluded scenes, like “Spider-Man and Wonder
Woman playing badminton” (Fig. 5, middle left). Previous methods often struggle with such non-
rigid motion. In addition, our method is capable of multi-region editing, where both foreground and
background are edited, as shown in the soap-box scene, where the background changes to “a mossy
stone bridge over a lake in the forest” (Fig. 5, middle right). Thanks to precise attention weight
distribution, we can swap identities seamlessly, such as in the jogging scene, where “Iron Man”
and “Spider-Man” swap identities (Fig. 5, bottom left). For part-level edits, VideoGrain excels in
adjusting a character to wear a Superman suit while keeping sunglasses intact (Fig. 5, bottom right).
Overall, for multi-grained editing, our VideoGrain demonstrates outstanding performance.

4.3               Q UALITATIVE AND Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISONS

Qualitative Comparison. Figure 6 shows a comparison between VideoGrain and baseline meth-
ods, including T2I-based and T2V-based approaches, for instance-level and part-level editing. For
fairness, all T2I-based methods use ControlNet conditioning. (1) Animal instances: In the left
column, T2I-based methods like FateZero, ControlVideo, and TokenFlow edit both cats into pandas
due to same-class feature coupling in diffusion models, failing to perform separate edits. DMT, even
with video generation priors, still blends the panda and toy poodle features. In contrast, VideoGrain
successfully edits one into a panda and the other into a toy poodle. (2) Human instances: In the
middle column, baselines struggle with same-class feature coupling, partially editing both men into


                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Automatic Metric                                       Human Evaluation
      Method             CLIP-F ↑     CLIP-T ↑ Warp-Err ↓           Q-edit ↑          Edit-Acc ↑ Temp-Con ↑ Overall ↑
     FateZero             95.75        33.78      3.08               10.96               59.8       78.6       59.6
   ControlVideo           97.71        34.41      4.73                7.27               53.2       50.0       43.6
    TokenFlow             96.48        34.59      2.82               12.28               45.4       50.4       39.8
  Ground-A-Video          95.17        35.09      4.43                7.92               69.0       72.0       63.2
      DMT                 96.34        34.09      2.05               16.63               58.7       79.4       64.5
 VideoGrain(ours)         98.63        36.56      1.42               25.75               88.4       85.0       83.0
 Table 1: Quantitative comparison of automatic metrics and human evaluation. The best results are bolded.
Iron Man. DMT and Ground-A-Video also fail to follow user intent, incorrectly editing the left and
right instances. VideoGrain, however, correctly transforms the right man into a monkey, breaking
the human-class limitation. (3) Part-level editing: In the third column, VideoGrain manages part-
level edits, such as sunglasses and boxing gloves. ControlVideo edits the gloves but struggles with
sunglasses and motion consistency. TokenFlow and DMT edit the sunglasses but fail to modify the
gloves or background. In comparison, VideoGrain achieves both instance-level and part-level edits,
significantly outperforming previous methods.
Quantitative Comparison. We compare the performance of different methods using both automatic
metrics and human evaluation. CLIP-T calculates the average cosine similarity between the input
prompt and all video frames, while CLIP-F measures the average cosine similarity between consec-
utive frames. Additionally, Warp-Err captures pixel-level differences by warping the edited video
frames according to the optical flow of the source video, extracted using RAFT-Large (Teed & Deng,
2020). To provide a more comprehensive measure of video editing quality, we follow (Cong et al.,
2023) and use Q-edit, defined as CLIP-T/Warp-Err. For clarity, we scale all automatic metrics by
100. In terms of human evaluation, we assess three key aspects: Edit-Accuracy (whether each local
edit is accurately applied), Temporal Consistency (evaluated by participants for coherence between
video frames), and Overall Edit Quality. We invited 20 participants to rate 76 video-text pairs on
a scale of 20 to 100 across these three criteria, following (Jeong & Ye, 2023). As demonstrated in
Table 1, VideoGrain consistently outperforms both T2I- and T2V-based methods. This is primarily
due to ST-Layout Attn’s precise text-to-region control and maintaining feature separation between
regions. As a result, our method achieves significantly higher CLIP-T and Edit-Accuracy scores
compared to other baselines. The improved Warp-Err and Temporal Consistency metrics further
indicate that VideoGrain delivers temporally coherent video edits.
Efficiency Comparison. To evaluate efficiency, we compared baselines with VideoGrain on a single
A6000 GPU for editing 16 video frames. The metrics include editing time (time taken to perform
one edit) and both GPU and CPU memory usage. From Tab. 2, it is clear our method achieves the
fastest editing time with the lowest memory usage, indicating its computational efficiency.

                  Time(min) ↓   Memory (GB) ↓   RAM (GB) ↓   ❌ W/O ST-Layout Attn   Attn Weight Before   Attn Weight After   ✅ ST-Layout Attn
 FateZero            8.68          27.35          144.22
 ControlVideo        4.41          16.15           7.03
 TokenFlow           4.56          17.84           5.35
 Ground-A-Video      5.81          17.31           9.96
 DMT                 5.79          27.88           8.12
 VideoGrain          3.83          15.94           4.42

         Table 2: Efficiency comparison.                            Figure 7: Attention weight distribution.

4.4   A BLATION S TUDY

To assess the contributions of different components in our proposed ST-Layout Attn, we first evalu-
ate whether our attention can achieve attention weight distribution, then decouple the self-attention
modulation and cross-attention modulation to evaluate their individual effectiveness.
Attention Weight Distribution. We evaluate the impact of ST-Layout Attn on attention weight
distribution. As shown in Fig. 7, the target prompt is “An Iron Man is playing tennis on a snow
court.” We visualize the cross-attention map for “man” to assess weight distribution. Without ST-
Layout Attn, feature mixing occurs, with “snow” weight spilling onto “Iron Man.” With ST-Layout
Attn, the man’s weight is correctly distributed. This is because we enhance positive pair scores and
suppress negative pairs in both cross- and self-attention. This enables precise, separate edits for
“Iron Man” and “snow.” Additional visualizations are in the Appendix.


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         left man   → Iron Man, right man → Spider man, ground, trees → frosty yellow leaves


                      Source video                                 (—) Cross-Attention Modulation
                                                                   (—) Self-Attention Modulation


             (+) Cross-Attention Modulation                        (+) Cross-Attention Modulation
             (—) Self-Attention Modulation                         (+) Self-Attention Modulation


               Figure 8: Ablation of cross- and self-modulation in ST-Layout Attn.

                          Method                        CLIP-F ↑   CLIP-T ↑     Warp-Err ↓    Qedit ↑
                          Baseline                       95.21      33.59         3.86          8.70
                Baseline + Cross Modulation              96.28      36.09         2.53         14.26
      Baseline + Cross Modulation + Self Modulation      98.63      36.56         1.42         25.75

          Table 3: Quantitative ablation of cross- and self-modulation in ST-Layout Attn.

Cross-Attention Modulation. In Fig. 8 and Tab. 3, we illustrate video editing results under different
set up: (1) Baseline (2) Baseline + Cross-Attn Modulation (3) Baseline + Cross-Attn Modulation +
Self-Attn Modulation. As shown in Fig. 8 top right, direct editing fails to discriminate between the
left and right instances, leading to incorrect (left) or no edits(right). However, when equipped with
cross-attention modulation, we achieve accurate text-to-region control, thereby editing left man to
“Iron Man” and right man to “Spiderman” separately. The quantitative results in Tab. 3 indicate that
with cross-attention modulation (second row), CLIP-T increases by 7.4%, and Q-edit increases by
63.9%. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our cross-attention modulation.
Self-Attention Modulation. However, modulating only cross-attention still leads to structure dis-
tortions, such as the spider web appearing on the left man. This is caused by the coupling of same
class-level features (e.g., human). When using our self-attention modulation, the feature mixing is
significantly reduced, and the left man retains unique object features. This is achieved by decreas-
ing the negative pair scores between different instances, while increasing positive scores within the
same instance. As a result, more part-level details, such as the distinctive blue sides, are generated
in the optimized areas. The quantitative decrease in Warp-Err by 43.9% and increase in Q-edit by
80.6% in Tab. 3 further prove the effectiveness of self-attention modulation.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we aim to solve the problem of multi-grained video editing, which includes both
class-level, instance-level and part-level video editing. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first attempt at this task. In this task, we find that the key problem is that the diffusion model
views different instances as same-class features and direct global editing will mix different local re-
gions. To wrestle with these problems, we propose VideoGrain to modulate spatial-temporal cross-
and self-attention for text-to-region control while keeping feature separation between regions. In
cross-attention, we enhance each local prompt’s focus on its corresponding spatial-disentangled
region while suppressing attention to irrelevant areas, thereby enabling text-to-region control. In
self-attention, we increase intra-region awareness and reduce inter-region interactions to keep fea-
ture separation between regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our VideoGrain surpasses
previous video editing methods on both class-level, instance-level, and part-level video editing.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   E THICS STATEMENT
This project aims to solve multi-grained video editing. However, the potential misuse of this tech-
nology, such as the creation of deceptive videos by altering identities, poses a risk. Strategies like
incorporating invisible watermarking could be explored to ensure videos are not used maliciously.

R EFERENCES
https://www.pika.art/. URL https://www.pika.art/.
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 18208–18218, 2022.
Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM Transactions on
 Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–11, 2023.
Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe
  Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh. Video
  generation models as world simulators. 2024. URL https://openai.com/research/
  video-generation-models-as-world-simulators.
Duygu Ceylan, Chun-Hao P Huang, and Niloy J Mitra. Pix2video: Video editing using image
  diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  23206–23217, 2023.
Wenhao Chai, Xun Guo, Gaoang Wang, and Yan Lu. Stablevideo: Text-driven consistency-aware
 diffusion video editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
 Vision, pp. 23040–23050, 2023.
Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Attend-and-excite:
  Attention-based semantic guidance for text-to-image diffusion models. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–10, 2023.
Yangming Cheng, Liulei Li, Yuanyou Xu, Xiaodi Li, Zongxin Yang, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang.
  Segment and track anything. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06558, 2023.
Yuren Cong, Mengmeng Xu, Christian Simon, Shoufa Chen, Jiawei Ren, Yanping Xie, Juan-Manuel
  Perez-Rua, Bodo Rosenhahn, Tao Xiang, and Sen He. Flatten: optical flow-guided attention for
  consistent text-to-video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05922, 2023.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-
  based semantic image editing with mask guidance. In ICLR 2023 (Eleventh International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations), 2023.
Michal Geyer, Omer Bar-Tal, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Tokenflow: Consistent diffusion features
 for consistent video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10373, 2023.
Yuchao Gu, Yipin Zhou, and Mike Zheng et al. Videoswap: Customized video subject swapping
  with interactive semantic point correspondence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02087, 2023.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff:
  Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.04725, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. 2022.
Hyeonho Jeong and Jong Chul Ye. Ground-a-video: Zero-shot grounded video editing using text-
  to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01107, 2023.
Heng Jia, Yunqiu Xu, Linchao Zhu, Guang Chen, Yufei Wang, and Yi Yang. Mos2: Mixture of scale
  and shift experts for text-only video captioning. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International
  Conference on Multimedia, pp. 8498–8507, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yoni Kasten, Dolev Ofri, Oliver Wang, and Tali Dekel. Layered neural atlases for consistent video
  editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(6):1–12, 2021.
Yunji Kim, Jiyoung Lee, Jin-Hwa Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Dense text-to-image
  generation with attention modulation. In ICCV, 2023.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. CVPR, 2023.
Shaoteng Liu, Yuechen Zhang, Wenbo Li, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya Jia. Video-p2p: Video editing with
  cross-attention control. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 8599–8608, 2024.
Yu Lu, Yuanzhi Liang, Linchao Zhu, and Yi Yang. Freelong: Training-free long video genera-
  tion with spectralblend temporal attention. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Yue Ma, Xiaodong Cun, Yingqing He, Chenyang Qi, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, Xiu Li, and Qifeng
  Chen. Magicstick: Controllable video editing via control handle transformations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.03047, 2023.
Yue Ma, Yingqing He, Xiaodong Cun, Xintao Wang, Siran Chen, Xiu Li, and Qifeng Chen. Follow
  your pose: Pose-guided text-to-video generation using pose-free videos. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4117–4125, 2024a.
Yue Ma, Hongyu Liu, Hongfa Wang, Heng Pan, Yingqing He, Junkun Yuan, Ailing Zeng, Chengfei
  Cai, Heung-Yeung Shum, Wei Liu, et al. Follow-your-emoji: Fine-controllable and expressive
  freestyle portrait animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01900, 2024b.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  SDEdit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Chong Mou, Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhaoyang Zhang, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang. Revideo:
  Remake a video with motion and content control. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 37:18481–18505, 2025.
Hao Ouyang, Qiuyu Wang, Yuxi Xiao, Qingyan Bai, Juntao Zhang, Kecheng Zheng, Xiaowei Zhou,
  Qifeng Chen, and Yujun Shen. Codef: Content deformation fields for temporally consistent video
  processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07926, 2023.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp.
  1–11, 2023.
Federico Perazzi, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Brian McWilliams, and Van Gool et al. A benchmark dataset and
  evaluation methodology for video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 724–732, 2016.
Quynh Phung, Songwei Ge, and Jia-Bin Huang. Grounded text-to-image synthesis with attention
  refocusing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05427, 2023.
Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural
  radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10318–10327, 2021.
Chenyang Qi, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Chenyang Lei, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng
  Chen. Fatezero: Fusing attentions for zero-shot text-based video editing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.09535, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Luming Tang, Menglin Jia, Qianqian Wang, Cheng Perng Phoo, and Bharath Hariharan. Emer-
  gent correspondence from image diffusion. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ypOiXjdfnU.
Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
  Part II 16, pp. 402–419. Springer, 2020.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1921–1930, 2023.
Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Mod-
   elscope text-to-video technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06571, 2023a.
Kai Wang, Fei Yang, Shiqi Yang, Muhammad Atif Butt, and Joost van de Weijer. Dynamic
  prompt learning: Addressing cross-attention leakage for text-based image editing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.15664, 2023b.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models
  for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022.
Shuai Yang, Yifan Zhou, Ziwei Liu, , and Chen Change Loy. Rerender a video: Zero-shot text-
  guided video-to-video translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia Conference Proceedings, 2023.
Xiangpeng Yang, Linchao Zhu, Hehe Fan, and Yi Yang. Eva: Zero-shot accurate attributes and
  multi-object video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16111, 2024a.
Xiangpeng Yang, Linchao Zhu, Xiaohan Wang, and Yi Yang. Dgl: Dynamic global-local prompt
  tuning for text-video retrieval. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  pp. 6540–6548, 2024b.
Yiyuan Yang, Guodong Long, Michael Blumenstein, Xiubo Geng, Chongyang Tao, Tao Shen, and
  Daxin Jiang. Pre-training cross-modal retrieval by expansive lexicon-patch alignment. In LREC-
  COLING 2024, pp. 12977–12987, 2024c.
Yiyuan Yang, Guodong Long, Tao Shen, Jing Jiang, and Michael Blumenstein. Dual-personalizing
  adapter for federated foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19211, 2024d.
Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang,
  Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models
  with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072, 2024e.
Danah Yatim, Rafail Fridman, Omer Bar-Tal, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Space-time diffusion
  features for zero-shot text-driven motion transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8466–8476, 2024.
Lijun Yu, Yong Cheng, Kihyuk Sohn, José Lezama, Han Zhang, Huiwen Chang, Alexander G
  Hauptmann, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Yuan Hao, Irfan Essa, et al. Magvit: Masked generative video
  transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 10459–10469, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
  (ICCV), pp. 3836–3847, October 2023a.
Yabo Zhang, Yuxiang Wei, Dongsheng Jiang, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wangmeng Zuo, and Qi Tian. Con-
  trolvideo: Training-free controllable text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13077,
  2023b.
Dewei Zhou, Ji Xie, Zongxin Yang, and Yi Yang. 3dis: Depth-driven decoupled instance synthesis
  for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12669, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Different from multi-modal learning (Yang et al., 2024b;c;d; Jia et al., 2024), controllable generation
(Ma et al., 2024b;a; Lu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024) or video editing (Yang et al., 2024a; Ma et al.,
2023) requires explicit control signals. Multi-grained editing further relies on additional layout
conditions to edit in the class, instance, or part level. Therefore, in the appendix, we first evaluate the
SAM-Track masks’ impact in Section A, then validate whether our method can work without SAM-
Track masks in Section B. Continually, we show that our method can solely edit specific subjects in
Section C and part-level modification example in Section D. We also evaluate our ST-Layout Attn’s
temporal focus in Section E and ControlNet’s effect in Section F.


A      E VALUATE SAM-T RACK MASKS ’ IMPACT

                                    " Spiderman and Polar Bear are jogging under cherry blossoms "



  SAM-Track
Instance masks


    VideoP2P
    Joint Edit



                                                                 "spiderman" weight "bear" weight   "cherry" weight



      Ours


                                                                 "spiderman" weight "bear" weight   "cherry" weight
                                           (1) VideoP2P Joint Edit with SAM-Track masks



    VideoP2P
     1st Edit


                   1st edit input                           1st: red man → Spider Man


    VideoP2P
    2nd Edit


                  2nd edit input                            2nd: grey man → Polar Bear


    VideoP2P
    3rd Edit


                  2nd edit input                            3rd: green trees → cherry blossoms
                                     (2) VideoP2P Sequential Edit based on Separate SAM-Track masks


                 Figure 9: VideoP2P joint and sequential edit with SAM-Track masks


To evaluate the impact of using SAM-Track (Cheng et al., 2023) for instance segmentation, we
compare our VideoGrain against VideoP2P (Liu et al., 2024), which is equipped with SAM-Track
instance masks. The instance masks replace cross-attention masks during editing. A 16-frame one-
shot tuning is performed, and ControlNet conditioning Zhang et al. (2023a) is added for fairness.


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Two experiments are tested: (1) jointly editing multiple areas in a single denoising process and (2)
sequentially editing three areas by inputting separate masks.
Results show that joint editing (Fig. 9(1)) modifies only left man into ”Spiderman,” leaving other
areas unchanged due to inaccurate cross-attn weight distribution. Sequential editing (Fig. 9(2))
succeeds initially but fails later due to error accumulation in denoising, resulting in blurred details.
                 " Spiderman and Polar Bear are jogging under cherry blossoms "


                 Ground-A-Video Input                            Ground-A-Video Result

                  Figure 10: Ground-A-Video joint edit with instance information

Additionally, as shown in figure above 10, also in Figs 2 and 6, Ground-A-Video (Jeong & Ye, 2023)
struggles with multi-grained video editing tasks, even with instance-level grounding information
(e.g., text-to-bounding box), which is comparable to SAM-Track’s masks.
These comparisons indicate that while SAM-Track provides layout guidance, it does not guarantee
successful edits. In contrast, our method enables zero-shot multi-grained editing, which was not
achievable by any previous methods, even when providing existing SOTA with SAM-Track masks.

B    V IDEO G RAIN CAN WORK WITHOUT SAM-T RACK MASKS
                   "Batman is playing tennis on snowy court before an iced wall"


                 (1) Input Video                                (2) Ground-A-Video Results


          (3) DDIM Inversion Cluster Masks                           (4) Our Results

                   Figure 11: Our method without additional SAM-Track masks

Our method is not strictly dependent on SAM-Track masks. As shown in Fig.11(3), we can cluster
DDIM inversion self-attention features to get inaccurate coarse layouts. Our method still achieves
high-quality multi-area editing results (4). In contrast, even with precise groundings (converted from
SAM-Track masks in (1)), Ground-A-Video fails to edit all three regions. These comparisons indi-
cate that our method does not rely on SAM-Track segmentation. Instead, it works effectively only
using the self-attention feature inside the diffusion model, even without accurate layout guidance.

C    S OLELY EDIT ON SPECIFIC SUBJECTS , WITHOUT BACKGROUND CHANGED
Our method is designed for multi-area editing and can naturally perform background-preserved
subject editing, as it treats multi-area editing as selecting regions restricted to the foreground. As


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (1) Input Video                                 (2) Left man -> Iron Man


           (3) Right man -> Spiderman                                (4) Joint Edit

              Figure 12: Soely edit on specific subjects, without background changed


shown in Fig 12, our method can separately edit the “left man” and “right man” or jointly edit both
subjects while keeping the background unchanged.

D    PART-L EVEL MODIFICATION EXAMPLES


       Color change: Gray shirt -> Blue shirt                Head color change: Black -> Ginger


 Color & shape change: Gray shirt -> Black suit               Body color change: Black -> Ginger

                    Figure 13: Part-level modifications on humans and animals

Our part-level editing supports not only adding objects but also part-level attribute modifications. In
the human case (Fig. 13 left), our method changes the color of a gray shirt to blue (second row) and
edits a half-sleeve shirt into a black suit (third row), showcasing part-level attribute and structure
editing. Similarly, in the animal case, our method can change a cat’s head or body color from black
to ginger while preserving the belt’s color, demonstrating precise part-level modifications.

E    T EMPORAL F OCUS OF ST-L AYOUT ATTN
Our ST-Layout Attn is designed as a full-frame approach to ensure inter-frame consistency. As
shown in Fig. 14, per-frame ST-Layout Attn causes feature coupling on Iron Man, while the sparse-
causal method results in flickering and misses Spider Man’s blue details due to their limited receptive
fields for positive/negative value selection across different layouts. In contrast, our ST-Layout Attn


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    (1) Input Video                                       (2) Per-frame


    (3) Sparse-Causal (first frame + previous frame)                        (4) Ours

                             Figure 14: Temporal Focus of ST-Layout Attn


effectively preserves texture details and prevents flickering, achieving temporal consistent and layout
unified multi-grained video editing.

F     C ONTROL N ET A BLATION


          (1) Input Video                  (2) Without ControlNet             (3) With ControlNet

                                      Figure 15: ControlNet ablation

Our method utilizes ControlNet depth/pose conditioning in certain complex motion cases to provide
necessary structural guidance. As shown in Fig. 15, even without ControlNet, our method can still
achieve simultaneous multi-region editing. However, in such cases, there may be some structural in-
consistencies between the edit object and source object due to the lack of explicit structure guidance.


G      M ORE GENERAL OBJECTS AND SHAPE EDITING

H      M ORE VISUALIZATION

I     L ATENT B LEND
To preserve areas not intended for editing (i.e., τ3 in ∆τ = {τ1 →τ1′ , τ2 →τ2′ , τ3 →τ3 , · · · }), we
employ Latent Blend (Avrahami et al., 2022; 2023), which leverages masks to direct the model
focus on areas requiring editing while keeping the background region identical to the source video.
For each frame i in the video, we first merge each attribute mask to form the global foreground mask
Mi by applying the logical OR operation across all layouts masks mi,k = [mi,1 , mi,2 , · · · , mi,k ] :
                                      Mi = mi,1 ∨ mi,2 ∨ · · · ∨ mi,k .                             (6)
We aggregate the masks Mi from all frames to obtain a combined mask M , and then blend the latent
states zt at each timestep t during the denoising process as follows:
                                       zt = (1 − M) · z̃t + M · zt ,                                (7)
where z̃t indicates the latent feature in the DDIM inversion process and zt is corresponding latent
feature during the DDIM denoising process.


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                           Edit prompt: A husky and a corgi and a zebra in autumn view lawn


                                                Source Video


                           Edit prompt: A teddy bear and a Golden Retriever are on the grass


                                               Source Video


                         Edit prompt: A red porsche car driving before the autumn view lawn


                                                     Source Video


                           Edit prompt: A red porsche car driving in the autumn view lawn forest


                                                     Source Video


    Figure 16: More general objects instance editing (animals) and shape editing (cars) results.


The key behind employing Latent Blend for preserving the background is that, given a desired area
mask, the less noisy foreground latent can be guided by the target text prompt ∆τ . Meanwhile, the
latent features outside the mask (the background) can be preserved. This blending ensures that, even
if the latent feature within the edit area is modified, the background features stay consistent.


J       E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

For FateZero3 (Qi et al., 2023), we employ prompt-to-prompt(Hertz et al., 2022) replace editing. To
enhance the identity binding of the edited object, we set the self/cross replacement steps at 0.3 and
    3
        https://github.com/ChenyangQiQi/FateZero



                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Source Video
ST-Layout Attn
     W/O
        Attn Weight Before
       ST-Layout Attn
      Attn Weight After


           Figure 17: More frames ablation of ST-Layout Attn’s effects on attention weight distribution.


the blending threshold at 0.7. In TokenFlow4 (Geyer et al., 2023), we utilize SD editing and default
to 4 keyframes for 16-frame videos. For other comparative methods like ControlVideo5 (Zhang
et al., 2023b) and Ground-A-Video6 (Jeong & Ye, 2023) and DMT7 (Yatim et al., 2024), we adhere
to their default hyperparameter settings. To ensure fairness across all T2I-based methods compared,
we re-implement ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023a) on their codebases.

K                            L IMITATIONS .
First, although our method can achieve multi-grained editing of video, the generation quality is still
limited by the base model since we are a training-free method. In scenarios where the generation
prior to SD is not ideal, artifacts may occur in the editing results. Second, since our method is based
on a T2I model, it struggles with large shape deformations and significant appearance changes. This
limitation is inherent in zero-shot methods. A potential future direction is to incorporate motion
priors from T2V generation models (Yang et al., 2024e) to handle such challenges.


               4
                 https://github.com/omerbt/TokenFlow
               5
                 https://github.com/YBYBZhang/ControlVideo
               6
                 https://github.com/Ground-A-Video/Ground-A-Video
               7
                 https://github.com/diffusion-motion-transfer/diffusion-motion-transfer



                                                          19
