Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AUTOCORRELATION M ATTERS :      U NDERSTANDING
THE ROLE OF I NITIALIZATION S CHEMES FOR S TATE
S PACE M ODELS
 Fusheng Liu, Qianxiao Li
 National University of Singapore, Singapore
 fusheng@u.nus.edu, qianxiao@nus.edu.sg



                                            A BSTRACT
         Current methods for initializing state space model (SSM) parameters mainly rely
         on the HiPPO framework (Gu et al., 2023), which is based on online function
         approximation with the SSM kernel basis. However, the HiPPO framework does
         not explicitly account for the effects of temporal structures of input sequences on
         the optimization of SSMs. In this paper, we take a further step to investigate the
         roles of SSM initialization schemes by considering the autocorrelation of input
         sequences. We: (1) rigorously characterize the dependency of the SSM timescale
         on sequence length based on sequence autocorrelation; (2) find that with a proper
         timescale, allowing a zero real part for the eigenvalues of the SSM state matrix
         mitigates the curse of memory while still maintaining stability at initialization; (3)
         show that the imaginary part of the eigenvalues of the SSM state matrix determines
         the conditioning of SSM optimization problems, and uncover an approximation-
         estimation tradeoff when training SSMs with a specific class of target functions.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The state space model (SSM) is a sequence model that has recently shown great potential in long
sequence modeling across various applications, including computer vision (Zhu et al., 2024; Liu
et al., 2024), time series forecasting (Rangapuram et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2023) and natural lan-
guage processing (Gu & Dao, 2023; Dao & Gu, 2024). In mathematics, a SSM layer is defined by
a continuous-time ordinary differential equation h′ (t) = W h(t) + Bx(t), y(t) = Ch(t) + Dx(t),
where W, B, C, D are trainable parameters, x(t) is the input sequence, and y(t) is the output se-
quence. For discrete input sequences, a timescale ∆ > 0 will be introduced as a hyperparameter
to discretize the model. Different from the attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017), SSMs are
recurrent-based architectures that treat the input sequence token by token, yet can achieve first-order
time complexity on the sequence length through parallelization (Gu et al., 2022b). There are two
well known issues for training recurrent-based architectures, the vanishing and the exploding gradi-
ent problems (Pascanu et al., 2013). By introducing complex-valued initialization schemes, proper
parameterization methods and regularization techniques, recent works demonstrate that SSMs can
achieve performance comparable to attention-based architectures in terms of both computational
cost and sample efficiency (Gu & Dao, 2023; Dao & Gu, 2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024;
Wang & Li, 2024; Liu & Li, 2024; Yu et al., 2024; Bick et al., 2024; Hwang et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024; Waleffe et al., 2024). However, the theoretical understanding on the roles of the initialization
schemes is still lacking and needs to further explored. In this paper, we particularly look into the
timescale ∆ and the state matrix W , and we aim to study the following fundamental question

Given a sequential dataset with length L, how should the timescale ∆ depend on L and what is the
                                   role of W on training SSMs?

Based on the analysis of continuous-time SSMs, previous works (Gu et al., 2022b;c; 2023) propose
the HiPPO framework where W, B are initialized such that the SSM basis kernels {e⊤  ne
                                                                                       Wt
                                                                                          B}∞n=1
are orthogonal in L2 [0, ∞) with some measure ω(t), and the timescale ∆ scales as 1/L to capture
long range dependencies of sequences with length L. Common HiPPO-based initialization methods
such as S4D-Legs and S4D-Lin typically presume that the measure ω(t) is exponential decay and


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the discrete input sequences x have a inherent timescale ∆ that is shared with the model. However,
these assumptions are restrictive because exponential decay measures weaken the effects of temporal
dependencies in input sequences, and in practice, we usually lack prior information about the data’s
timescale. To address this concern, we take an initial step towards understanding the relationship
between the autocorrelation of input sequences and the SSM initialization schemes. Specifically,
we focus on the diagonal SSM1 (Gu et al., 2022c) where the state matrix W is a complex-valued
diagonal matrix. By studying the stability condition for given input sequences x ∈ RL , we find that
the connection of the timescale ∆ and the sequence length L is highly related with the spectrum
of the data autocorrelation matrix E[xx⊤ ]. Different temporal dependencies in the input sequences
can cause significant variations in the spectrum of the autocorrelation matrix. For example, when
x is sampled from a standard normal distribution, x has zero temporal dependencies, and the auto-
correlation matrix becomes an identity matrix. On the other hand, if x consists of constant values,
the input sequence exhibits full temporal dependencies, and the autocorrelation matrix is low rank.
For the state matrix W , our stability analysis shows that even with a zero real part, i.e. ℜ(W ) = 0,
the diagonal SSM can still be stable at initialization if ∆ is properly set. One benefit for setting the
real part to zero is that the learned SSM kernel functions at initialization do not exponentially decay,
which helps to mitigate the curse of memory (Li et al., 2022). Our convergence analysis indicates
that the imaginary part ℑ(W ) plays a crucial role in the convergence rate and explains the benefits
for complex-valued SSMs compared to real-valued SSMs in terms of the optimization. In particular,
the more separated the imaginary parts ℑ(w) are, the faster the convergence. When considering
both approximation and optimization, we characterize an approximation-estimation tradeoff when
the target function has closely spaced dominant frequencies. Then well separated ℑ(w) values lead
to fast convergence, while achieving a good approximation requires close imaginary parts.
To summarize, the main goal of this paper is to provide a theoretical understanding on the effects
of three specific hyperparameters: the model timescale ∆, the real part of ℜ(W ), and the imaginary
part of the state vector ℑ(W ). These components are connected as a data-dependent initializa-
tion scheme for SSMs. First, for any given sequential dataset, we can estimate its autocorrelation.
Using this information, we can apply Theorem 3.1 to initialize ∆, taking into account both data
autocorrelation and sequence length. Second, if the true input-output mapping is represented by an
underlying linear functional, often referred to as a memory function, that exhibits a long memory
pattern, our second theory, detailed in Section 3.2, suggests that initializing with a zero real part can
help mitigate the challenges posed by long sequences. Finally, the third theory introduced in Sec-
tion 3.3 discusses an approximation-estimation tradeoff that arises when the true memory function
ρ∗ features closely spaced frequencies. If we can accurately recover ρ∗ from the sequential data, we
can then initialize the imaginary part based on the dominant frequencies of ρ∗ , thereby finding an
optimal balance informed by theoretical insights. Accordingly, our contributions are as follows:
• In section 3.1, we characterize the dependency between the timescale ∆ and the sequence length
  L by taking into account the autocorrelation of the input sequences. Even if the eigenvalues of the
  state matrix W have zero real part, the stability condition on the magnitude of the output value at
  initialization can still hold with an appropriate setting of ∆.
• In section 3.2, we show that the real part of the eigenvalues of the state matrix W determines the
  decay rate of the SSM kernel functions. Allowing the eigenvalues of W to have zero real part at
  initialization can significantly increase the model’s effective memory and help mitigate the curse
  of memory for fixed-length tasks that require long-term memory.
• In section 3.3, we prove that the conditioning of SSM optimization problems is determined by the
  separation distance of the imaginary parts of the eigenvalues of the state matrix. Well-separated
  imaginary parts induce faster convergence, whereas closely spaced ones lead to slower conver-
  gence. This explains the benefits of complex-valued SSMs over real-valued SSMs. Furthermore,
  it uncovers an approximation-estimation tradeoff when the target function has close dominant
  frequencies in the frequency domain.

2       P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we briefly introduce the diagonal SSM and the problem setting we consider through-
out this paper. Specifically, we consider the following single-input single-output (SISO) diagonal-
    1
        To simplify the analysis, we omit the skip connection by letting D = 0.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SSM built in the complex number field C and then cast into the real number field R,
                       d
                         h(t) = W h(t) + bx(t), y(t) = ℜ(c⊤ h(t)), t ≥ 0,                             (1)
                      dt
where ℜ(·) represents the real part; x(t) is input sequence from an input space2 X := C0 (R≥0 , R);
y(t) ∈ R is the output sequence at time t; h(t) ∈ Cm is the hidden state with h(0) = 0; W ∈
Cm×m , b, c ∈ Cm are trainable parameters. In particular, the state matrix W = diag(w1 , . . . , wm )
is a diagonal matrix. To simplify the analysis, we omit the skip connection matrix D. Following the
training setup in Gu et al. (2022c), the read-out vector c follows standard normal distribution and
the read-in vector b in (1) is fixed as an all-one vector at initialization without training. Under these
settings, the input-output relation in (1) is explicitly given by the integral
                                            Z t
                                    y(t) =      ℜ(c⊤ ews )x(t − s)ds,                                 (2)
                                                  0
                   m
where w ∈ C is the state vector that contains all the diagonal entries of the state matrix W , and
the function ℜ(c⊤ ews ) is called the memory function or the kernel function.
Discretization. To handle discrete sequences, we follow (Gu et al., 2022c) to use the zero-order
(ZOH) hold method for discretization. Then given a timescale ∆ > 0 and any discrete sequence
(x0 , . . . , xL−1 ) ⊂ R with length L, for ℓ = 1, 2, . . . , L, the ZOH method induces a model output
                                                                                             
                      m    ∆wj                                          m    ∆wj
                     X   e      − 1                                   X    e      − 1
         yℓ = ℜ                    cj e∆wj (ℓ−1)  x0 + · · · + ℜ                   cj e∆wj 0  xℓ−1 . (3)
                     j=1
                            w  j                                       j=1
                                                                              w  j

Remark 2.1. Here we focus on the SISO model with ZOH discretization. It is also possible to extend
to the multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) case, by noticing that the MIMO output is essentially
a linear combination of several single-input single-output (SISO) models. As a result, we can extend
our results to the MIMO scenario by examining each SISO model individually along with its respec-
tive input-output mapping. However, our theory are not directly applicable to other discretization
methods (e.g. bilinear method), which involve different matrix forms for the model’s input-output
mapping (see Appendix D), and require different techniques to yield theoretical insights.
In the following section, we tackle the problems related to the initialization schemes of SSMs that
were introduced in the Introduction. Specifically, we will explore the following questions:

1. Timescale Initialization: How should we initialize the model timescale ∆ for fixed-length tasks
   to enhance the training of SSMs? Is the previously used scaling ∆ = 1/L a universal approach?
2. Real Part of the State Vector: What role does ℜ(w) play? Can we initialize ℜ(w) to be zero,
   and what benefits might arise from a zero real part?
3. Imaginary Part of the State Vector: What role does ℑ(w) play? What advantages do complex-
   valued SSMs offer compared to real-valued SSMs?

3       M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we present our main results by focusing on three initialization parameters ∆, ℜ(w)
and ℑ(w) respectively. Specifically, in section 3.1, we rigorously characterize the relationship be-
tween the timescale ∆ and the sequence length L in terms of training stability at initialization by
taking into account data autocorrelation. In section 3.2, we demonstrate that allowing the state
vector’s real part to be zero can prevent exponential decay in the SSM kernel function, thereby miti-
gating the curse of memory in certain scenarios. In section 3.3, we explore the relationship between
the convergence rate and the separation distance of the state vector’s imaginary part. In particular,
we uncover an approximation-estimation tradeoff for a class of target functions.

3.1       R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ∆ AND L

In this subsection, we derive a stability condition for the ZOH-discretized diagonal SSM (3) when
the state vector’s real part ℜ(w) is non-positive. From both theoretical and numerical perspectives,
    2
        A linear space of continuous functions from R≥0 to R that vanishes at infinity.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: (Left) Training a diagonal SSM (3) on a copying
                                                        √ task using i.i.d. data with a dimension
of 128. √
        We vary the minimal timescale ∆min = 1/L, 1/ L and the maximal timescale ∆max =
1/L, 1/ L, 0.1 w.r.t. sequence length L. (Middle) The maximal eigenvalue of the autocorrelation
matrix E[xx⊤ ] on different random processes of x. (Right) The maximal eigenvalue of E[xx⊤ ] on
sequential image datasets sMNIST and sCIFAR10 with different resize rates varied from 0.5 to 4.


Figure 2: The expected magnitude of the SSM output value on synthetic sequences with different
autocorrelation. The real part ℜ(w) = −0.5 follows the common practice and we consider four
dependencies between the timescale ∆ and the sequence length L.


we demonstrate that the dependency of the model timescale ∆ on the sequence length L is strongly
influenced by the data autocorrelation. To start with, we prove the following theorem that provides
an upper bound on the magnitude of the model output value.
Theorem 3.1. Consider a ZOH discretized SSM (3) with timescale ∆ > 0 and ℜ(wj ) ≤ 0 for j =
1, . . . , m. Suppose that the input sequence (x0 , . . . , xL−1 ) is sampled from a unknown distribution
in RL , and the read-out vector c is from i.i.d. standard normal distribution. Then we have
                                       2
                                Ec,x [yL ] ≤ ∆2 m2 L · λmax (E[xx⊤ ]),
where λmax (·) represents the maximal eigenvalue.

The proof is provided in Section D. In practice, the hidden state size m is often much smaller than
the sequence length L (Gu et al., 2023). Given this, we focus on fixing the hidden size m and
investigating the relationship between the model timescale ∆ and the sequence length L. We see
that Theorem 3.1 connects the model timescale ∆ with the sequence length L in terms of the data
autocorrelation matrix E[xx⊤ ]. If we have normalized the sequences such that E[∥x∥2 ] = 1, then a
simple observation is that 1 ≤ λmax (E[xx⊤ ]) ≤ L because Tr(E[xx⊤ ]) = L. This indicates that the
maximal eigenvalue of the autocorrelation matrix can have different dependencies on L based on the
temporal dependencies. For example, when the elements in the sequence are uncorrelated with each
other, x exhibits zero temporal dependencies, and the autocorrelation
                                                                 √          matrix is an identity matrix
                 ⊤
with λmax (E[xx ]) = 1. In this case, ∆ should scale as 1/ L to ensure training stability. On the
other hand, when x is a constant sequence (1, 1, . . . , 1), then x exhibits full temporal dependencies.
The autocorrelation matrix then becomes a rank-1 matrix with λmax (E[xx⊤ ]) = L, implying that ∆
should scale as 1/L. Additionally, this upper bound is applicable for all cases where ℜ(w) ≤ 0. As
the real part ℜ(w) approaches zero, the exponential decay rate of the SSM kernel slows, resulting in
a tighter bound. Specifically, when the real part is zero and the input data lacks temporal dependency,
the bound becomes tight up to a constant factor. This occurs because the data autocorrelation matrix
E[xx⊤ ] simplifies to a diagonal matrix under these conditions. Given a p     specific task with an input
sequential dataset, we can then initialize the model timescale ∆ as O(1/ Lλmax (E[xx⊤ ])).


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: The expected magnitude of the SSM output value on synthetic sequences with different
autocorrelation and different dependencies between ∆ and L. The real part ℜ(w) is set to be zero.


Figure 4: The expected magnitude of the SSM output value on sequential image datasets with dif-
ferent resize rates (ranging from 0.5 to 4) and different dependencies between ∆ and L.


Remark 3.2. Theorem 3.1 applies for the final output mode, while in practice, there are also some
other output modes and the analysis on the stability condition is case by case. For example, for the
                        PL
pooling mode y = L1 ℓ=1 yL     2
                                 , we can use Theorem 3.1 to get a same upper bound for Ec,x [y 2 ].
Also, in this paper we consider fixed-length tasks, i.e., all the sequences are with the same length. For
the varied-length case, we may first cluster the sequences into several groups, and then increase the
model feature dimension to manage varied sequence lengths separately. For example, if the sequence
length alternates between L1 and L2 , then we can double the feature dimension and initialize the
model separately for the first and second halves, allowing the model to accommodate two fixed-
length datasets simultaneously.
Numerical experiments on λmax (E[xx⊤ ]) and E[yL        2
                                                          ]. To validate our theory, we conduct ex-
periments on the exact values of the magnitude of the model output and E[xx⊤ ]. Specifically,
we consider both synthetic and real sequential datasets in both negative and zero real part cases.
For synthetic datasets, we consider Gaussian process with mean 0 and autocovariance function
E[xi xj ] = K(i, j). By restricting K(i, i) = 1 then the autocovariance matrix is exactly the same
as the autocorrelation matrix. In this paper, we choose 4 Gaussian processes with different autoco-
variance functions and plot their maximal eigenvalues. The autocovariance functions for “ou, iid,
rbf” are K(i, j) = exp(−|i − j|/ℓ), δi−j , exp(−|i − j|2 /ℓ) respectively. The autocovariance matrix
for “rand” is given by ΣΣ⊤ where Σ is a random matrix with i.i.d. uniform distributed entries in
[0, 1]. As Figure 1 (Middle) shows, different processes have varying dependencies of λmax (E[xx⊤ ])
on L ranging from O(1) to O(L). For the i.i.d. case, λmax (E[xx⊤ ]) is not always 1 in Figure 1
(Middle), which is because we use the sample autocorrelation matrix to replace the expected auto-
correlation matrix. For real sequential datasets, we choose to resize the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al.,
2010) and the gray CIFAR10 dataset (Tay et al., 2021) with resize rates [0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4]
and the flatten the images to sequences. More experiment details are provided in Appendix B. We
record λmax (E[xx⊤ ] based on the entire training dataset. As shown in Figure 1 (Left), the maximal
eigenvalue scales (almost) linearly with sequence length across the resize rate for both sequential
MNIST (sMNIST) and sequential CIFAR10 (sCIFAR10) datsets. Additionally, we plot the relation-
ship between the magnitude of the model output value and sequence length by varying the timescale
∆ = [L−1 , L−0.75 , L−0.5 , L−0.25 ]. In Figures 2 and 4, when ℜ(w) = −0.5 (following the setup in
                                              2
Gu et al. (2022c; 2023)), the magnitude E[yL    ] remains stable for both synthetic and resized image
datasets for all decay rates of ∆. When ℜ(w) = 0, Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate that for the ‘rand’
process, ∆ = L−1 is stable. For the ‘iid,’ ‘ou,’ and ‘rbf’ processes, ∆ = L−0.75 is stable. This
indicates that our bound in Theorem 3.1 effectively characterizes the relation between ∆ and L for


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: (Left) Training a diagonal SSM (3) on a task that requires long-term memory. The learned
memory function ρ̃ effectively captures the spike in long-range dependencies. However, it struggles
to do so when the real part is negative. (Middle) Test loss on the long-term memory task when
initializing ℜ(w) = 0 and ℜ(w) = −0.5. (Right) Test accuracy for training a diagonal SSM on
decorrelated sequential MNIST dataset with different real parts at initialization.

ℜ(w) = 0. Moreover, as shown in Figure 4, for the sequential image datasets, ∆ should scale as
1/L to ensure stability when ℜ(w) = 0; otherwise, the magnitude increases with sequence length.
This finding aligns with the empirical results in Gu et al. (2022c) that ∆ should scale as 1/L to ef-
fectively capture the range of dependencies for length L. But their theoretical reasons are based on
Fourier analysis of continuous-time SSMs and do not explicitly account for the data autocorrelation.
Experiments on copying task with different timescales. We tested the performance of the diag-
onal SSM (3) on a copying task with various dependencies of ∆ on L. It is worth noting that, as
discussed in Jelassi et al. (2024), SSMs struggle with the copying task because the model’s state
dimension needs to scale linearly with the sequence length to memorize all the input tokens. How-
ever, the limitation highlighted in Jelassi et al. (2024) pertains to the length generalization task—i.e.,
training an SSM with short sequences and then testing it on longer sequences will fail if the hidden
size m does not grow linearly with L. Here, we focus on a fixed-length task, where both training and
test sequences have the same length. We find that, with an appropriately initialized timescale, SSMs
can effectively handle the copying task even with a small state size. In this paper, we use a diagonal
SSM with a fixed state size m = 32 to learn a copying task on i.i.d. data with a dimension of 128, and
the timescale ∆ ∈ R128 . We vary the minimal and maximal timescales (∆min , ∆max ) with different
dependencies on L. From Figure 1 (Left), we see that the combination (∆min , ∆max ) = (1/L, 0.1),
which is commonly used in practice (Gu√et al., 2022c; 2023) to train real datasets, consistently
performs worse than setting ∆min = 1/ L. This stable scaling is in line with our theoretical
suggestions for i.i.d. data. Therefore, the data autocorrelation is very crucial for us to get a good
initialization scale on the timescale. More experiment details are provided in Appendix B.

3.2   B ENEFITS OF ZERO REAL PART

In this subsection, we investigate the benefits of initializing ℜ(w) = 0 for tasks that require long-
term memory. In previous works (Li et al., 2021; 2022), it is shown that recurrent-based models
suffer from the curse of memory in both approximation and optimization when there is long-term
memory in the target. For example, we consider using a diagonal SSM (3) to learn a input-out
relationship given by a real-valued target function ρ∗ such that
                          yℓ∗ = ρ∗ℓ−1 x0 + · · · + ρ∗0 xℓ−1 , ℓ = 1, 2, . . . , L.
The objective function is given by the squared difference between the model output yL and the
                      ∗
corresponding label yL  . Then in a special case when the input sequences have zero temporal depen-
                   ⊤
dencies with E[xx ] = IL , the expected mean squared error is given by
                                        ∗ 2                       2
                             E[|yL − yL   | ] = ∥ρ̃ − ρ∗ ∥ ,
                       P    ∆w
                                                          P
                        m e   j −1                         m e∆wj −1
where ρ̃ is a vector ℜ  j=1  wj    cj e∆wj 0 , . . . , ℜ   j=1 wj    cj e∆wj (L−1)    that rep-
resents the model’s memory, and ρ∗ = (ρ∗0 , . . . , ρ∗L−1 ). Therefore, a well-trained SSM means that
the model memory function matches with the target function, i.e.,
                                                  
                         m     ∆wj
                        X    e      − 1 ∆wj ℓ 
                     ℜ                cj e            = ρ∗ℓ , ℓ = 0, . . . , L − 1.
                        j=1
                                w  j



                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Recovering the memory function ρ on the decorrelated sequential MNIST dataset by
solving a linear equation X ∗ ρ = Y , where X ∈ RN ×L is the collected sequence matrix, Y ∈
RN ×10 is the one-hot label matrix, and√∗ is the convolution operator. Then ρ ∈ RL×10 has 10
channels and we plot the scaled function Lρ each channel to show the underlying memory patterns.


Then we can see that the curse of memory happens when the target function ρ∗ has a sudden spike in
a very long distance. For instance, consider a shifting task that requires mapping an input sequence
(x0 , . . . , xL−1 ) to a shifted sequence (0, . . . , 0, x0 ). In this task, the target ρ∗ is (0, . . . , 0, 1), which
is challenging for an exponentially decaying SSM kernel ρ̃ to capture long-term memory when
ℜ(w) < 0. However, if we allow the real part to be zero at initialization, then ρ̃ does not un-
dergo exponential decay. As a result, we can potentially avoid the curse of memory, even for long
sequences, in this scenario. It is worth noting that in this paper, we do not consider a stable pa-
rameterization to ensure ℜ(w) ≤ 0 strictly during training. This approach means ℜ(w) is likely
to become positive during training. Our goal is to allow the model to learn directly from the data
without introducing new variables, such as reparameterization methods, which could complicate the
analysis. Otherwise, it would be unclear whether the improvements are due to the zero real part
or the introduced reparameterization method. Our experiments demonstrate that initializing with
a zero real part still helps enhance training, even without a stable parameterization. This suggests
that, despite the potential optimization stability challenges during training, a zero real part can be
beneficial for training on certain tasks.
Experiments on the benefits of zero real part. To validate the effectiveness of having a zero real
part, we conduct experiments on both synthetic and real datasets that require long-term memory.
For the synthetic task, we use i.i.d. sequential data to easily visualize the expected error via the
memory function. The goal is to learn an input-output mapping from (x0 , . . . , xL−1 ) to x0 + xL−1 ,
which requires the model to memorize both the first and last token. The target memory function
ρ∗ is (1, 0, . . . , 0, 1). In our setting, the sequence length L is 128, and the hidden state size m is
32. As shown in Figure 5 (Left) and (Middle), the SSM with a zero real part outperforms the case
with a negative real part. It is evident that by initializing ℜ(w) = 0, the learned memory function is
able to capture long range dependencies. For the real-world task, we utilize the sequential MNIST
(sMNIST) dataset. Before training, we preprocess the entire dataset with a linear transformation to
decorrelate the training sequences, resulting in an autocorrelation matrix that is an identity matrix.
We recover the underlying target memory function by solving a least square problem minρ ∥X ∗ ρ −
Y ∥2F where X ∈ R50000×784 is the collected sequence matrix, Y ∈ R50000×10 is the one-hot label
                                                                                                  784×10
matrix, and ∗ denotes the convolution operator. The recovered target memory    √ function ρ ∈ R
has 10 channels. To illustrate the underlying memory patterns, we plot Lρ for each channel in
Figure 6. We observe that for the decorrelated sMNIST dataset, the underlying memory function
exhibits a sudden spike at a long distance, implying the curse of memory when ℜ(w) < 0. This
observation is confirmed in Figure 5 (Right), which shows that initializing ℜ(w) = 0 outperforms
the case with a negative real part. We also apply our methods to the Long Range Arena (LRA)
benchmark (Tay et al., 2021), which features six diverse tasks ranging from text to image processing.
Given that we lack precise knowledge of the memory function for each LRA task, we opt to initialize
a fraction of the real part as zero and compare this setup to the default S4D model (Gu et al., 2022c).
In particular, for each single layer of an L-layer S4D model, which has a feature dimension of d
and a state size of m, there are d state vectors w ∈ Cm . At initialization, a fraction p ∈ [0, 1] of


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          ListOps        Text   Retrieval   Image   Pathfinder   PathX    Avg
                   Baseline                60.47        86.18    89.46      88.19     93.06      91.95   84.89
       Initialize 10% of ℜ(w) to be 0      61.44        88.05    90.73      89.11     95.58      97.55   87.08
      Ratio for ℜ(w) ≥ 0 after training   1.29%         1.99%    2.58%      4.31%    4.31%       4.04%   3.09%


Table 1: Test accuracy for training S4D on the LRA benchmark with different fractions of zero real
part at initialization.


these state vectors is randomly selected to have their real parts set to zero. When p = 0, the training
proceeds following the baseline setup. As p increases, the model starts with more zero real parts. To
ensure credible results, we exclude any reparameterization method on the zero real part, allowing the
model to adapt from the data during training. This approach isolates the impact of the zero real part
on performance without confounding variables introduced by reparameterization. All models were
trained with a 6-layer architecture, maintaining the original S4D training conditions as specified in
the work by Gu et al. (2022c). We present both the test accuracy and the ratio of non-negative real
part parameters to the total Ldm real part parameters upon completion of training in Table 1. We can
see that, initializing an appropriate fraction of state vectors with zero real parts enables the model
to outperform the default S4D configuration. Importantly, even post-training, some non-negative
real parts persist, suggesting that the model retains stability and effectively adapts to the data. We
provide more experimental details in Appendix B. In Appendix B.2, we add ablation studies on the
gray-sCIFAR dataset with varied fractions p of zero real part at initialization.

3.3   I MAGINARY PART INDUCES AN APPROXIMATION - ESTIMATION TRADEOFF

In the previous subsection, we show that the real part ℜ(w) is related with the long-term memory
when training SSMs. In this subsection, we focus on the imaginary part ℑ(w). We will demonstrate
how ℑ(w) influences the conditioning of the SSM optimization problem within a convex framework.
Additionally, from an approximation standpoint, we reveal an approximation-estimation tradeoff
that arises when training SSMs with a particular class of target functions.
Convergence analysis. Here we consider the continuous-time SSM (2) and assume that the read-out
vector c is in Rm . This real-value assumption is necessary in the current version to get an theoretical
estimate for the spectrum of the induced Gram matrix because we use the Gershgorin circle theorem
to prove Theorem 3.4. This theorem is applicable only when the matrix has dominant diagonal en-
tries. If the vector c is complex-valued, the resulting Gram matrix would not be diagonal-dominant,
rendering the Gershgorin circle theorem ineffective. Suppose the true input-output R t relation is given
by some real-valued target function ρ∗ (s) ∈ L1 [0, ∞) ∧ L2 [0, ∞) with y ∗ (t) = 0 ρ∗ (s)x(t − s)ds.
We use the squared difference between the SSM output y(t) and the target output y ∗ (t) at some
terminal time T > 0 averaged over input distributions, which can be written as
                                                                              2
                                   L(c, a) := Ex (y(T ) − y ∗ (T )) .                            (4)
To make the theoretical analysis amenable, we assume that x(t) is sampled from white noise, i.e.,
x(T − s)ds = dWs where Ws is the canonical real-valued Wiener process. Then by Itô’s isometry
                                                                        RT                     2
(Proposition C.2), the expected risk (4) can be rewritten as L(c, w) = 0 c⊤ ℜ (ews ) − ρ∗ (s) ds.
In the practical training, the sequence length is very long and thus we take T →− ∞ to investigate
the effect of long-term memory. To study the effects of the state vector initialization, we consider
the following convex optimization problem where w is fixed.
                                                                       2
                                        Z ∞ X    m
                         arg min Lc :=            cj ℜ(ewj s ) − ρ∗ (s) ds.                    (5)
                            c∈Rm               0         j=1

From the perspective of function approximation, the HiPPO framework (Gu et al., 2020) initializes
w such that the SSM basis kernel functions {ℜ(ewj s )}∞                          2
                                                         j=1 are orthogonal in L [0, ∞) w.r.t. some
measure ω(s). In this paper, we discover the effects of the state initialization on the optimization
problem (5). Let c∗ Rbe one of the solution of the convex problem (5), then c∗ is a stationary point
                      ∞
that satisfies Gc∗ = 0 ℜ(ews )ρ∗ (s)ds, where G ∈ Rm×m is a Gram matrix with
                                          Z ∞
                                 [G]j,k =       ℜ(ewj s )ℜ(ewk s )ds.                            (6)
                                                    0


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: (Left) Condition number κ(G) := λλmax     (G)
                                                min (G)
                                                        for S4D-Real and S4D-Lin with different hid-
den size m. (Middle) κ(G) for S4D-Lin with different m by varying scaling factors of the imaginary
part ℑ(a). (Right) κ(G) and approximation measure σmax (M ) (in the approximation-estimation
tradeoff part) for S4D-Lin by different ratios of model frequencies v and target frequencies ξ.


Therefore, the spectrum of the Gram matrix G determines the numerical stability and convergence
rate of optimization algorithms for solving the convex problem (5). We show in the following
proposition that when w ∈ Rm and all wj are distinct, or when w ∈ Cm and all the imaginary parts
ℑ(w) are non-zero and distinct, then G is positive definite.
Proposition 3.3. Let wj = aj + i · vj with aj , vj ∈ R for j = 1, . . . , m. If all vj = 0, i.e., w ∈ Rm ,
then G is positive definite given that all aj are distinct. If vj are all non-zero, i.e., w ∈ Cm , then G
is positive definite given that all vj are distinct.

The proof is based on the argument of Vandermonde matrix, and we provide details in Appendix E.
Given that the gram matrix G is positive-definite, we are ready to study its spectrum. In the follow-
ing theorem, we show that for complex-valued SSMs, the gram matrix G can be well-conditioned
provided that the imaginary parts ℑ(w) are well separated.
Theorem 3.4. Let λmin (G), λmax (G) be the extreme eigenvalues of G defined in (6), and let
             2x
coth(x) = ee2x −1
                +1
                   . Suppose that wj = −0.5 + i · vj for vj ∈ R, and we define the separation
distance δ := minj̸=k |vj − vk |. Then if δ > 0, we have
                      3π       π                              5   3π       π
              1.19 −     coth        < λmin (G) ≤ λmax (G) <    +    coth      .
                      4δ          δ                          12   4δ       δ

The proof is based on the Gershgorin circle theorem, with details provided in Appendix F. The setup
wj = −0.5 + i · vj follows the configurations in Gu et al. (2022a;c; 2023). This theorem shows that
the Gram matrix G can be well-conditioned when the separation distance δ is large. One example is
that for the commonly used S4D-Lin initialization (Gu et al., 2022c), vj = π · j. Then the
                                                                                        √ separation
distance δ = π. Numerical calculations show that 0.2 < λmin (G) ≤ λmax (G) < 2, meaning
that G is well-conditioned for any hidden size m, and its condition number has a uniform upper
bound w.r.t. m. Note that x coth(x) ≥ 1 and  is increasing on [0, ∞), which implies that the bound
for λmin (G) is non-trivial when 3π         π
                                  4δ coth δ < 1.19. By numerically solving this inequality, it is
sufficient to have δ > 2.3. However, Proposition 3.3 suggests that as long as δ > 0, the positive-
definiteness of G is guaranteed. This indicates a gap between the lower bound and the actual minimal
eigenvalue, which we leave for future research.
Real vs complex. We can now compare real-valued SSMs and complex-valued SSMs in terms of the
conditioning of the convex optimization problem (5), which is determined by the condition number
of G. For real-valued SSMs with the S4D-Real initialization (Gu et al., 2022c), where wj = −j, we
                1
have Gj,k = j+k    . In this case, G is a Hilbert matrix, whose condition number grows exponentially
with respect to its size m (Todd, 1953). For complex-valued SSMs with wj = −0.5 + ivj , Theorem
3.4 indicates that if the separation distance δ remains uniformly large with respect to m, then G can
be well-conditioned even for larger√ values of m. For S4D-Lin initialization, we already know that
0.2 < λmin (G) ≤ λmax (G) < 2 by the above argument. Therefore, unlike real-valued SSMs, the
condition number of G in the complex-valued case can remain well-conditioned even for large m,
given that the imaginary parts are well separated. This difference is illustrated in Figure 7 (Left),
where we compare the exact condition numbers for S4D-Real and S4D-Lin. As the scaling factor


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of the imaginary part increases, the separation distance also increases. Figure 7 (Middle) shows that
the Gram matrix G for S4D-Lin becomes better conditioned, validating Theorem 3.4.
Approximation-estimation tradeoff. Despite the fact that complex-valued SSMs with adequately
separated imaginary parts ℑ(w) enhance the conditioning of G, we cannot simply initialize w with
widely separated ℑ(w). This is because ℑ(w) determines the frequencies that the SSM can capture,
and misaligned frequencies relative to the target ρ∗ lead to a large approximation error Lc∗ . For
example, suppose that the target memory function ρ∗ (s) = e−s/2 ĉ⊤ cos(ξs) with ĉ, ξ ∈ Rm . Let
w = −0.5 + iv for v ∈ Rm , then we have
       Z ∞              Z ∞                        ⊤        Z ∞
                                 s                                    s
Lc∗ =       ρ∗ 2 (s)ds−      e− 2 cos(vs)ρ∗ (s)ds     G−1          e− 2 cos(vs)ρ∗ (s)ds = ĉ⊤ M c,
        0                  0                                      0

               m×m
where M ∈ R     is given by
Z ∞                          Z ∞                           Z ∞
     −s               ⊤           −s              ⊤    −1       −s              ⊤
    e cos(ξs) cos(ξs) ds−        e cos(ξs) cos(vs) ds G        e cos(vs) cos(ξs) ds .
 0                                  0                                       0

We can see that the maximum singular value σmax (M ) of M determines the approximation error.
Now, let’s consider a limiting case when vj = µj with µ → ∞. According to Lemma C.5, we know
that G = 21 Im , a scaled identity
                                 R ∞ matrix, possesses the best possible conditioning. Furthermore, if
ξ is finite, then as µ → ∞, 0 e−s cos(vj s) cos(ξk s) ds = 0, indicating that the worst approxi-
               R∞
mation error 0 ρ∗ 2 (s) ds. On the other hand, if we aim to minimize the approximation error, we
might align the frequencies such that v = ξ. However, when the target function comprises closely
spaced frequencies ξ1 , . . . , ξm , such alignment may cause G to have a large condition number (as
per Theorem 3.4). Balancing these two aspects reveals an approximation-estimation tradeoff, which
is crucial when selecting an SSM initialization. Numerical evidence for this tradeoff is illustrated
in Figure 7 (Right). In this figure, we set ξj = 0.1πj with a relatively small separation distance
δ = 0.1π, and we vary the ratio vj /ξj from 20 to 28 . As the ratio increases, the optimization is
expected to improve, while the approximation deteriorates. This trend is shown in Figure 7 (Right),
where the induced Gram matrix G becomes better-conditioned, whereas the approximation measure
σmax (M ) increases. In practice for a specific task, if we manage to accurately recover the memory
function from the sequential data, we can then apply a Fourier transform to identify the dominant
frequencies of the memory function. Given a state size m, we can greedily select m frequencies that
exhibit the largest separation distance from these dominant frequencies to initialize the imaginary
part. Our theory suggests that this approach achieves an optimal balance between the tradeoff of ap-
proximation and estimation. However, practically, recovering the memory function accurately from
the data is challenging, and hyperparameter tuning might be needed to find the optimal balance.


4    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we study the question proposed in the Introduction section, focusing on two initializa-
tion schemes for state space models (SSMs): the timescale ∆ and the state matrix W . Regarding the
timescale ∆, we investigate it from the perspective of training stability at initialization. Our findings
indicate that its dependency on sequence length is determined by data autocorrelation. By analyzing
data autocorrelation, we can initialize ∆ to enhance SSM training for tasks involving fixed-length
sequences. For the state matrix W , we differentiate between the real part ℜ(W ) and the imagi-
nary part ℑ(W ). The real part ℜ(W ) is crucial for capturing long-term memory in temporal data.
Allowing for a zero real part can effectively mitigate the curse of memory while maintaining train-
ing stability at initialization, provided the timescale is appropriately initialized. The imaginary part
ℑ(W ) affects the conditioning of the SSM optimization problem. A well-separated ℑ(W ) leads to
a well-conditioned Gram matrix, improving the convergence rate. However, from an approxima-
tion standpoint, excessively increasing the separation distance can result in a frequency mismatch
between the SSM and the target function, leading to an approximation-estimation tradeoff. These
three components are intricately linked as a data-dependent initialization scheme for SSMs. There
are several potential future interesting directions. For instance, we have not discussed the effects of
gating (Mehta et al., 2023) and model depth on the approximation and optimization of SSMs, which
we leave for future research.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. Q. Li is supported
by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, under the NRF fellowship (project No. NRF-
NRFF13-2021-0005).

R EFERENCES
Aviv Bick, Kevin Y Li, Eric P Xing, J Zico Kolter, and Albert Gu. Transformers to ssms: Distilling
  quadratic knowledge to subquadratic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10189, 2024.

Nicola Muca Cirone, Antonio Orvieto, Benjamin Walker, Cristopher Salvi, and Terry Lyons. Theo-
  retical foundations of deep selective state-space models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19047, 2024.

Tri Dao and Albert Gu. Transformers are SSMs: Generalized models and efficient algorithms
  through structured state space duality. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, 2024.

Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.

Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hippo: Recurrent memory
  with optimal polynomial projections. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  1474–1487, 2020.

Albert Gu, Karan Goel, Ankit Gupta, and Christopher Ré. On the parameterization and initialization
  of diagonal state space models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:35971–
  35983, 2022a.

Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022b.

Albert Gu, Ankit Gupta, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. On the parameterization and initialization
  of diagonal state space models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 2022c.

Albert Gu, Isys Johnson, Aman Timalsina, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Re. How to train your
  HIPPO: State space models with generalized orthogonal basis projections. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Ankit Gupta, Albert Gu, and Jonathan Berant. Diagonal state spaces are as effective as structured
  state spaces. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel.           Gaussian error linear units (gelus).     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.

Sukjun Hwang, Aakash Lahoti, Tri Dao, and Albert Gu. Hydra: Bidirectional state space models
  through generalized matrix mixers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09941, 2024.

Samy Jelassi, David Brandfonbrener, Sham M. Kakade, and eran malach. Repeat after me: Trans-
  formers are better than state space models at copying. In Forty-first International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2024.

Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
  2014.

Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and CJ Burges. Mnist handwritten digit database. ATT Labs [Online].,
  2, 2010.

Zhong Li, Jiequn Han, Weinan E, and Qianxiao Li. On the curse of memory in recurrent neural
  networks: Approximation and optimization analysis. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhong Li, Jiequn Han, E Weinan, and Qianxiao Li. Approximation and optimization theory for
  linear continuous-time recurrent neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23
  (42):1–85, 2022.
Fusheng Liu and Qianxiao Li. From generalization analysis to optimization designs for state space
  models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Yue Liu, Yunjie Tian, Yuzhong Zhao, Hongtian Yu, Lingxi Xie, Yaowei Wang, Qixiang Ye, and
  Yunfan Liu. Vmamba: Visual state space model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10166, 2024.
Harsh Mehta, Ankit Gupta, Ashok Cutkosky, and Behnam Neyshabur. Long range language model-
  ing via gated state spaces. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Antonio Orvieto, Samuel L Smith, Albert Gu, Anushan Fernando, Caglar Gulcehre, Razvan Pas-
  canu, and Soham De. Resurrecting recurrent neural networks for long sequences. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26670–26698. PMLR, 2023.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2013.
Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Matthias W Seeger, Jan Gasthaus, Lorenzo Stella, Yuyang Wang, and
  Tim Januschowski. Deep state space models for time series forecasting. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Mark Rudelson and Roman Vershynin. Hanson-wright inequality and sub-gaussian concentration.
 2013.
Jerome Sieber, Carmen Amo Alonso, Alexandre Didier, Melanie N Zeilinger, and Antonio Orvieto.
   Understanding the differences in foundation models: Attention, state space models, and recurrent
   neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15731, 2024.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Yikang Shen, Dara Bahri, Philip Pham, Jinfeng Rao,
  Liu Yang, Sebastian Ruder, and Donald Metzler. Long range arena : A benchmark for efficient
  transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
J. Todd. The condition of the finite segments of the Hilbert matrix. National Bureau of Standards
   Applied Mathematics Series, 1953.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Roger Waleffe, Wonmin Byeon, Duncan Riach, Brandon Norick, Vijay Korthikanti, Tri Dao, Albert
  Gu, Ali Hatamizadeh, Sudhakar Singh, Deepak Narayanan, et al. An empirical study of mamba-
  based language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07887, 2024.
Junxiong Wang, Daniele Paliotta, Avner May, Alexander M Rush, and Tri Dao. The mamba in the
  llama: Distilling and accelerating hybrid models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15237, 2024.
Shida Wang and Qianxiao Li. StableSSM: Alleviating the curse of memory in state-space models
  through stable reparameterization. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Annan Yu, Michael W Mahoney, and N Benjamin Erichson. There is hope to avoid hippos for
  long-memory state space models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13975, 2024.
Michael Zhang, Khaled Kamal Saab, Michael Poli, Tri Dao, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re. Ef-
 fectively modeling time series with simple discrete state spaces. In The Eleventh International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Lianghui Zhu, Bencheng Liao, Qian Zhang, Xinlong Wang, Wenyu Liu, and Xinggang Wang. Vision
  mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state space model. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Nicolas Zucchet and Antonio Orvieto. Recurrent neural networks: vanishing and exploding gradi-
  ents are not the end of the story. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21064, 2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORKS
Optimization of SSMs. Recurrent-based architectures are known for two issues: training stability
and computational cost (Pascanu et al., 2013). To mitigate these challenges and capture long range
dependencies more effectively in sequence modeling, the S4 model was introduced with novel pa-
rameterization, initialization, and discretization techniques (Gu et al., 2022b). Recent updates to
the S4 model have further simplified the hidden state matrix by using a diagonal matrix, thereby
improving computational efficiency (Gu et al., 2022c; Gupta et al., 2022; Orvieto et al., 2023). Ad-
ditionally, regularization methods such as dropout, weight decay, and data-dependent regularizers
(Liu & Li, 2024) are employed with SSMs to prevent overfitting. In this study, we explore how
temporal dependencies in input sequences impact initialization schemes in terms of optimization,
with a particular focus on the timescale and state matrix.
Curse of memory in SSMs. The “curse of memory” is a newly introduced concept that highlights
the difficulty recurrent-based models face in capturing long-term memory (Li et al., 2021; 2022),
and has been discussed in recent works (Cirone et al., 2024; Sieber et al., 2024; Zucchet & Orvieto,
2024). This issue arises due to the exponential decay property of the model’s kernel basis functions.
A common strategy to parameterize the real part of the state matrix’s eigenvalues involves stable
parameterization (Gu et al., 2022c; Wang & Li, 2024), ensuring stable training dynamics even if the
input sequence is infinitely long. However, this stable parameterization constrains the real part of
the state matrix’s eigenvalues to be strictly negative, thereby limiting the model’s ability to capture
long-term memory. In this paper, we argue that if input sequences have fixed lengths, it is reasonable
to set the real part of the eigenvalues to zero by appropriately setting the timescale. This relaxation
allows the model to capture long-term memory while still maintaining training stability.

B    E XPERIMENTS DETAILS
In this section, we provide more experiment details that produce Figure 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and Table 1
in section 3.
Figure 1 (Left). The synthetic dataset that we use to produce Figure 1 (Left) is i.i.d. sampled from
standard normal distribution with dimension 128, i.e., each input sequence is of shape (1, L, 128)
where L is its sequence length. We use a ZOH discretized diagonal SSM layer (3) with hidden size
m = 32, model dimension d = 128 to handle the 128 dimensional dataset. We initialize the state
vector w by S4D-Lin with real part −0.5. The read-out vector c is initialized as i.i.d. standard normal
distribution. We vary ∆min and ∆max in the SSM layer and use the Adam optimizer (Kingma,
2014) to train the hyperparmeters ∆, ℜ(w), ℑ(w), C without weight decay. The learning rate for
∆, ℜ(w), ℑ(w) is 0.001 and the learning rate for c is 0.1.
Figure 1 (Middle), 2, 3. The synthetic datasets that we use to produce these figures are Gaus-
sian processes with mean zero and varied autocovariance functions E[xi xj ] = K(i, j) for i, j =
1, 2, . . . , L. Specifically, the ‘iid’ dataset refers to K(i, j) = δi−j ; the ‘ou’ dataset refers to
K(i, j) = exp(−|i − j|/2); the ‘rbf’ dataset refers to K(i, j) = exp(−π|i − j|2 ); and the au-
tocovariance matrix for the ‘rand’ dataset is given by ΣΣ⊤ /L   √ where Σ ∈ R
                                                                              L×L
                                                                                   is a random matrix
with i.i.d. entries sampled from a uniform distribution U [0, 3]. For all the four synthetic datasets,
we have K(i, i) = 1. The plot for Figure 1 (Middle) records the maximal eigenvalue of the sample
matrix that we fix the data size to be 1000 and vary the sequence length L as plotted. So we can see
some deviations between theory and practice. For Figure 2 & 3, we also use the 1-dimensional SSM
layer (3) with S4D-Lin initialization on ℑ(w) and vary the real part ℜ(w) to be −0.5 or 0.
Figure 1 (Right), 4, 5 (Right), 6. For the resized sequential image datasets, we choose to resize
the original images with resize rates [0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4]. Then we standardize the whole
images and flatten them into 1-d sequence. For sequential MNIST (sMNIST) dataset, the sequence
length is 784r2 and for sequential CIFAR10 (sCIFAR10), the sequence length is 1024r2 where r
is the resize rate. The plot for the maximal eigenvalue of the autocorrelation matrix and the output
value are based on the whole training set. We use the 1-dimensional SSM layer (3) with S4D-Lin
initialization and vary the real part ℜ(w) to be −0.5 or 0 to calculate the output value magnitude.
For the decorrelated sMNIST dataset, we choose the original MNIST dataset and the decorrelation
transformation is given by a centered matrix with a whitening matrix after flattening images. The
centered matrix is the mean of the sequential data along the batch dimension, and the whitening


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Behavior of the real part ℜ(w) after training on the synthetic task and the decorrelated
sMNIST dataset.


matrix has shape L × L. The whitening matrix can be obtained by SVD on the data matrix. To train
the decorrelated sMNIST dataset, we use a 128-dimensional SSM layer (3) with m = 32 and GELU
activation (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) on the model output, and also apply a gated linear unit after
the GELU activation. The experiment for ℜ(w) = −0.5 follows the default training setup in Gu
et al. (2022c), and for the experiment with ℜ(w) = 0, we initialize all the real part ℜ(w) to be zero
without any reparameterization method. We use dropout with rate 0.1 and apply a decoder layer
for classification. We use Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.001 on ∆, ℜ(w), ℑ(w) and AdamW
optimizer with weight decay 0.01 on the rest hyperparameters. For the plot of the memory function
in Figure 6, we solve a least square problem by taking the pseudo inverse of the sequence matrix
X ∈ R50000×784 and then get the recovered memory function ρ.
Figure 5 (Left), (Middle). The comparisons on zero real part and negative real part in Figure 5
(Left) & (Middle) are conducted on a 1-dimensional synthetic dataset. We sample the training and
test dataset from i.i.d. standard normal distribution with length 128. The training sample size and
the test sample size are both 1000. We use the
                                             √ SSM layer (3) with m = 32, S4D-Lin initialization
on ℑ(w) and initialize the timescale ∆ = 1/ 128. We use Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.001
on ∆, ℜ(w), ℑ(w) and learning rate 0.01 on c.
Table 1. Compared with the default training setup in Gu et al. (2022c) for S4D models, the only
difference is that we randomly select a fraction p ∈ [0, 1] over the feature dimension such that
the selected state vectors are initialized with zero real part. For these selected vectors, their corre-
sponding timescale ∆0 ∈ Rp·d is initialized p  to a constant. As suggested by Theorem 3.1, to ensure
the stability, ∆0 can be chosen to be O(1/ Lλmax (E[xx⊤ ])). Here we do not conduct a prior
numerical check on the spectrum of the data autocorrelation, so we simply take an upper bound of
λmax (E[xx⊤ ]), which is given by O(L) if we have normalized the sequences such that E[∥x∥2 ] = 1.
In that case, ∆0 = O(1/L). In the default training setup (Gu et al., 2022c), the model timescale ∆
is sampled from a uniform distribution U [∆min , ∆max ] with ∆min ∼ O(1/L). Hence, for the LRA
benchmark we simply initialize ∆0 as a constant ∆min as in Gu et al. (2022c).
We also summarize the in other hyperparameters for training S4D on the LRA benchmark in Table
2. And we provide the behavior of the real part ℜ(w) after training on the synthetic task (ref Figure
5 (Left), (Middle)) and the decorrelated sMNIST dataset (ref Figure 5 (Right)) in Figure 8. We
can see that with zero real part at initialization, it is possible that there remains some non-negative
real part after training if no reparameterization method is introduced. But the improvement on the
experiments indicates that the model can learn from the data effectively even without constraining
the real part values.

B.1   A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS FOR S4D-L EGS INITIALIZATION

In this subsection, we include more experiment results in Figure 9, 10, 11, 12 for SSMs with S4D-
Legs (Gu et al., 2022c) initialization on the imaginary part ℑ(w). The S4D-Legs initialization is
an approximation on the original S4-Legs initialization (Gu et al., 2022b) by taking diagonal part
of the diagonal plus low-rank HiPPO-Legs matrix. In Figure 9, 10, 11, we plot the magnitude of


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              D     H    N     Dropout     Learning rate   Batch size    Epochs    Weight decay
  ListOps     6    256    4       0             0.01          32           40          0.05
    Text      6    256    4       0             0.01          16           32          0.05
 Retrieval    6    256    4       0             0.01          64           20          0.05
   Image      6    512   64      0.1            0.01          50          200          0.05
 Pathfinder   6    256   64      0.0           0.004          64          200          0.05
   PathX      6    256   64      0.0          0.0005          16           50          0.05

Table 2: List of the S4D model hyperparameters for the LRA benchmark, where D, H, N denote
the depth, feature dimension and hidden state space dimension respectively.


Figure 9: The expected magnitude of the SSM output value on synthetic sequences with S4D-Legs
initialization and different autocorrelation. The real part ℜ(w) = −0.5 follows the common practice
and we consider four dependencies between the timescale ∆ and the sequence length L.


Figure 10: The expected magnitude of the SSM output value on synthetic sequences with S4D-Legs
initialization and different autocorrelation and different dependencies between ∆ and L. The real
part ℜ(w) is set to be zero.


Figure 11: The expected magnitude of the SSM output value for S4D-Legs initialization on sequen-
tial image datasets with different resize rates (ranging from 0.5 to 4) and different dependencies
between ∆ and L.



                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: (Left) Training a diagonal SSM (3) with S4D-Legs initialization on a task that requires
long-term memory. The learned memory function ρ̃ effectively captures the spike in long-range
dependencies. However, it struggles to do so when the real part is negative. (Middle) Test loss on
the long-term memory task when initializing ℜ(w) = 0 and ℜ(w) = −0.5. (Right) Test accuracy
for training a diagonal SSM with S4D-Legs initialization on decorrelated sequential MNIST dataset
with different real parts at initialization.

 Initialize a fraction p of ℜ(w) to be 0      p=0           p = 0.1        p = 0.2        p = 0.3        p = 0.4        p = 0.5
                 Accuracy                  84.09 (0.47)   84.60 (0.38)   84.23 (0.49)   83.77 (0.46)   83.50 (0.42)   83.19 (0.39)
   Ratio for ℜ(w) ≥ 0 after training           0%            3.90%          7.62%         10.85%         14.34%         17.25%


Table 3: Test accuracy for training a 4-layer S4D model in sCIFAR dataset with varied fractions of
zero real part at initialization.


the SSM output value given the S4D-Legs initialization for both zero real part and negative real
part cases. The experiment settings follow the guidelines we introduce before with only a change
on the initialization of ℑ(w). We can see that for S4D-Legs initialization, our conclusion still
holds in the sense that negative real part is stable at initialization for all all the scaling that we
considered in this paper, while for zero real part, the dependencies of ∆ on L varies for different
sequence autocorrelation. We also compare the effects of real parts on optimization with S4D-Legs
initialization. The results are shown in Figure 12 and we obtain consistent results as the S4D-Lin
initialization. One interesting finding is that on the decorrelated sMNIST dataset, the comparison
between Figure 5 (Right) and Figure 12 (Right) shows that the S4D-Lin initialization outperforms
the S4D-Legs initialization in both zero real part and negative real part cases.

B.2     A BLATION STUDIES ON THE EFFECTS OF FRACTIONS OF ZERO REAL PART AT
        INITIALIZATION

In this subsection, we conduct ablation studies on the gray-sCIFAR dataset (with sequence length
1024) to evaluate the benefit of initializing the real part to zero in multi-layer S4D models, while
making minimal modifications. Based on our theory, zeroing the real part can alleviate the curse of
memory in scenarios where the memory function exhibits a long memory pattern. But since we do
not have a precise knowledge of the memory function for the gray-sCIFAR dataset, we do ablation
studies on the effects of zero real part by varying the fraction p as specified in Section 3.2. For
the selected state vectors with zero real part, their corresponding timescale ∆0 ∈ Rp·d is initialized
as a constant 0.001. We use a 4-layer S4D model with feature dimension 128 and vary p across
[0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5]. We present both the test accuracy and the ratio of non-negative real part
parameters to the total 4 × 32 × 128 = 16384 real part parameters upon completion of training
in Table 3. We can see that initializing an appropriate fraction of state vectors with zero real parts
enables the model to outperform the default S4D configuration. Importantly, even post-training,
some non-negative real parts persist, suggesting that the model retains stability and effectively adapts
to the data.

C     AUXILIARY L EMMAS
In this section, we provide the description for Itô’s isometry and a few auxiliary lemmas that we will
need for the proofs of Theorem 3.1, Proposition 3.3 and Theorem 3.4.


                                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma C.1. If ℜ(z) ≤ 0, then
                                                    ez − 1
                                                           ≤ 1.
                                                       z

Proof. Notice that
                             Rz                Rz                 Rz                      Rz
               |ez − 1|       0
                                   es ds        0
                                                    |es ||ds|     0
                                                                       eℜ(z) |ds|         0
                                                                                               |ds|
                        =                ≤                    =                   ≤                 = 1,
                  |z|             |z|                |z|                |z|                   |z|
which finishes the proof.
Lemma C.2 (Itô’s isometry). Let W : [0, T ] × Ω → R denote the canonical real-valued Wiener
process defined up to time T > 0, and let X : [0, T ]×Ω → R be a stochastic process that is adapted
to the natural filtration of the Wiener process. Then
                                                !2    "Z          #
                                    Z     T                                T
                             E               Xt dWt     =E                   Xt2 dt ,
                                      0                                0


where E denotes expectation with respect to classical Wiener measure.
Lemma C.3 (Gershgorin circle theorem). Let A be a complex n × n matrix, with entries aij . For
i ∈ {1,P. . . , n}, let Ri be the sum of the absolute value of the non-diagonal entries in the i-th row:
Ri = j̸=i |aij |. Let D(aii , Ri ) ⊆ C be a closed disc centered at aii with radius Ri . Then every
eigenvalue of A lies within at least one of the discs D(aii , Ri ).
Lemma C.4. For any t ∈ R,
                                  ∞
                                  X       1        1  π
                                        2 + t2
                                               = − 2 + coth(πt).
                                  n=1
                                      n           2t  2t

Proof. This is a side result of the Basel problem. The related proof can be found in the Wiki page.
We omit it here.
Lemma C.5. For any vj , vk ∈ R, we have
         Z ∞
                                          1        1                 1
              e−s cos(vj s) cos(vk s)ds =                   +                   .
          0                               2 1 + (vj − vk )2   1 + (vj + vk )2

Proof. Notice that
         Z ∞
              e−s cos(vj s) cos(vk s)ds
           0
         1 ∞ −s                           1 ∞ −s
           Z                                Z
       =        e cos((vj − vk )s)ds +             e cos((vj + vk )s)ds
         2 0                              2 0
           Z ∞
                                                     1 ∞
                                                       Z
         1
       =        ℜ (exp (−s + i · (vj − vk )s)) ds +       ℜ (exp (−s + i · (vj + vk )s)) ds
         2 0                                         2
                                                       0
         1              1                  1
       = ℜ                       +
         2     1 − i · (vj − vk ) 1 − i · (vj + vk )

         1          1                   1
       =                      +                    .
         2 1 + (vj − vk )2       1 + (vj + vk )2


Lemma C.6 (Hanson-Wright inequality). Let X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) ∈ Rn be a random vector with
independent components Xi which satisfy EXi = 0 and ∥Xi ∥ψ2 ≤ K. Let A be an n × n matrix.
Then, for every t ≥ 0,
                                                                 t2

                ⊤          ⊤                                               t
            P X AX − EX AX > t ≤ 2 exp −c min                         ,           ,
                                                             K 4 ∥A∥2F K 2 ∥A∥

                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where c is a positive absolute constant and the subgaussian norm ∥ · ∥ψ2 is defined as
                                      ∥ξ∥ψ2 = sup p−1/2 (E|ξ|p )1/p .
                                                   p≥1
                                                                                 p
In particular, if ξ is a standard normal distribution, then ∥ξ∥ψ2 =               8/3.

Proof. We refer the proof to Rudelson & Vershynin (2013).

D    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1
In this section, we prove the upper bound on the second moment of the model output value in
Theorem 3.1.

Proof. First, we may express the model output yL in a matrix form. To do so, we rewrite c as a
2m × 1 vector (ℜ(c1 ), . . . , ℜ(cm ), ℑ(c1 ), . . . ℑ(cm ))⊤ that contains the real and imaginary part of
c, and let V to be a 2m × L Vandermonde-like matrix
               ∆w                         ∆w                                 ∆w                     
            ℜ e ∆w1−1 e∆w1 0           ℜ e ∆w1−1 e∆w1 1                  ℜ e ∆w1−1 e∆w1 (L−1)
                   1                            1                                 1
                                                                  ···
                                                                                                    
                     ..                             ..                                ..            
           ∆w .                                      .                                 .
                                                                                                    
                                          ∆w                                 ∆w                   
               e   m −1 ∆w 0              e    m −1 ∆w 1                     e   m −1 ∆w (L−1)
        ℜ       ∆wm e
                             m
                                      ℜ     ∆wm e
                                                          m
                                                                  ···    ℜ     ∆wm e
                                                                                          m
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
  V :=          ∆w1
                                              ∆w1
                                                                                ∆w1
                                                                                                     .
         −ℑ e ∆w1−1 e∆w1 0           −ℑ e ∆w1−1 e∆w1 1           · · · −ℑ e ∆w1−1 e∆w1 (L−1)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                    
        
                    .
                     ..                             .
                                                    ..                                .
                                                                                      ..
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
               ∆w                         ∆w                                 ∆w                    
                    m                            m                                m
          −ℑ e ∆wm−1 e∆wm 0          −ℑ e ∆wm−1 e∆wm 1            · · · −ℑ e ∆wm−1 e∆wm (L−1)
Then yL can be written in a matrix form
                                      yL = ∆ · c⊤ V Jx,
where J ∈ RL×L is a row reversed identity matrix, i.e.
                                          0 ··· 0 1
                                                           
                                        0 · · · 1 0
                                   J =  ... . . . ... ...  .
                                                            

                                                   1     ···        0   0
Furthermore, we may connect V with a standard Vandermonde matrix VL , by noticing that
                                        ΦV = DVL ,
where VL is a 2m × L complex Vandermonde matrix with 2m nodes e∆w1 , e∆w̄1 , . . . , e∆wm , e∆w̄m :
                              1 e∆w̄1 · · · e∆w̄1 (L−1)
                                                         
                             ..    ..               ..   
                            .
                                    .   ···          .   
                                                          
                            1 e∆w̄m · · · e∆w̄m (L−1) 
                      VL =                               ∈ C2m×L ,
                                  ∆w1
                            1 e         · · · e∆w1 (L−1) 
                                                          
                            .     ..               ..
                             ..
                                                          
                                    .    ···         .    
                                  ∆wm           ∆wm (L−1)
                              1 e        ··· e
Φ is a scaled unitary matrix
                                       ···                          ···
                                                                                
                           1     0            0          i     0            0
                          0     1     ···    0          0     i    ···     0    
                          .     ..           ..         ..    ..           ..
                                       ..                           ..
                                                                                 
                          .
                          .      .       .    .          .     .      .     .
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                          0     0     ···    1         0 0 ··· i
                                                                                
                    Φ :=                                                         ∈ C2m×2m .
                                                                                 
                          1     0     ···    0     −i 0 · · · 0                 
                          0
                                1     ···    0     0 −i · · · 0                 
                                                                                 
                          .     ..    ..     ..     ..   .. ..    ..
                          ..
                                                                                 
                                  .       .    .      .    .    .   .            
                           0     0     ···    1     0     0 · · · −i

                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with ΦΦH = ΦH Φ = 2I2m , and D is a diagonal matrix
              ∆w̄1                                                                     
                        e      −1
                            ∆w̄1
                                    ..                                                 
             
                                         .                                             
                                                                                        
                                              e∆w̄m −1
                                                                                       
                                                                                         ∈ C2m×2m .
                                              ∆w̄m
                                                                                        
           D=
                                                          e∆w1 −1                      
                                                           ∆w1                         
                                                                    ..                 
             
                                                                         .             
                                                                                        
                                                                              e∆wm −1
                                                                               ∆wm

Hence, we have V = 12 ΦH DVL . Notice that both ℜ(∆wj ) and ℜ(∆w̄j ) are non-positive, then
by Lemma C.1 we have ∥D∥ ≤ 1. Now combining it with V = 12 ΦH DVL and the fact that the
exchange matrix J is an orthogonal matrix, then when ℜ(wj ) ≤ 0 for all j, we have
                           h             2 i
                 2
          Ec,x [yL ] = Ec,x ∆ · c⊤ V Jx
                     = ∆2 Ec c⊤ V JEx [xx⊤ ]JV ⊤ c


                          ∆2
                        ≤     Ec [∥c∥2 ]λmax (E[xx⊤ ])λmax (VL VLH )
                           2
                          ∆2 m
                        ≤       λmax (E[xx⊤ ]) Tr(VL VLH )
                            2
                                               Xm                0                    L−1
                            2              ⊤            ∆ℜ(wj )              ∆ℜ(wj )
                        = ∆ mλmax (E[xx ])            e            + ··· + e
                                                     j=1

                        = ∆2 m2 Lλmax (E[xx⊤ ]),
which finishes the proof.

It is also possible to derive a high-probability bound using Lemma C.6 (the Hanson-Wright in-
equality). It’s important to note that we do not make any assumptions about the input sequential
data; instead, we only assume that the read-out vector c is i.i.d. Gaussian, as stated in Theorem
3.1. This allows us to apply the high-probability bound to the expression c⊤ V JEx [xx⊤ ]JV ⊤ c,
where V JEx [xx⊤ ]JV ⊤ is a deterministic matrix. By applying the Hanson-Wright
                                                                          p            inequality in
Lemma C.6, we take a δ > 0, and let A = V JEx [xx⊤ ]JV ⊤ , K =               8/3, then by solving
            log(2/δ)
    t
K 2 ∥A∥ =       c    , we have t = 8 log(2/δ)
                                       3c     ∥A∥. Then for small enough δ, i.e., for large enough
               2
               t           t
t, we have K 4 ∥A∥ 2 > K 2 ∥A∥ . Therefore, by Lemma C.6 we get with probability at least 1 − δ,
                   F


                                                 8∆2 log(2/δ)
                2
           Ex [yL ] ≤ ∆2 m2 Lλmax (E[xx⊤ ]) +                 ∥A∥
                                                      3c
                                                 4∆2 log(2/δ)
                       ≤ ∆2 m2 Lλmax (E[xx⊤ ]) +              λmax (E[xx⊤ ]) Tr(VL VLH )
                                                      3c
                                                   log(1/δ)
                       ≲ ∆2 mLλmax (E[xx⊤ ]) m +               ,
                                                       c
where ≲ hides a positive absolute constant.

E    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3.3
In this section, we show the proof for Proposition 3.3.
                         R∞
Proof. Since Gj,k =         0
                                ℜ(ewj s )ℜ(ewk s )ds, then for any ξ ∈ Rm , we have
                                                                    2
                                            Z ∞ X    m
                                  ξ ⊤ Gξ =              ξj ℜ(ewj s ) ds ≥ 0.
                                                0        j=1



                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence,
    Pm G is positive semi-definite for both real-valued w and complex-valued w. Let ξ ⊤ Gξ = 0,
then j=1 ξj ℜ(ewj s ) = 0 for s ≥ 0.
When a ∈ Rm , we take the discrete time points s = 0, 1, . . . , m to form m equations. Note that
ℜ(ewj s ) = ewj s . If wj are distinct, then
                                         Pmthe Vandermode matrix given by w1 , . . . , wm is invertible,
indicating that the only solution for j=1 ξj ℜ(ewj s ) = 0 is ξj = 0 for j = 1, . . . , m. Thus, G is
positive definite in that case.
When w ∈ Cm with distinct imaginary parts, we can always find a scaling factor γ > 0 such that
eγw1 , . . . , eγwm , eγ w̄1 , . . . , eγ w̄m are distinct, where w̄ is the conjugate of w. Then by the argument
                                                                        Pm              Pn
of Vandermonde matrix, the only solution of the equation j=1 ξj ewj s + j=1 ξˆj ew̄j s = 0 for s ≥
                                                                                            Pm
0 is that ξj = ξˆj = 0 for j = 1, . . . , m. Since 2ℜ(ewj s ) = ewj s + ew̄j s , then j=1 ξj ℜ(ewj s ) = 0
only has zero solution.
Combining these two cases we finish the proof.

F    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.4

In this section, we prove Theorem 3.4 based on the Gershgorin circle theorem (Lemma C.3).

Proof. First, we need to bound both the diagonal entry and the off-diagonal sum. The diagonal entry
Gj,j = 12 (1 + 1+4v
                 1
                    2 ), which can be bounded as
                         j

                                                     !
                                 1         1
                                     1+                   ≤ Gj,j ≤ 1,   j = 1, . . . , m.
                                 2      1 + 4vj2

For the off-diagonal sum, we have ∀j = 1, . . . , m,
                  X
         2Rj = 2      |Gj,k |
                     k̸=j
                    X               1          X        1
                =                            +
                             1 + (vj − vk )2     1 + (vj + vk )2
                    k̸=j                          k̸=j
                    ∞                      ∞
                    X           2          X            1             1
                <                      +                         −
                             1 + δ2 k2           1 + (vj + vk )2   1 + 4vj2
                    k=1                    k=1
                     ∞                      ∞
                    X           2          X          1             1
                <                      +                       −
                             1 + δ2 k2           1 + vj2 + vk2   1 + 4vj2
                    k=1                    k=1
                     ∞                      ∞
                    X          2       X        1            1
                <                    +        2         −
                                 2
                             1+δ k 2               2
                                         1 + vj + δ k 2   1 + 4vj2
                    k=1                    k=0
                      ∞                              ∞
                                                                                                       !
                    2 X              1        1 X           1                       1          1
                =                           +                          +                  −                ,
                    δ2          1/δ 2 + k 2   δ2  (1 + vj2 )/δ 2 + k 2            1 + vj2   1 + 4vj2
                         k=1                        k=1

where the first inequality is due to the fact that the minimal separation distance minj̸=k |vj −vk | ≥ δ,
and
P∞the last    inequality is because vj > 0 and reordering {vk }k≥1 does not affect the result for
           1
  k=1 1+v 2 +v 2 . Then by Lemma C.4, we have
            j   k

                ∞                           ∞                                 ∞
           2 X         1        1 X              1            3 X         1
                              +                             <
           δ2     1/δ 2 + k 2   δ2     (1 + vj2 )/δ 2 + k 2   δ2     1/δ 2 + k 2
              k=1                  k=1                           k=1
                                                                   2                    π
                                                              3      δ     πδ
                                                            = 2 − +            coth
                                                              δ       2     2           δ
                                                                3 3π            π
                                                            =− +        coth        .
                                                                2    2δ         δ


                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence we have,
                                   !                                                             !
                1            1            1      3 3π            π    1          1          1
    Gj,j − Rj >      1+                −      − +        coth         −              −
                2         1 + 4vj2        2      2    2δ         δ        2 1 + vj2     1 + 4vj2

                 5 1               1             2        3π         π
               > − max                   −              −     coth
                 4 2            1 + x2       1 + 4x2       4δ         δ
                        3π          π
               > 1.19 −     coth         .
                         4δ          δ
Under the same argument, we get
                                                                                           !
                            1      3 3π              π    1                1         1
          Gj,j + Rj < 1 +       − +          coth         + max                 −
                            2      2     2δ          δ       2          1 + vj2   1 + 4vj2
                                                                               !
                       1 3π             π  1                 1            1
                    < +          coth         + max                −
                       4     4δ          δ       2        1 + vj2    1 + 4vj2
                        5     3π         π
                    =      +      coth         .
                       12     4δ           δ
Combining the two bounds and Lemma C.3, we finish the proof.


                                                 21
