Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROVENCE : EFFICIENT AND ROBUST CONTEXT
PRUNING FOR RETRIEVAL - AUGMENTED GENERATION

 Nadezhda Chirkova, Thibault Formal, Vassilina Nikoulina, Stéphane Clinchant
 Naver Labs Europe
 Grenoble, France
 {nadia.chirkova,thibault.formal}@naverlabs.com



                                             A BSTRACT

           Retrieval-augmented generation improves various aspects of large language mod-
           els (LLMs) generation, but suffers from computational overhead caused by long
           contexts as well as the propagation of irrelevant retrieved information into gener-
           ated responses. Context pruning deals with both aspects, by removing irrelevant
           parts of retrieved contexts before LLM generation. Existing context pruning ap-
           proaches are however limited, and do not provide a universal model that would be
           both efficient and robust in a wide range of scenarios, e.g., when contexts contain
           a variable amount of relevant information or vary in length, or when evaluated
           on various domains. In this work, we close this gap and introduce Provence
           (Pruning and Reranking Of retrieVEd relevaNt ContExts), an efficient and robust
           context pruner for Question Answering, which dynamically detects the needed
           amount of pruning for a given context and can be used out-of-the-box for various
           domains. The three key ingredients of Provence are formulating the context
           pruning task as sequence labeling, unifying context pruning capabilities with con-
           text reranking, and training on diverse data. Our experimental results show that
           Provence enables context pruning with negligible to no drop in performance,
           in various domains and settings, at almost no cost in a standard RAG pipeline.
           We also conduct a deeper analysis alongside various ablations to provide insights
           into training context pruners for future work. Our model1 and code2 are publicly
           available.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has become a widely-used paradigm for improving factu-
ality, attribution, and adaptability of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Das et al., 2019; Asai et al.,
2024; Seo et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2020; Mallen et al., 2023a; Min et al., 2023). Augmenting a
given user’s query with retrieved relevant contexts helps to avoid the generation of untruthful infor-
mation and enables the provision of references used to generate the answer. Furthermore, using a
domain-specific datastore may enable access and reasoning over a previously unknown knowledge –
without fine-tuning the LLM. One additional advantage of the RAG approach is the easy plug-and-
play architecture (LangChain): practitioners may choose components (retrievers, generator LLMs,
context granularity etc.) which best suit their particular cases to maximize the final performance.
At the same time, the use of RAG adds computational overhead due to both retrieval latency and
the increased input length for the LLMs. It may also propagate irrelevant information present in
retrieved contexts into generated responses. These issues can be solved by developing more efficient
and robust LLMs – either by making architectural changes to process long contexts more efficiently
(Nawrot et al., 2024; Dao, 2024; Chevalier et al., 2023) or increasing the diversity of the tuning
data to improve processing of irrelevant contexts (Lin et al., 2024). However, tuning the LLM
can be highly resource-consuming, or even impossible to apply for proprietary (closed) LLMs. An
alternative solution consists in pruning retrieved contexts by removing context parts irrelevant to
the user’s query – which reduces context lengths and therefore speeds up generation. Such context
    1
        Our model: https://huggingface.co/naver/provence-reranker-debertav3-v1
    2
        Our code: https://github.com/naver/bergen/tree/main/scripts/provence


                                                   1
               Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Inference                          Retrieved passages                             Training
                                                                                                                                                 prompt
                        Data                                                                                                                                Question: How many French words are there
                        store                                                              Datastore                                                        in English?
                                               Pumpkin is at its peak in the fall.<…>
                                   Retriever   Eating pumpkin every day can help                                   Retriever +          Data labeler        Context: [1] In uence of French on English. [2]
                                               strengthen your immune system and                                    reranker               LLM              The most notable in uence of French has …
                                               promote eye health. However, if you
                                               eat too much, you may experience                                                                             Answer the Question, using only information
                        Can
                        you                    diarrhea from a high dose of ber.                                                                            provided in the Context. If no useful
                        eat                    Read on to learn more.                                                                                       information is provided, you must output "No
                      pumpkin
                                                                                            How many                                                        answer". If some parts of the Context are
                       every                            Reranked and pruned passages                           Retrieved       Rerank       Pruned          used to answer, you must cite all the
                                                                                           French words
                       day?                                                                                     context         score       context
                                               Eating pumpkin every day can help
                                                                                            are there in                                                    corresponding sentences using symbols [ ].
                                                                                             English?
                                               strengthen your immune system and                                                                       Rerank score             Binary mask
                                  Context                                                                            input
                                               promote eye health. However, if you                     input                     target target              0.9   0     0        1      1     1   0     0
                      User        pruner &
                      question                 eat too much, you may experience
                                  reranker     diarrhea from a high dose of ber.           Train
                                                                                          question                  Training
                                  Generator                         Generated response
                                                                                                                                          architecture
                                    LLM                Yes, but not too much.
                                                                                                                                                          [BOS] How many … In u ence of … The most…


                                        Figure 1: Illustration of inference (left) and training (right) of Provence.

               Table 1: Analysis of existing approaches for context pruning. Violet / Orange highlight practical /
               less-practical solutions.

                 Approach                         Query- Granularity                     Output                            Type          Base arch.                           Multi-              Model re-
                                                  dep.                                                                                                                        domain              lease
                                                                                                                                                                              testing
                 Selective Context                No           token-level               % of tokens                       extr.         Llama-7B / GPT2                      Yes                 Yes
                 LLMLingua                        No           token-level               % of tokens                       extr.         Alpaca-7B / GPT2                     Yes                 Yes
                 LongLLMLingua                    Yes          token-level               % of tokens                       extr.         Llama-2-7B-chat                      Yes                 Yes
                 LLMLingua2                       No           token-level               % of tokens                       extr.         RoBERTa / mBERT                      Yes                 Yes
fl   fl   fl
                 RECOMP extr.
                 fi
                                                  Yes          sent.-level               k sentences                       extr.         BERT                                 No                  Yes
                 RECOMP abstr.                    Yes          sent.-level               ⩾ 0 sentences                     abstr.        T5-L                                 No                  Yes
                 FilCo                            Yes          sent.-level               1 sentence                        abstr.        T5-XL / Llama-2-7B                   No                  No
                 COMPACT                          Yes          sent.-level               ⩾ 0 sentences                     abstr.        Mistral-7B                           No                  Yes
                 Provence (ours)                  Yes          sent.-level               ⩾ 0 sentences                     extr.         DeBERTa                              Yes                 Yes


               pruning module can be used in a plug-and-play manner with any generator LLM, featuring both
               easy use and better transparency in the RAG pipeline.
               Despite initial efforts on developing context pruners for RAG, none of the existing solutions pro-
               vide a model ready to be used out-of-the-box in practice. First, many approaches are designed for
               a simplified setting, e.g., with the assumption that only one sentence per context is relevant to the
               input query (Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024), or that the compression ratio is fixed (Jiang et al.,
               2023; Pan et al., 2024). However, in practice contexts may contain various portions of relevant in-
               formation, from empty to full relevant context, and pruners should detect it in an adaptable fashion.
               Second, many works introduce context pruners that are not efficient enough to be used in practice.
               This includes using billion-sized LLMs as base models for pruners (Jiang et al., 2024; Pan et al.,
               2024; Wang et al., 2023), or designing abstractive context compressors which require sequential
               autoregressive generation of the final context (Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). We argue that a
               more practical and efficient setting consists in fine-tuning a small-size model such as DeBERTa (He
               et al., 2021b;a), as an extractive pruner, i.e., with a lightweight prediction head for selecting relevant
               context parts. Third, most of the existing works train context pruners for each dataset individually
               and do not target nor test pruners robustness to various data domains.
               Table 1 summarizes the properties of various existing methods along specified dimensions and shows
               that none of them satisfy all listed criteria. The table also includes a dimension of pruning granular-
               ity, i.e., token-level vs sentence-level pruning. In this work, we focus on query-dependent sentence-
               level pruning, which prunes out semantic units (sentences) that are deemed not relevant to generate
               the answer. An alternative approach is token-level pruning which prunes out low-level grammatical
               units such as articles or interjections, usually in a query-independent fashion. The two approaches
               are orthogonal and could potentially be combined.
               To address listed limitations, we introduce Provence (Pruning and Reranking Of retrieVEd rel-
               evaNt ContExt), an approach for training an adaptable, efficient and robust sentence-level context
               pruner for Question Answering, which can be used out-of-the-box across various domains and set-
               tings. To achieve this, we formulate context pruning as binary sequence labeling so that the binary
               mask predicted by the pruner determines sentences (from zero to all) which are relevant to the query,


                                                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and train our pruner from a lightweight DeBERTa model on diverse data. Furthermore, we notice
that context pruning and reranking (i.e., the second step in effective retrieval pipelines) bear a strong
resemblance. We therefore propose to unify these two models into a single one, completely elimi-
nating the cost of context pruning in the RAG pipeline.
More specifically, our contributions are as follows:

       • We propose an approach for training an adaptable, robust, and efficient context pruner for
         QA – and release our trained model and code. Three key ingredients of our approach are
         formulating context pruning as sequence labeling, unifying context pruning and reranking
         in a single model, and training on diverse data.
       • We test Provence on various QA domains and show its out-of-the-box applicability to
         prune contexts with negligible to no drop in performance and at almost no cost, substan-
         tially outperforming baseline approaches. We also demonstrate Provence capabilities in
         detecting the number of relevant sentences at any positions in the context and robustness to
         various context lengths.
       • We conduct multiple ablations to demonstrate which techniques are essential for training
         robust context pruners, to provide insights for future context pruners development.

Definitions. A typical RAG pipeline consists of (0) a user’s question, or query; (1) a datastore,
i.e., a collection of documents (pieces of text) to be retrieved from, (2) an efficient retriever which
enables fast retrieval from a large datastore (typically a dual-encoder model, where queries and
passages are encoded independently), (3) a more expensive cross-encoder reranker which further
reduces and reorders a set of retrieved passages (cross-encoding means encoding a passage together
with a query); and (4) a generator LLM which outputs the final response based on the user’s query
and the relevant passages. Such a pipeline can be represented as retrieve >> rerank >>
generate. Context pruning can be incorporated before generation, i.e., retrieve >> rerank
>> prune >> generate. In our work, we also propose to incorporate context pruning into
reranking, an essential and already present component in RAG (Rau et al., 2024a): retrieve >>
rerank+prune >> generate. This enables context pruning at almost zero cost.


2   R ELATED WORK

Context pruning. RECOMP (Xu et al., 2024) focuses on context pruning for RAG and proposes
both extractive and abstractive context pruners. The extractive RECOMP approach independently
encodes sentences in the context and then selects top sentences with embeddings closest to the query
embedding. Such an approach limits context understanding, due to independent processing of both
sentences and queries. The method also requires specifying the amount of sentences to keep as
a hyperparameter – which is usually unknown in practice and should depend on each particular
passage. The abstractive RECOMP summarizes key information from the passage relevant to the
query (including zero relevant information) by training on silver summaries generated by GPT-3.5.
However, it requires inefficient autoregressive generation of the final context, and can eventually
hallucinate facts not present in the input context. FilCo (Wang et al., 2023) similarly proposes to
generate contexts autoregressively but is trained on extractive targets, i.e., one sentence from the
context selected by one of three criteria. The drawbacks are again inefficiency and the simplified
assumption of one relevant sentence per context. A recent approach, COMPACT (Yoon et al., 2024),
also proposes to generate filtered contexts autoregressively – hence inefficiently – and introduces an
iterative approach for gradually updating the relevant context after processing a new portion of
retrieved passages. In contrast to all listed efforts, Provence dynamically detects the amount of
relevant information in the context – from zero to all sentences – in an extractive and efficient way.
Furthermore, we propose a novel approach of integrating context pruning into a reranker.
Concurrently to our work, DSLR (Hwang et al., 2024) performs extractive sentence-level pruning,
by encoding sentences one-by-one, together with the query, using existing rerankers. Similarly to
Provence, DSLR keeps sentences with scores higher than a threshold and preserves the original
order of sentences. However, in contrast to Provence, DSLR processes sentences in a context inde-
pendently, which could lead to misunderstanding of coreference between sentences and consequent
pruning errors.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


An orthogonal line of work proposes extractive token-level pruners. LLMLingua (Jiang et al., 2023)
and Selective Context (Li et al., 2023) use LLMs to remove tokens with high generation probabil-
ities, independently of the query. LLMLingua2 (Pan et al., 2024) is a small BERT-based model
finetuned to eliminate redundant tokens, also independently of the query. LongLLMLingua (Jiang
et al., 2024) proposes query-dependent LLM-based token pruning based on contrastive perplexity.
Listed approaches remove tokens in a way that it does not break context understanding for the LLM
– hence they are not capable of removing semantic parts of the context. LLMLingua models also
have many hyperparameters in the interface which are hard to tune in practice. These approaches
can however also be combined with sentence-level pruning.
Retrieval granularity. Alternatively to context pruning, one can reformulate datastore content into
atomic units, e.g., propositions as in Dense-X retrieval Chen et al. (2024c) or decontextualized sen-
tences (Choi et al., 2021). Such preprocessing is expensive and can lead to some information loss.
Passage filtering. Another related – and orthogonal – line of works focuses on filtering entire pas-
sages if they are deemed irrelevant for a given question; such an approach can be straightforwardly
combined with Provence. A simple method consists in introducing a threshold on the (re)ranking
score. LongLLMLingua reranks passages based on the probability of a question given the passage.
(Yoran et al., 2024) use natural language inference models to filter out passages that do not entail
question-answer pairs, but report that this approach sometimes filters out relevant passages too.
Improving context processing in LLMs. While context pruners aim to remove context parts ir-
relevant to the user’s query, another line of work aims to process contexts more efficiently and
effectively in LLMs. Efficient context processing could be achieved through efficient attention im-
plementations (Dao, 2024; Anagnostidis et al., 2023), KV cache compression (Nawrot et al., 2024),
encoding retrieved passages in parallel (Zhu et al., 2024), or compressing contexts into one or more
context embeddings (Chevalier et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2024; Rau et al., 2024b; Louis et al., 2025).
Other works aim to make LLMs more robust, by exposing them to noisy contexts during training
or finetuning (Izacard et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024). All such approaches usually require LLM
adaptation which may complicate application to an arbitrary picked LLM.


3   P ROVENCE

The high-level overview of our proposed approach is illustrated in Figure 1. Our first contribution is
to pose the context pruning problem as a sequence labeling task. We fine-tune a DeBERTa model to
encode the query–context pair and output binary masks which are used to filter out irrelevant context
parts. The labels for training are generated by LLama-3-8B-Instruct (AI@Meta, 2024); we call them
silver labels since they are generated automatically. Such an approach solves several limitations of
existing context pruners: (1) by construction, the model is able to deal with varying noise in contexts
and select an appropriate pruning ratio; (2) queries are encoded together with context sentences
(cross-encoding), providing richer representations – compared for instance to extractive RECOMP
which encodes query and context sentences independently; (3) using a lightweight encoder makes
our approach more efficient than LLM-based or abstractive methods.
Our second contribution consists in unifying reranking and context pruning – instead of considering
these steps as distinct in the RAG pipeline. In Provence, reranking and pruning can be done in a
single forward step, thus eliminating the computational overhead due to context pruning – making
Provence almost “free”.
Training data. Our approach requires a set of training questions and a retrieval datastore. Spefi-
cially, we rely on the train set of the MS MARCO document ranking collection which includes 370k
queries (Nguyen et al., 2016). The MS MARCO collection is a domain-diverse datastore of 3.2M
documents crawled from the Web – which is required for the final model’s robustness to various
domains – and is often used to train retrievers and rerankers. In ablations, we also consider the train
set of Natural Questions which contains 87k queries Kwiatkowski et al., 2019).
Data processing. We create a retrieval datastore by splitting MS MARCO documents into passages
consisting of N consecutive sentences – N being a random integer ∈ 1..10. This is to enable the
pruner’s robustness to variable retrieved context lengths. We also prepend page titles to each pas-
sage. For each question, we retrieve top-5 relevant passages using a strong retrieval pipeline (Rau
et al., 2024a) consisting of a SPLADE-v3 retriever (Lassance et al., 2024) and a DeBERTa-v3


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


reranker (Lassance & Clinchant, 2023). The resulting set of retrieved passages is naturally diverse
w.r.t. relevance or irrelevance to the question, due to imperfections in retrieval.
Silver labels generation. Given a question and a retrieved passage (context), we split the passage
into sentences3 and prompt Llama-3-8B-Instruct to select sentences relevant to the given question.
One approach would be to use a straightforward prompt such as “Output indexes of sentences rel-
evant to the given question”. However, we decided to utilize the strong LLMs’ capabilities of ac-
tually answering questions while citing relevant context sentences. We therefore instruct the LLM
to answer the given question using only information provided in the given context, and output “No
answer” in case no relevant information is provided. We also specify the easy-to-parse citation for-
mat [i] and number sentences with the same marker in the context. Our prompt can be found in
Appendix – Table 6; we use greedy decoding and parse cited sentences using regular expressions.
We also compare different prompting strategies in the ablation study.
We found that Llama-3-8B is well capable of answering only based on a given context in most cases
and of outputting a citation ∼ 90% of the time. We filter out cases when no citations are produced
and ”No answer” is not present in the LLM’s output, as these are the cases when the context actually
contains relevant information but the LLM “forgot” to cite it. The final labels distribution (number
of selected sentences per context, their positions) is shown in Appendix – Figure 5.
Training of Provence. Our context pruner receives as input the concatenation of a question and
a retrieved context, and outputs per-token binary labels denoting whether each token (defined by
the pretrained model’s tokenizer) should be included in the selected context. In Section 4.4 (Ab-
lations), we also consider an approach where a special token is inserted at the beginning of each
sentence, and labels are predicted per-sentence based on the representations of those tokens. We
train Provence as a binary per-token classifier with ground truth labels coming from the silver
data labeling, and the model can be used as a standalone pruner, i.e., retrieve >> rerank >>
Provence (standalone) >> generate.
Unifying compression and reranking. We note that cross-encoder rerankers (Nogueira & Cho,
2020) share both the same architecture and inputs (pairs of question–passages) as Provence. Ad-
ditionally, the task of context pruning (selecting parts of contexts that are useful for generating the
answer to the question) intrinsically bears similarity with re-ranking (estimating the relevance of
a context w.r.t. the question) – and we hypothesize the possibility of knowledge transfer between
these two related tasks. We therefore propose to unify both approaches in a single model, with two
different task heads. More specifically, the reranking head outputs a scalar prediction for the BOS
token while the pruning head outputs per-token predictions for the passage tokens, as illustrated in
Figure 1. To ease training, we propose to further fine-tune a pretrained reranker on our labeling
objective, while adding a ranking “regularizer” to preserve initial reranking capabilities. The regu-
larizer is a Mean Squared Error loss on the reranking scores from the initial reranker. This can be
viewed as a straightforward pointwise score distillation process, where the initial model serves as
the teacher – a method that has demonstrated great effectiveness in Information Retrieval Hofstätter
et al. (2021). The final loss function is as follows:
                  N  X  Ln
                 X                                            2
            L=             log P (yn,k |zn,k ) + λ sn − zn,0            zn = Provence(xn )          (1)
                n=1   k=1

where N is the number of datapoints (query–passage pairs), xn is a sequence of Ln + 1 input tokens
(concatenated query, passage and BOS at the 0-th position), zn is a sequence of Ln + 1 predictions
output by the model, yn is a sequence of Ln target binary labels for context pruning, sn is the teacher
score (initial reranker), zn,0 is the ranking score predicted from the BOS representation.
In the case of the unified model, re-ranking and context pruning need a single forward step from
the encoder, i.e., retrieve >> Provence (w/ re-ranking) >> generate – making
context pruning almost free in terms of execution time.
Inference with Provence. At inference, we feed a concatenation of a question and a retrieved pas-
sage through Provence, which outputs probabilities of including each token in the final context,
as well as the passage score in the case of the unified model. We simply use a threshold T to binarize
  3
    using the nltk.sent tokenize function: https://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.tokenize.
sent_tokenize.html


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Natural Questions (wiki)          Hotpot QA (wiki)                    TyDi QA (wiki)               Pop QA (wiki)
                     100                              100                         100                            100
compression rate %       75                           75                              75                         75
                         50                           50                              50                         50
                         25                           25                              25                         25
                          0                            0                              0                           0
                               60            70              45     50       55                 60          70         50          55         60
                              Syllabus QA (syllabi)         BioASQ (Pubmed)                      RGB (news)                 Full context
                     100                              100                         100                                       Provence (w/ reranker)
compression rate %


                         75                           75                              75                                    Provence (standalone)
                                                                                                                            LLMLingua2
                         50                           50                              50                                    LongLLMLingua
                                                                                                                            RECOMP (ext)
                         25                           25                              25                                    RECOMP (ext+thr)
                                                                                                                            RECOMP (abs)
                          0                            0                              0                                     DSLR
                                 40              50          70              80            90            95                 Dense-X retrieval
                                      LLM-Eval                    LLM-Eval                           LLM-Eval

Figure 2: Main results for various QA domains, comparing Provence and baseline models. Gen-
erator: LLama-2-7B, retriever: SPLADE-v3, reranker: DeBERTa-v3 (or Provence in the unified
setting). Plot titles denote “Dataset name (datastore type)”. x-axis denotes QA performance eval-
uated with LLM-as-a-judge; y-axis denotes the context compression ratio. For both metrics, the
higher the better: the best model would be closest to the top right corner. Numerical scores are
presented in App. Tables 8–9. Main conclusion: Provence consistently lies on the Pareto front.


the token probabilites (keep or not) – which has a direct effect on the compression rate. As shown in
the experiments section, the choice of a threshold is generally transferable across various datasets,
making the model flexible to be used out-of-the box in various QA applications4 .
We note that our model outputs token-level predictions despite the sentence-level labeling task.
We found that probabilities of including tokens into the final context are naturally clustered on
the sentence level – see example in Appendix Figure 6 – due to the sentence-level targets used in
training. However, in rare cases we could still have partial sentences being selected. To avoid this
phenomenon, we apply a “sentence rounding” procedure: for each sentence, we check the ratio of
kept tokens (predicted label= 1), and select the entire sentence only if it is higher than 0.5.


4                        E XPERIMENTS

4.1                        E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Provence training details. We train Provence on the MS Marco data processed as described in
Section 3, using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and HuggingFace transformers (Wolf et al., 2020). We
use DeBERTa-v3 (He et al., 2021a) as our pretrained model for training the standalone Provence.
For the unified approach, we start training from an already trained cross-encoder, also based on
DeBERTa-v3 (Lassance & Clinchant, 2023). Note that in the latter, we initialize the ranking head
from its fine-tuned version, and train the separate pruning head from scratch.
After preliminary experiments, we set the learning rate to 3 × 10−6 , the batch size to 48 and train
models for one epoch. For joint training, there is a slight trade-off between pruning and reranking.
We set the reranking regularization coefficient λ to 0.05, chosen as the minimal value that does not
substantially degrade reranking performance on the MS MARCO development set.
Evaluation datasets. We test Provence on a diverse set of QA datasets. First, we consider com-
monly used datasets relying on Wikipedia datastore: Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019),
                     4
                         Note that tuning the threshold per dataset could of course further improve results.


                                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Time/MFLOPS required for context pruning,
50 samples, with batch size set 1 (1 sample consists of
a query and top-5 retrieved documents).                              Table 3: Speed up in generation due
                                                                     to compression (Provence, 49%
                                                                     compression). Batch sizes 1 or 256.
 Pruner                             Time (s)     FLOPS
 LongLLMLingua, rate=0.5              194       5.400e+16               Generator          bs 1    bs 256
 LLMLingua2, rate=0.5                  38       9.822e+15
 RECOMP extr., top=2                   12       1.037e+15               LLama-2-7B         ×1.2     ×2
 RECOMP abstr.                        499       5.357e+14               LLama-2-13B        ×1.4     ×2
 DSLR, th=0.5                          26       4.391e+15               SOLAR-10.7B        ×1.4     ×1.9
 Provence (standalone)                 25       7.901e+14



TyDi QA (Clark et al., 2020), PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023b) (all three datasets include single-hop
questions), and HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) (multi-hop questions). Second, we consider datasets
with datastores from various domains: BioASQ (Nentidis et al., 2023) (biomedical questions with
Pubmed as a datastore), SyllabusQA (Fernandez et al., 2024) (questions about educational course
logistics, with courses syllabus as a datastore); and RGB Chen et al. (2024b) (questions about news
with Google-searched news as contexts). Further details can be found in Appendix B.
Evaluation settings. We conduct experiments using BERGEN (Rau et al., 2024a), a benchmarking
library for RAG, using the recommended experimental setting. For each query, we retrieve top-
5 relevant passages using a strong and robust retrieval pipeline: SPLADE-v3 >> DeBERTa-v3
reranker (except for RGB, for which Google-searched passages are already provided). We then pass
queries prepended with relevant document (full length or pruned) into LLama-2-7B-chat (Touvron
et al., 2023)5 to generate answers; other retrieval-generator settings are reported in Appendix. Each
evaluation dataset comes with short keyword answers, which we use to evaluate responses using
LLM-based evaluation (LLMeval in Rau et al., 2024a); match-based metrics are also reported in
Appendix. We additionally measure compression as a portion of the context which was pruned out.
We compare Provence to publicly available context pruning models listed in Table 1, except
LLMLingua and Selective Context which were shown to underperform LLMLingua2 (Pan et al.,
2024). For all context pruners (except abstractive RECOMP for which it is not available), we enforce
the selection of the first (title) passage sentence, to avoid ambiguity in understanding the context by
the generator. For extractive RECOMP, we use the model trained on NQ, consider using top-1/2/3
sentences, and prepend the passage title to each sentence. For the LLMLingua family, we vary the
compression rate in {0.25, 0.5, 0.75} and use code provided on the official repository6 . We use the
XLM-RoBERTa model for LLMLingua2. For Provence, we use T = 0.1 and T = 0.5. We also
compare our method to DSLR based on the same reranker as ours, i.e, DeBERTa-v3.

4.2   M AIN RESULTS

Context pruners are often only tested on limited domain data, e.g., with Wikipedia datastore, and
an important aspect of our work is evaluating context pruning on a series of QA domains. Figure 2
reports the trade-off between compression (efficiency) and LLM-evaluated performance (quality),
for various QA datasets and context pruning methods. We choose to report a figure per dataset to
better assess the Pareto front of existing solutions, rather than comparing methods with different
compression rates in the same table. Figure 7 in Appendix further reports similar results with match-
based metric, and Appendix Tables 11–13 show examples of context pruning with various methods.
First, we observe that Provence achieves the highest performance across pruning methods, for
similar compression ratios. Second, it is noteworthy that Provence outperforms methods requiring
more computations such as LLMLingua models, showing that efficiency is not traded for effective-
ness. Furthermore, Provence is the only method capable of achieving high compression levels
without (or with negligible) performance drops, on all datasets. Moreover, for some datasets, e.g.,
PopQA, pruning with Provence leads to performance improvements due to noise filtering.
   5
     For main experiments, we chose a “weaker” generator which relies more on contexts, to create a more
challenging setting for context pruners; results with stronger generators are reported in Appendix – Figure 8.
   6
     https://github.com/microsoft/LLMLingua


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                                                                                                                                     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 2                                                              NQ (T=0.1)                   Hotpot QA (T=0.1)
                                                                                                                        000
                                                                                                                                      Context         LLMeval LLMeval Comp-
                                                                           98 2      0   0    0              96 3     1 001
                                                                                                                         0 0


Avg number of
selected sents


                                                  num sents by llama3-8b
                                                  >=4 3 2 1 0


                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                      granularity     (full   (pruned ression
                                                                           0.68 56 26 10 7.4                 2 60 26 002
                                                                                                                     7.7 3.8


                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                      cntx)   cntx)
                 1                                                         0.46 14 36 25 25                  2 27 39 003
                                                                                                                      19 13


                                                                                                    2
                                                                            0 4.7 15 26 53                   2.5 12 28 004
                                                                                                                        28 29                       Natural questions


                                                                                                    >=4 3
                 0                                                          0   3 3.9 0.99 92                0 15 10 005
                                                                                                                      25 50           2 sents         66.8       66.1        2%
                                                                                                                     006
                     0.0         0.5       1.0                              0   1 2 3 >=4                    0 1 2 3 >=4
                                                                                                                         007
                                                                                                                                      6 sents         68.3       68.1        50%
          1.0                                                              Syllabus QA (T=0.1)                BioASQ (T=0.1)
                                                                                                                         008
                                                                                                                                      10 sents        68.8       67.5        64%
                                                                           68 16 5       3    2              72 17 9      2 0         100 words       66.5       65.6        48%


                                                  num sents by llama3-8b
                                                  >=4 3 2 1 0


                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                         009
Match


                                                                           6.3 35 28 12 18                   1.6 39 27 15 17
          0.5                                                                                                                                          Hotpot QA


                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                         010
                              1-sent "needle"                              2.4 9.7 22 22 44                 0.091 6.5 24 24 46


                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                         011          2 sents         52.8       52.8        8%
                              2-sent "needle"                               0 4.2 11 4.2 81                   0 2.1 9.3 012
                                                                                                                          17 71


                                                                                                    >=4 3
          0.0                                                                                                                         6 sents         54.6       55.1        55%
                                                                           1.1 1.1 3.8 3.2 91                 0 0.97 2.6 013
                                                                                                                         6.6 90
                     0.0         0.5        1.0                             0 1 2 3 >=4                      0 1 2 014     3 >=4
                                                                                                                                      10 sents        55.7       54.0        68%
                           Position in text                                num. sents by Provence           num. sents by Provence    100 words       54.4       54.2        53%
                                                                                                                         015
                                                                                                                         016         P ROVENCE : EFFICIENT AND ROBUST CONTEXT
Figure 3: Analyses. (Left) Needle-in-the-haystack test allowing INGthe   control
                                                                       FOR   RETRIEVAL          - AUGMENTED
                                                                                  of the position  of the   GENERATION   017
                                                                                                                         018
ground truth sentence(s) in the context. (Middle) Comparison
                                                         019
                                                                  of the number   of  selected  sentences
by the silver predictor (LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct) and Provence.
                                                         020       Heatmaps
                                                                 Anonymous     are normalized by rows:
                                                                            authors
a cell in position (i, j) indicates which percentage of contexts
                                                         021     that under
                                                                 Paper weredouble-blind
                                                                            pruned into    i sentences by
                                                                                        review
the silver predictor, were pruned into j sentences by Provence.
                                                         022            (Right) Testing Provence in
settings with different context lengths. All experiments023
                                                          are done with unified Provence, T = 0.1.
                                                                                                                         024
                                                                                                                                                                                 A BSTRACT
                                                                                                                         025
                                                                                                                         026                  Abstract will places here
                                                                                                                         027
The effect of threshold. An important aspect in the out-of-the-box applicability of context pruners                      028
is how much effort is needed to select the suitable values of 1hyperparameters.
                                                                      I NTRODUCTION For Provence, it                     029
only consists in setting the pruning threshold T . In Figure 2 (for which T = 0.1 and T = 0.5),                          030
we observe that Provence pruning ratio automatically            Retrieval-augmented
                                                        031varies  from 50% to 80%,     generation   (RAG) became
                                                                                              depending        on thea widely-used paradigm for improv
                                                                attribution, and domain-adaptiveness of large language models (LLMs) Das et al. (201
dataset, which demonstrates that the same values for T 032
                                                         work well     for all  considered      domains      –
                                                                (2024); Seo et al. (2019); Lewis et al. (2020); mak-
                                                                                                                   Mallen et al. (2023); Min et al. (2023).
                                                        033
ing Provence robust to the choice of hyperparameters.   034
                                                            If necessary,
                                                                given user’s users    can
                                                                               query with  astill  tune
                                                                                              retrieved   it  further
                                                                                                         relevant  context helps to avoid the generation
for their datasets and/or needs. We note that some models       information
                                                                specify       anddesired
                                                                            the    enables the   provision of references
                                                                                            compression         ratio        used to generate the answer.
                                                        035     using a domain-specific datastore may enable access to the previously unknown know
as a hyperparameter, e.g., LLMLingua models or extractive
                                                        036     RECOMP
                                                                LLM finetuning. (through
                                                                                    One moretop-N      sentences).
                                                                                                important   advantage of the RAG approach is the easy
While it may seem convenient to estimate inference cost,037 the architecture
                                                                 “optimal”such  compression
                                                                                   as LangChain:ratio      (without
                                                                                                      developers  may choose components (retrievers, gen
                                                                contextpair.
losing performance) is specific to each particular question-context
                                                        038              granularity
                                                                               Thus,etc.)  which
                                                                                        using   a best  suit theiras
                                                                                                   threshold       particular
                                                                                                                     a        cases and achieve high final p
                                                        039
hyperparameter is more appropriate for this task. We also experimented          withthespecifying
                                                                At the same time,                      a threshold
                                                                                         use of RAG adds     computational overhead due to the increased
                                                        040
in extractive RECOMP (shown on the same plot) and found         and it
                                                               that  may  also propagate
                                                                        often   leads toirrelevant    information present in retrieved contexts into genera
                                                                                           lower performance
                                                        041     One solution to these issues is developing more efficient and robust LLMs, by making
(compared to top-N ). The reason is that different queries
                                                        042 have   different
                                                                changes         ranges
                                                                          to process longof  similarity
                                                                                           contexts          scores. Nawrot et al. (2024) and increasing
                                                                                                      more efficiently
                                                                                                                         043         of the tuning data to improve processing of irrelevant contexts Lin et al. (2024).
Efficiency. We compare Provence with other pruning      044   methods       in terms
                                                                approach requires     highlyof resource-consuming
                                                                                                efficiency. Table     LLM tuning and thus is hard to apply
2 reports compression time and FLOPS7 required by045different   pickedpruning        methods.solution
                                                                         LLM. An alternative          As expected,
                                                                                                            consists of pruning retrieved contexts, which rem
LongLLMLingua (based on LLama-2-7B-chat) is much                parts irrelevant
                                                        046 slower     compared   to thetouser’s
                                                                                            otherquery  and hence
                                                                                                     pruners       reduces context lengths and speeds up gen
                                                                                                                 based
                                                                context pruning module can be used in a plug-and-play manner with any generator L
on smaller modles. RECOMP abstr. requires less FLOPS easy
                                                        047      compared       to providing
                                                                      use and also   Provence,             but its au-
                                                                                                  better transparency  in the RAG pipeline.
                                                        048
toregressive nature makes it very slow in practice. Note   that  in  the  case    of  the    unified    Provence
                                                        049     Despite initial efforts on developing context pruners for RAG, none of the existing
model, pruning is almost free – as it’s part of the re-ranking
                                                        050       step.a model
                                                                stitute   Tableready3 reports      speed-up
                                                                                           to be used            gains plug-and-play manner in practice.
                                                                                                       in the described
due to compression with Provence model (∼ 50% compression
                                                        051     the works rate).    All runs
                                                                            train context         were
                                                                                             pruner        performed
                                                                                                    for each  dataset individually and do not target nor test
on single Tesla V100-SXM2-32GB GPU with vllm Kwon       052     et  al. (2023).
                                                                ferability            Withdomains.
                                                                           to other data        large batch
                                                                                                         Second,sizes,
                                                                                                                  some approaches are designed for a simp
                                                                with an assumption that only one sentence will be relevant to the input query. Howev
we systematically observe 2× speed-ups at inference, while
                                                        053    smaller     batch     sizes    lead   to  lower   gains
                                                                contexts may contain various portions of relevant information, from empty to full rel
(especially for smaller models). We assume this is mostly due          to theshould
                                                                and pruners      CPU/GPUbe flexiblecommunication
                                                                                                    enough to detect it. Third, many works propose contex
bottleneck, which masks inference gains due to compression. are not efficient enough to be used in practice. This includes using billion-size LLMs a
                                                                                                                                     for pruners and designing abstractive pruners which 1 require non-parallelizable autore
                                                                                                                                     eration of the final context. A more practical setting is to tune a small-size model such
                                                                                                                                     an extractive pruner, i.e. with a lightweight prediction head for selecting relevant cont
4.3              A NALYSIS
                                                               Table 1 summarizes properties of various existing methods along specified dimensio
                                                               approach, LLMLingua2, satisfies all listed criteria, however, its goal is to prune out lo
This section reports a more fine-grained evaluation to better understand     such as articles properties.
                                                               matical units Provence         or interjections, so it is query-independent and prunes
                                                               level by design. A more suitable design for the task is query-dependent sentence-
Robustness to the position of relevant information in thewhich  context.
                                                                      prunes We    design units
                                                                              out semantic   a needle-in-the-
                                                                                                 (sentences) that are not relevant to the query. This
haystack experiment which allows us to check the performance   urally enables higher level ofon
                                                                       of Provence            compression,
                                                                                                a simplebut   toyit also could be combined with token
                                                               such as LLMLingua2.
example and to evaluate its robustness w.r.t. the position of the relevant information in the input
                                                     In this work, we introduce Provence (PRuning Of retrieVEd relevaNt ContExt), an
                                                     robust sentence-level context pruner for question answering, applicable out-of-the-b
        7                                            scenarios, i.e. for contexts from various domains and with variable amount of inform
          We use https://github.com/cli99/flops-profiler
                                                     to the to report
                                                            query.       FLOPS required
                                                                   Our contributions           by each
                                                                                      are as follows:
pruner. We note that FLOPS do not always align with real inference time.
                                                                                                                                            • We propose an approach for training an efficient and robust context pruner
                                                                                                                                              approach consists of three key ingredients: (a) a strategy for selecting di
                                                                                                                                              data and data augmentation, to enable robustness; (b) an effective way of pro
                                                                                                               8                              open-source LLMs for producing a silver labelling of variable portions of rele
                                                                                                                                              and (c) a sequence labeling objective for training an efficient, lightweight ext
                                                                                                                                              on the silver labeled data. [it would be mega cool to say about combination
                                                                                                                                              here]
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Effectiveness of reranking top-50 documents retrieved by SPLADE-v3. DeBERTa-v3 is the
“baseline” (initialization point for Provence, which we aim to preserve performance). We report
the R@5 on two RAG datasets (NQ and HotpotQA), MRR@10 on MS MARCO passages (dev set),
nDCG@10 on TREC DL’19 (Craswell et al., 2020), and mean nDCG@10 on the 13 open datasets
from the BEIR benchmark (Thakur et al., 2021) – Table 7 in Appendix reports the full results.

                                                                 Dataset
                      Model                  NQ     HotpotQA        MS     TREC19       BEIR
                      DeBERTa-v3            83.0        70.4       40.5       77.4       55.4
                      Provence              84.4        70.5       40.6       77.2       55.9
                      Provence (NQ)         84.5        70.3       40.2       77.5       55.1



context. We write 5 questions and answers8 , and insert answers (“needles”) at random positions
between sentences, in a subset of 100 passages sampled from the Wikipedia datastore. Ideally,
Provence should only select the “needle” sentences and filter out all other sentences in contexts.
We plot the number of selected sentences and percentage of cases when the pruned context contains
the “needle” (Figure 3, (Left)). We consider two settings: with 1- and 2-sentence “needles”. We
observe that Provence correctly selects “needle” sentence(s) in most cases, except at leftmost and
rightmost positions.9 In most cases Provence does not select any irrelevant sentences. The results
are similar for both simpler (1-sentence) and harder (2-sentence) “needles” showing Provence’s
flexibility in detecting the number of relevant sentences, discussed below in more details.
Adaptability to the variable number of relevant sentences. To evaluate the capability of
Provence to dynamically detect the number of relevant sentences in the context, we compare
the number of sentences L selected by Provence and by a silver oracle. A silver oracle is easy
to construct for L = 0, by pairing questions with randomly sampled contexts. For L ⩾ 1, we use
the labeling produced by Llama-3-8B-Instruct. Figure 3 (Middle) shows that the number of relevant
sentences detected by Provence is close to the silver oracle value in most cases, for all considered
datasets. In contrast, extractive RECOMP would always select a prespecified number of sentences.
Robustness w.r.t. context granularity. Figure 3 (Right) shows Provence performance for two
datasets, with Wikipedia datastores made of contexts of various granularity. Here, each considered
datastore is produced by splitting Wikipedia pages into chunks of N sentences, N ∈ {2, 6, 10}, or
100 words, and prepending the page title to each chunk. Provence shows high performance in all
cases – the performance with pruned contexts being close to the performance obtained using original
contexts. As could be expected, the compression ratio is higher for longer contexts.
Reranking effectiveness. Table 4 compares reranking performance between our reranking baseline
and unified Provence – whose training starts from the former. We can see that our joint training
procedure (on both pruning and ranking tasks) makes it possible to learn a context pruner that pre-
serves initial reranking capabilities. We further include as a comparison point results from a model
trained in similar conditions on NQ. Overall, results are similar – further highlighting the robustness
of Provence w.r.t. training data. We further discuss such aspects in Section 4.4 (Ablations).
Applicability in different settings. Figure 8 (App.) demonstrates the applicability of Provence
in variable retrieval-generator settings – achieving similar results as the ones reported in Figure 2.

4.4    A BLATIONS

In this Section we analyze various design choices made in Provence development, to provide
insights into training context pruners for future works (results shown in Figure 4). All models in this
section are standalone context pruners, trained with the same amount of parameter updates.
   8
      Example: “Which library was used in the experiments?”, answer: “Experiments were conducted using
the Bergen library”. Example reformulation into a 2-sentence answer: “Experiments were conducted using a
library. Its name is Bergen.”
    9
      The reason for the drops in the left-most and right-most positions is that training data has little examples of
the corresponding types of relevant sentences, see e.g., statistics for the rightmost position in the App. Figure
5, (Right). We leave further improving processing of these positions to future work.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    NQ (wiki)          Hotpot QA (wiki)            Syllabus QA (syllabi)
                               80                                             80                           Anchor


          compression rate %
                                                  80                                                       Deberta-large
                               60                 60                          60                           MS-Marco (downsample)
                                                                                                           MS-Marco (full)
                               40                 40                          40                           straight. oracle
                                                                                                           relevant oracle
                               20                 20                          20                           sent-level labeling
                                0                                              0                           full context
                                                   0
                                    70       72        52    54     56             40    45      50
                                     LLMeval                LLMeval                      LLMeval


Figure 4: Ablation results. All models are single-component modifications of the anchor model,
which is a base-size model, trained on NQ, with the answer oracle and token-level labeling. Numeric
scores / match-based results are presented in Appendix Table 10 / Figure 11 correspondingly.


Model size. We first observe that DeBERTa-large slighly increases the compression rate – when
comprared to DeBERTa-base. All other ablations are tuned from a DeBERTa-base model, for ef-
ficiency reasons. Note that the final Provence is trained from a DeBERTa-large model (or its
equivalent reranker).
Data mixtures. We compare training on NQ (87k queries), MS MARCO downsampled to the same
size, and full MS MARCO (370k queries). Despite the observation that using the MS MARCO type
of data leads to lower results than NQ – with equal number of queries – we also find that using larger
data (i.e., full MS MARCO) improves results. Our final models are trained on the full MS MARCO
– further ablations are conducted on the NQ data, for efficiency reasons.
Labeling strategies. As described in Section 3, we can train the pruner either to perform token-
level labeling (with sentence rounding at inference) or to perform sentence-level labeling. In the
former case sentence representations are richer but the model also needs to learn to output similar
predictions for tokens inside one sentence. In the latter case sentence content must be represented in
a single embedding which may limit representation expressivity. In practice we observe close per-
formance, with the token-level strategy slightly outperforming the sentence-level one some datasets.
In all other experiments we use the token-level strategy.
Oracle prompts. We compare three options for prompting an oracle LLM to generate silver label-
ing: (1) answer oracle: asking to answer the given question from the given context, citing corre-
sponding sentences; (2) relevance oracle: asking to list any relevant information in the context to
the question, citing corresponding sentences; (3) straightforward oracle: asking to output indexes of
sentences which answer the given question. We found that the behavior of the straightforward ora-
cle varies on different prompts, while the use of the answer oracle makes answers more consistent.
The motivation for the relevance oracle is that often contexts contain distantly relevant information
to the query and it could be reasonable to select the corresponding sentences. Comparing the listed
prompts, we observe that the relevance oracle underperforms the answer oracle, and the straight-
forward oracle performs similarly or slightly lower than the answer oracle.
Unification with reranker. In Figure 2 we compare Provence trained as a standalone model and
as a model unified with reranker, and find that both strategies lead to similar results – although the
former relies on two separate inference steps (re-ranking and pruning) in a RAG pipeline.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we present Provence, a robust, adaptable, and efficient context pruner for Question
Answering – either unified in a single model with reranking capabilities or available as a lightweight
standalone model. In contrast to previous extractive approaches, Provence dynamically detects
the needed pruning ratio for a given context and can be used out-of-the-box for various QA domains.
In extensive experiments, we demonstrate that Provence prunes contexts with negligible to no
drops in performance and in some cases even brings performance improvement due to removing
context noise. We also show Provence capabilities in correctly detecting the number of relevant
sentences in contexts, located at any position, and with contexts of various lengths. Finally, the
ablation study highlights the importance of using a large training data and the appropriate prompt in
the silver oracle.


                                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Limitations. Despite Provence being ready to use in various settings, demonstrated in the paper,
it is focusing only on QA applications, with a single passage processed at a time, and is trained on
English-only data. Future work could consider extending it to other tasks, multi-passage contexts,
and languages beyond English.

R EFERENCES
AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card. 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/
  llama3/blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.
Sotiris Anagnostidis, Dario Pavllo, Luca Biggio, Lorenzo Noci, Aurélien Lucchi, and Thomas
  Hofmann. Dynamic context pruning for efficient and interpretable autoregressive transform-
  ers. ArXiv, abs/2305.15805, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:258888224.
Akari Asai, Zexuan Zhong, Danqi Chen, Pang Wei Koh, Luke Zettlemoyer, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  and Wen-tau Yih. Reliable, adaptable, and attributable language models with retrieval. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.03187, 2024.
Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. Bge m3-embedding:
   Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge dis-
   tillation, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03216.
Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. Benchmarking large language models in
   retrieval-augmented generation. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
   38(16):17754–17762, Mar. 2024b. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i16.29728. URL https://ojs.
   aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/29728.
Tong Chen, Hongwei Wang, Sihao Chen, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Xinran Zhao, Hongming Zhang,
  and Dong Yu. Dense X retrieval: What retrieval granularity should we use? In Yaser Al-Onaizan,
  Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 15159–15177, Miami, Florida, USA, November
  2024c. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2024.emnlp-main.845.
Alexis Chevalier, Alexander Wettig, Anirudh Ajith, and Danqi Chen. Adapting language models
  to compress contexts. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3829–3846,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  emnlp-main.232. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.232.
Eunsol Choi, Jennimaria Palomaki, Matthew Lamm, Tom Kwiatkowski, Dipanjan Das, and Michael
  Collins. Decontextualization: Making sentences stand-alone. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 9:447–461, 2021. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00377. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.tacl-1.27.
Jonathan H. Clark, Eunsol Choi, Michael Collins, Dan Garrette, Tom Kwiatkowski, Vitaly Nikolaev,
  and Jennimaria Palomaki. TyDi QA: A benchmark for information-seeking question answering in
  typologically diverse languages. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  8:454–470, 2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00317. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  tacl-1.30.
Nick Craswell, Bhaskar Mitra, Emine Yilmaz, Daniel Campos, and Ellen M. Voorhees. Overview
  of the trec 2019 deep learning track, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.07820.
Nick Craswell, Bhaskar Mitra, Emine Yilmaz, Daniel Campos, and Jimmy Lin. Ms marco: Bench-
  marking ranking models in the large-data regime. In Proceedings of the 44th International
  ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’21,
  pp. 1566–1576, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  9781450380379. doi: 10.1145/3404835.3462804. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3404835.3462804.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tri Dao. Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=mZn2Xyh9Ec.

Rajarshi Das, Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Manzil Zaheer, and Andrew McCallum. Multi-step retriever-
  reader interaction for scalable open-domain question answering. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  HkfPSh05K7.

Nigel Fernandez, Alexander Scarlatos, and Andrew Lan. SyllabusQA: A course logistics ques-
  tion answering dataset. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 10344–10369, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.557. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.557.

Tao Ge, Hu Jing, Lei Wang, Xun Wang, Si-Qing Chen, and Furu Wei. In-context autoencoder
  for context compression in a large language model. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  uREj4ZuGJE.

Pengcheng He, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Debertav3: Improving deberta using electra-style
  pre-training with gradient-disentangled embedding sharing, 2021a.

Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. {DEBERTA}: {DECODING}-
  {enhanced} {bert} {with} {disentangled} {attention}. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XPZIaotutsD.

Sebastian Hofstätter, Sophia Althammer, Michael Schröder, Mete Sertkan, and Allan Hanbury.
  Improving efficient neural ranking models with cross-architecture knowledge distillation, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02666.

Jennifer Hsia, Afreen Shaikh, Zhiruo Wang, and Graham Neubig. Ragged: Towards informed design
  of retrieval augmented generation systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09040, 2024.

Taeho Hwang, Soyeong Jeong, Sukmin Cho, SeungYoon Han, and Jong Park. DSLR: Document re-
  finement with sentence-level re-ranking and reconstruction to enhance retrieval-augmented gen-
  eration. In Wenhao Yu, Weijia Shi, Michihiro Yasunaga, Meng Jiang, Chenguang Zhu, Han-
  naneh Hajishirzi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Zhihan Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Work-
  shop on Knowledge Augmented Methods for NLP, pp. 73–92, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.knowledgenlp-1.6. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.knowledgenlp-1.6.

Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Atlas: Few-shot Learning
  with Retrieval Augmented Language Models, November 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2208.03299. arXiv:2208.03299 [cs].

Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. LLMLingua: Com-
  pressing prompts for accelerated inference of large language models. In Houda Bouamor,
  Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 13358–13376, Singapore, December 2023. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.825. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.825.

Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Xufang Luo, Dongsheng Li, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili
  Qiu. LongLLMLingua: Accelerating and enhancing LLMs in long context scenarios via prompt
  compression. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  1658–1677, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.91.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dahyun Kim, Chanjun Park, Sanghoon Kim, Wonsung Lee, Wonho Song, Yunsu Kim, Hyeonwoo
  Kim, Yungi Kim, Hyeonju Lee, Jihoo Kim, Changbae Ahn, Seonghoon Yang, Sukyung Lee,
  Hyunbyung Park, Gyoungjin Gim, Mikyoung Cha, Hwalsuk Lee, and Sunghun Kim. Solar 10.7b:
  Scaling large language models with simple yet effective depth up-scaling, 2023.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
  benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention, 2023.
LangChain. LangChain Documentation. https://python.langchain.com/.
Carlos Lassance and Stéphane Clinchant. Naver labs europe (splade) @ trec deep learning 2022,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.12574.
Carlos Lassance, Hervé Déjean, Thibault Formal, and Stéphane Clinchant. Splade-v3: New base-
  lines for splade, 2024.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
  Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and
  Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 9459–9474. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Abstract.html.
Yucheng Li, Bo Dong, Frank Guerin, and Chenghua Lin. Compressing context to enhance in-
  ference efficiency of large language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 6342–6353, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.391. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  emnlp-main.391.
Jimmy Lin, Xueguang Ma, Sheng-Chieh Lin, Jheng-Hong Yang, Ronak Pradeep, and Rodrigo
  Nogueira. Pyserini: A python toolkit for reproducible information retrieval research with
  sparse and dense representations. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Confer-
  ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’21, pp. 2356–2362, New
  York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450380379. doi:
  10.1145/3404835.3463238. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3404835.3463238.
Xi Victoria Lin, Xilun Chen, Mingda Chen, Weijia Shi, Maria Lomeli, Richard James, Pedro
  Rodriguez, Jacob Kahn, Gergely Szilvasy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Wen tau Yih.
  RA-DIT: Retrieval-augmented dual instruction tuning. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  22OTbutug9.
Maxime Louis, Hervé Déjean, and Stéphane Clinchant. Pisco: Pretty simple compression for
 retrieval-augmented generation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.16075.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric
  memories. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 9802–9822, Toronto, Canada, July 2023a. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.546. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.546.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  memories. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 9802–9822, Toronto, Canada, July 2023b. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.546. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.546.
Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Mohit Iyyer,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Factscore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of fac-
  tual precision in long form text generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.
  14251.
Piotr Nawrot, Adrian La’ncucki, Marcin Chochowski, David Tarjan, and E. Ponti. Dynamic memory
  compression: Retrofitting llms for accelerated inference. ArXiv, abs/2403.09636, 2024. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268384862.
Anastasios Nentidis, Georgios Katsimpras, Anastasia Krithara, Salvador Lima-López, Eulalia
  Farré-Maduell, Luis Gasco Sanchez, Martin Krallinger, and Georgios Paliouras. Overview
  of BioASQ 2023: The Eleventh BioASQ Challenge on Large-Scale Biomedical Semantic In-
  dexing and Question Answering, pp. 227–250. 09 2023. ISBN 978-3-031-42447-2. doi:
  10.1007/978-3-031-42448-9 19.
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao, Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and
  Li Deng. Ms marco: A human generated machine reading comprehension dataset. Novem-
  ber 2016. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
  ms-marco-human-generated-machine-reading-comprehension-dataset/.
Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. Passage re-ranking with bert, 2020.
Zhuoshi Pan, Qianhui Wu, Huiqiang Jiang, Menglin Xia, Xufang Luo, Jue Zhang, Qingwei Lin,
  Victor Ruhle, Yuqing Yang, Chin-Yew Lin, H. Vicky Zhao, Lili Qiu, and Dongmei Zhang.
  LLMLingua-2: Data distillation for efficient and faithful task-agnostic prompt compression. In
  Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 963–981, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  findings-acl.57.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-
  ward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: an imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
David Rau, Hervé Déjean, Nadezhda Chirkova, Thibault Formal, Shuai Wang, Vassilina Nikoulina,
  and Stéphane Clinchant. Bergen: A benchmarking library for retrieval-augmented generation,
  2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01102.
David Rau, Shuai Wang, Hervé Déjean, and Stéphane Clinchant. Context embeddings for efficient
  answer generation in rag, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09252.
Minjoon Seo, Jinhyuk Lee, Tom Kwiatkowski, Ankur Parikh, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
 Real-time open-domain question answering with dense-sparse phrase index. In Anna Korhonen,
 David Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
 ation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4430–4441, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for
 Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1436. URL https://aclanthology.
 org/P19-1436.
Xiao Shitao, Liu Zheng, Shao Yingxia, and Cao Zhao. Retromae: Pre-training retrieval-oriented
  language models via masked auto-encoder. In EMNLP, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2205.12035.
Nandan Thakur, Nils Reimers, Andreas Rücklé, Abhishek Srivastava, and Iryna Gurevych. BEIR: A
  heterogeneous benchmark for zero-shot evaluation of information retrieval models. In Thirty-fifth
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round
  2), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=wCu6T5xFjeJ.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023.
Zhiruo Wang, Jun Araki, Zhengbao Jiang, Md Rizwan Parvez, and Graham Neubig. Learning to
  filter context for retrieval-augmented generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2311.08377.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Qun Liu and David Schlangen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
  ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–
  45, Online, October 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-demos.6. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Fangyuan Xu, Weijia Shi, and Eunsol Choi. RECOMP: Improving retrieval-augmented LMs
  with context compression and selective augmentation. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  mlJLVigNHp.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop ques-
  tion answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chiang, Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pp. 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium, 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D18-1259. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1259.
Chanwoong Yoon, Taewhoo Lee, Hyeon Hwang, Minbyul Jeong, and Jaewoo Kang. Com-
  pact: Compressing retrieved documents actively for question answering, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2407.09014.
Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. Making retrieval-augmented language
  models robust to irrelevant context. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZS4m74kZpH.
Yun Zhu, Jia-Chen Gu, Caitlin Sikora, Ho Ko, Yinxiao Liu, Chu-Cheng Lin, Lei Shu, Liangchen
  Luo, Lei Meng, Bang Liu, and Jindong Chen. Accelerating inference of retrieval-augmented
  generation via sparse context selection. ArXiv, abs/2405.16178, 2024. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:270062557.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        C ODE AND EXPERIMENTS DATA

We release our code at https://github.com/naver/bergen/tree/main/scripts/
provence. In this page, we also make available a zip archive with experimental results for the
main Figure 2, e.g. it includes model generations and scores computed with various evaluation
metrics (LLMEval, Match, Recall etc).


B        DATA

Evaluation datasets. We consider the following datasets:

         • Datasets with Wikipedia as a datastore:
             – Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019). We use a test set of 2.8k ques-
               tions, distributed as a part of the KILT collection (https://huggingface.co/
               datasets/facebook/kilt_tasks);
             – HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018). We use a test set of 5.6k questions, distributed as a part
               of the KILT collection (https://huggingface.co/datasets/facebook/
               kilt_tasks);
             – PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023b). We use a test set of 14k questions distributed by the
               dataset authors.
         • Datasets with individual datastores:
             – BioASQ (Nentidis et al., 2023). We use a version of the dataset provided by (Hsia
               et al., 2024), with 3.8k queries. We only use queries from categories “yes/no”, “fac-
               toid”, and “list”.
             – Syllabus QA (Fernandez et al., 2024). We use the test set of 1.1k questions distributed
               by the authors;
             – RGB (Chen et al., 2024b). We use the test set of 200 questions distributed by the
               authors.

All datasets provide short answers (keywords) for each query, which we use to evaluate both match-
based metrics such as Recall and LLM-based metrics Rau et al. (2024a)10 .

Datastores. For training Provence, we use the MS MARCO document collection (Craswell
et al., 2021). We split each document into overlapping chunks of N sentences, where N is random
in ∈ 1..10 – with a higher probability for longer contexts – to train Provence on various context
lengths. Each chunk is prepended with a page title. The resulting datastore contains 34M passages.
We also process the Wikipedia datastore in a similar fashion, for ablation experiments. We download
a 2024 Wikipedia dump and process it using scripts provided by Pyserini (Lin et al., 2021)11 . We
also prepare versions of this Wikipedia datastore with passages of N sentences with overlaps of N/2
sentences, for testing Provence robustness to various context lengths.
All other evaluations on Wikipedia-based datasets – including main evaluations – are conducted on
the Wikipedia datastore provided at https://huggingface.co/datasets/castorini/
odqa-wiki-corpora. We use a version with passages of 6 sentences with a 3-sentence overlap
– making 9M passages in total.
For Pubmed, we use the version of the dataset provided by (Hsia et al., 2024) at https:
//huggingface.co/datasets/jenhsia/ragged. It consists of 58M passages, extracted
from Pubmed abstracts. Each passage (chunk) is prepended with the page’s title.
For SyllabusQA, we split each syllabus (provided by the authors) into passages of 100 words. For
RGB, Google-retrieved contexts are provided by the authors; for each query we compose a retrieved
context from 3 relevant and 2 irrelevant documents.
    10
   Using SOLAR-10.7B (Kim et al., 2023).
    11
   At                 https://github.com/castorini/pyserini/blob/master/docs/
experiments-wiki-corpora.md.


                                                     16
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     C        M ODELS
     We list in Table 5 all the main models used to conduct experiments for Provence.

                              Model                        Checkpoint
                              SPLADE-v3                    naver/splade-v3
                              RetroMAE                     Shitao/RetroMAE MSMARCO distill
                              DeBERTa-v3                   microsoft/deberta-large
                              DeBERTa-v3 (RR)              naver/trecdl22-crossencoder-debertav3
                              BGE-M3                       BAAI/bge-reranker-v2-m3
                              LLama-2-7B-chat              meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf
                              LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct          meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct
                              Mistral-7B-instruct          mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
                              SOLAR-10.7B-Instruct-v1.0    upstage/SOLAR-10.7B-Instruct-v1.0

     Table 5: List of all the models used in the experiments with their corresponding HuggingFace check-
     points.


                        0.6                                Dataset                                                               Dataset
                                                            Wiki                    0.20                                          Wiki
                        0.5                                 MS-Marco                                                              MS-Marco
                        0.4                                                         0.15
            Frequency


                                                                        Frequency


                        0.3                                                         0.10
                        0.2
                                                                                    0.05
                        0.1
                   Train
                    0.0
                         v0 Last Checkpoint: 20 days ago                            0.00
File Edit View Run 0Kernel1 Settings
                             2 3 Help   4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                 Beginning                                          End    Trusted
                              Number of selected sentences                                     Position of a selected sentence in context
                                   Code                                                                         JupyterLab         Python 3 (ipykernel)
         # Example usage
     Figure
       words =5:   Statistics of the
                [t[0].replace('Ġ',     silver contexts
                                   "").replace("Ċ",        labeled
                                                    "\n") for        by LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct. (Left) the distribution
                                                              t in wp_preds]
     ofvalues
        the number      of sentences in silver
               = F.softmax(outputs["logits"],       contexts.
                                              dim=-1)[0, :, 1] (Right) the distribution of the position of the selected

     sentences
       N = 165     in contexts.
         display_colored_words(words[1:N], values[1:N])
         plt.savefig("colored_example.pdf", bbox_inches="tight")

         how many french words are there in the english language Inf luence of French on English . The most notable
         influence of French on English has been its extensive contribution to the English lex icon . It has been estimated that
         about a third of the words in English are French in origin ; lingu ist Henri ette Walter claims that this total may
         be as high as two thirds . L ingu ist Anthony Lac oud re has estimated that over 40 , 000 English words come
         directly from French and may be understood without orth ographical change by French speakers . Albert C . B augh
         and Thomas Cable note that " although this influx of French words was brought about by the victory of the Conquer
         or and by the political and social consequences of that victory , it was neither sudden nor immediately apparent .
         Rather it began slowly and continued with varying tempo for a long time .               COLORS: 0.99 0.1 0
         <Figure size 640x480 with 0 Axes>

[131]:   vss = []
         Figure 6: Example visualization of per-token probabilities of being selected in the final context.
         intensity2v = {}
         for v in values[:N]:
             intensity = int((1 - v) * 155)+100
             vss.append(intensity)
             intensity2v[intensity] = v
         [intensity2v[intensity] for intensity in set(vss)]


                                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Prompt used for generating silver labeling with LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct. The sentence cita-
tions in the response are parsed using regular expression.

   Question: {question}
   Context: [1] {sentence1} [2] {sentence2} [3] {sentence3} ...
   Answer the Question, using ONLY information provided in the Context. If no useful information
   is provided, you MUST output ”No answer”. If some parts of the Context are used to answer, you
   MUST cite ALL the corresponding sentences. Use the symbols [ ] to indicate when a fact comes
   from a sentence in the context, e.g [0] for a fact from sentence 0. You should only answer the given
   question and should not provide any additional information.



           Natural Questions (wiki)             Hotpot QA (wiki)                     TyDi QA (wiki)                   Pop QA (wiki)
          100                           100                               100                                   100
          75                            75                                 75                                   75
comp. %


          50                            50                                 50                                   50
          25                            25                                 25                                   25
           0                             0                                    0                                  0
                 60           70               45       50     55                 50          60           70         50     60     70
                Syllabus QA (syllabi)          BioASQ (Pubmed)                         RGB (news)
          100                           100                               100                                          Full context
                                                                                                                       Provence (w/ reranker)
          75                            75                                 75                                          Provence (standalone)
comp. %


                                                                                                                       LLMLingua2
          50                            50                                 50                                          LongLLMLingua
          25                            25                                 25                                          RECOMP (ext)
                                                                                                                       RECOMP (ext+thr)
           0                             0                                    0                                        RECOMP (abs)
                      40         45                 60              70                 80                 100
                           Recall                     Recall                                Recall

Figure 7: Main results for various QA domains, comparing Provence and baseline models, metric:
Recall. Generator: LLama-2-7B, retriever: SPLADE-v3, reranker: DeBERTa-v3 (or Provence
in the unified setting). Plot titles denote “Dataset name (datastore type)”. x-axis denotes QA per-
formance evaluated with Recall; y-axis denotes the context compression ratio. For both metrics, the
higher the better: the best model would be closest to the top right corner.


                                      Table 7: nDCG@10 on the 13 open BEIR datasets.

                                              Corpus                     DeBERTav3            Provence
                                              TREC-COVID                      88.3                 88.3
                                              NFCorpus                        37.5                 37.8
                                              NQ                              66.7                 66.5
                                              HotpotQA                        74.5                 74.9
                                              FiQA-2018                       47.8                 47.6
                                              ArguAna                         29.8                 33.2
                                              Touché-2020                    33.5                 33.4
                                              Quora                           84.8                 85.4
                                              DBPedia                         48.9                 49.2
                                              SCIDOCS                         19.2                 19.6
                                              FEVER                           86.6                 87.9
                                              Climate-FEVER                   27.4                 28.1
                                              SciFact                         75.8                 75.3
                                              average                         55.4                 55.9



                                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Natural Questions (wiki)              Hotpot QA (wiki)                   TyDi QA (wiki)                    Pop QA (wiki)
                     80                                                                80                               80
compression rate %


                                                     75
                     60                                                                60                               60
                                                     50
                     40                                                                40                               40
                     20                              25                                20                               20
                      0                               0                                 0                                0
                                     60         80             50        55       60               60            80           40             60
                          Syllabus QA (syllabi)            BioASQ (Pubmed)                        RGB (news)
                     80                              80
compression rate %


                                                     60                                60
                     60
                                                                                                                             Splade + deberta + Llama-2-7b
                     40                              40                                40                                    Splade + deberta + Llama-3-8b
                                                                                                                             Splade + deberta + Mistral-8b
                     20                              20                                20                                    Splade + deberta + Solar-10.7b
                                                                                                                             BM25 + no rerank + LLama-2-7b
                     0                                0                                 0                                    Retromae + bge-m3 + LLama-2-7b
                                   50     60              75           80         85          85         90 95
                                    LLMeval                          LLMeval                           LLMeval

                          Figure 8: Testing Provence in various RAG settings (retrieval, re-ranking, generator).


                      Natural Questions (wiki)                  Hotpot QA (wiki)                       TyDi QA (wiki)                 Pop QA (wiki)
                     100                              100                                   100                              100
compression rate %


                      75                                  75                                75                                75
                      50                                  50                                50                                50
                      25                                  25                                25                                25
                          0                               0                                  0                                 0
                                60             70               45         50          55               65    70      75             50            60
                              Syllabus QA (syllabi)            BioASQ (Pubmed)                          RGB (news)
                     100                              100                                   100                                           Full context
compression rate %


                                                                                                                                          Provence
                      75                                  75                                75                                            LLMLingua2
                      50                                  50                                50                                            RECOMP (ext)
                                                                                                                                          RECOMP (abs)
                      25                                  25                                25
                          0                               0                                  0
                              35      40     45                      70      75                   80          90
                                      LLM-Eval                         LLM-Eval                           LLM-Eval

Figure 9: Comparing Provence to a subset of baselines with retriever: RetroMAE (Shitao et al.,
2022), reranker: BGE-M3 (Chen et al., 2024a), generator:: LLama-2-7B-chat.


                                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Natural Questions (wiki)                   Hotpot QA (wiki)                  TyDi QA (wiki)
compression ratio %   80                                                                       80
                                                             75
                      60                                                                       60
                      40                                     50                                40
                      20                                     25                                20
                      0                                       0                                 0
                           65      70         75                  54      56   58      60                 70       75
                                 Pop QA (wiki)                    Syllabus QA (syllabi)                BioASQ (Pubmed)
                      80                                     80
compression ratio %


                                                                                               60
                      60                                     60
                      40                                     40                                40
                      20                                     20                                20                                  top-1
                                                                                                                                   top-5
                      0                                       0                                 0                                  top-20
                           55       60           65           52.5 55.0 57.5 60.0 62.5                 77.5 80.0 82.5 85.0
                                    LLMeval                             LLMeval                             LLMeval

Figure 10: Testing Provence with different top-k documents provided to the generator. The setting
is the same as the one in Figure 2.



             Table 8: Numerical scores corresponding to Figure 2 – NQ, Hotpot QA, Tydi QA, and Pop QA.

                                                      NQ                  HotPot QA                 Tydi QA               PopQA
                                          LLM-         Comp.           LLM-         Comp.    LLM-       Comp.      LLM-      Comp.
                                          Eval         rate %          Eval         rate %   Eval       rate %     Eval      rate %
            Full context                  71.8         0.0             57.0      0.0         73.9       0.0        57.8      0.0
            Provence                      72.4         62.2            56.7      66.4        70.5       63.0       59.3      68.6
            (w/ reranker)                 72.6         76.0            56.0      82.4        73.6       76.2       59.5      75.8
            Provence                      72.3         64.1            56.6      69.5        70.9       65.8       59.0      69.9
            (standalone)                  70.6         77.3            54.8      84.1        70.2       78.1       58.8      76.1
            LLMLingua2                    59.5         74.0            47.1      74.4        57.7       73.9       42.9      75.0
                                          67.5         45.4            52.9      45.8        67.3       45.0       52.5      46.3
                                          70.3         25.0            55.0      24.9        70.0       24.8       55.2      25.1
            LongLLMLingua 61.3                         69.1            52.6      68.5        56.6       69.5       49.5      65.5
                          68.5                         47.9            55.6      46.5        65.5       47.8       54.5      43.6
                          71.3                         28.7            56.9      26.8        69.1       28.8       57.6      23.9
            RECOMP                        70.6         43.6            55.5      40.9        68.6       46.4       56.9      41.1
            (ext)                         68.2         59.8            53.4      57.5        67.0       63.0       55.7      57.4
                                          66.2         77.1            50.1      75.7        64.5       79.7       52.3      74.9
            RECOMP                        69.0         59.5            50.9      62.9        70.9       52.4       54.8      56.0
            (ext+thr)                     72.9         11.8            56.4      14.4        72.3       6.9        58.5      12.4
            RECOMP (abs)                  66.9         94.5            53.1      94.4        66.4       95.2       54.4      92.8
            DSLR                          71.7         44.9            52.9      75.7        72.7       45.8       58.6      48.1
                                          70.5         54.9            50.7      83.4        69.8       55.6       58.7      58.1
                                          70.4         61.4            49.3      87.0        70.7       62.0       58.8      63.7
                                          67.7         72.0            45.2      91.7        67.5       72.9       58.5      71.9
                                          67.6         77.7            43.2      93.4        67.5       78.1       57.9      76.0
            Dense-X                re-    62.7         69.0            49.6         67.7     66.4       71.5       52.0      68.5
            trieval


                                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Table 9: Numerical scores corresponding to Figure 2: Syllabus QA, BioASQ, and RGB.

                                              Syllabus QA                BioASQ                   RGB
                                         LLM-       Comp.        LLM-          Comp.       LLM-     Comp.
                                         Eval       rate %       Eval          rate %      Eval     rate %
                    Full context         52.9       0.0          80.7          0.0         93.5     0.0
                    Provence             49.8       60.6         80.6          49.0        94.4     60.5
                    (w/ reranker)        51.0       76.5         80.3          67.4        96.3     69.3
                    Provence             50.7       64.1         80.6          51.3        95.8     61.6
                    (standalone)         47.8       76.6         80.1          68.9        96.3     69.4
                    LLMLingua2           37.4       73.4         72.6          73.6        78.6     74.3
                                         43.4       45.4         77.7          45.2        93.5     46.1
                                         49.8       26.6         78.7          24.8        95.8     26.3
                    LongLLMLingua 42.3              71.3         72.2          72.9        71.6     73.9
                                  45.1              48.5         77.3          50.4        83.3     51.6
                                  50.9              29.2         78.7          31.3        92.1     32.1
                    RECOMP               44.6       51.5         78.7          42.2        97.7     42.0
                    (ext)                42.7       61.4         78.4          54.8        94.9     52.1
                                         39.1       71.1         76.3          69.7        94.4     63.2
                    RECOMP               45.5       35.7         76.6          51.2        92.1     51.4
                    (ext+thr)            52.8       7.7          80.2          6.5         97.7     13.4
                    RECOMP (abs)         38.1       98.9         68.2          96.1        90.7     95.7
                    DSLR                 49.6       33.2         80.1          29.9        97.2     41.6
                                         49.1       46.4         79.6          40.1        97.7     46.9
                                         47.2       55.4         79.2          47.3        96.3     49.7
                                         44.2       70.6         77.6          60.2        97.2     54.1
                                         40.7       78.2         75.4          68.0        95.8     56.9


                     NQ (wiki)                Hotpot QA (wiki)           Syllabus QA (syllabi)
          80                            80                          80                                  Anchor
                                                                                                        roberta-large
          60                            60                          60                                  MS-Marco (downsample)
comp. %


                                                                                                        MS-Marco (full)
          40                            40                          40                                  straight. oracle
                                                                                                        relevant oracle
          20                            20                          20                                  sent-level labeling
           0                                                         0                                  full context
                                         0
               70      72          74        50   52      54              42          44    46
                       Recall                      Recall                            Recall

                            Figure 11: Ablation results with Recall (match-based metric).


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Table 10: Numerical scores corresponding to Figure 4.

                                           NQ                HotPot QA           Syllabus QA
                          Thresh.   LLM-      Comp.       LLM-    Comp.    LLM-        Comp.
                                    Eval      rate %      Eval    rate %   Eval        rate %
      Anchor                0.01    72.2      46.9        56.0    46.7     51.1        33.1
                            0.1     71.6      66.6        55.6    70.8     51.1        65.5
                            0.5     70.6      79.6        52.9    85.8     44.0        78.7
      Deberta-large         0.01    72.5      59.4        56.7    63.7     49.9        50.7
                            0.1     72.1      69.2        55.9    75.6     49.6        68.3
                            0.5     70.9      78.0        53.2    84.7     46.1        77.0
      MS-Marco              0.01    72.9      27.1        57.2    25.9     52.5        11.6
      (downsample)          0.1     72.8      57.5        56.2    61.6     50.5        49.3
                            0.5     68.7      79.4        52.3    84.5     43.0        78.4
      MS-Marco              0.1     72.3      64.1        56.6    69.5     50.7        64.1
      (full)                0.5     70.6      77.3        54.8    84.1     47.8        76.6
      straight. oracle      0.01    73.1      31.1        56.8    32.8     52.9        25.6
                            0.1     72.5      51.4        55.9    56.8     51.7        54.7
                            0.5     72.0      70.2        54.8    76.8     45.5        75.3
      relevant oracle       0.01    72.8      16.1        57.4    22.6     49.4        11.1
                            0.1     72.6      38.8        55.7    55.1     49.6        41.4
                            0.5     71.3      66.9        51.6    83.9     46.8        73.3
      sent-level            0.01    73.0      51.2        56.2    54.5     51.5        47.2
      labeling               0.1    71.0      66.4        55.0    72.5     48.3        69.2
                            0.5     71.2      78.2        53.0    85.3     40.4        78.8
      full context          0.01    71.8      0.0         57.0    0.0      52.9        0.0


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Example of context pruning with various approaches. Provence selects one sentence
about the Shepard’s pie and removes sentences about other similar dishes, which is RECOMP (ext)
is not capable of by design. RECOMP (abs) correctly generates a summary; LongLLMLingua
removes the part relevant to the Shepard’s pie, and LLMLingua2 uniformly removes no-informative
tokens.

   Question               what goes on the bottom of shepherd’s pie
   Original context       Shepherd’s pie. History. In early cookery books, the dish was a means of using
                          leftover roasted meat of any kind, and the pie dish was lined on the sides and
                          bottom with mashed potato, as well as having a mashed potato crust on top.
                          Variations and similar dishes. Other potato-topped pies include: The modern
                          ”Cumberland pie” is a version with either beef or lamb and a layer of bread-
                          crumbs and cheese on top. In medieval times, and modern-day Cumbria, the
                          pastry crust had a filling of meat with fruits and spices.. In Quebec, a varia-
                          tion on the cottage pie is called ”Pâté chinois”. It is made with ground beef
                          on the bottom layer, canned corn in the middle, and mashed potato on top..
                          The ”shepherdess pie” is a vegetarian version made without meat, or a vegan
                          version made without meat and dairy.. In the Netherlands, a very similar dish
                          called ”philosopher’s stew” () often adds ingredients like beans, apples, prunes,
                          or apple sauce.. In Brazil, a dish called in refers to the fact that a manioc puree
                          hides a layer of sun-dried meat.
   Provence               Shepherd’s pie. In early cookery books, the dish was a means of using leftover
                          roasted meat of any kind, and the pie dish was lined on the sides and bottom
                          with mashed potato, as well as having a mashed potato crust on top.
   RECOMP         (ext,   In early cookery books, the dish was a means of using leftover roasted meat
   top-3)                 of any kind, and the pie dish was lined on the sides and bottom with mashed
                          potato, as well as having a mashed potato crust on top. The ”shepherdess pie” is
                          a vegetarian version made without meat, or a vegan version made without meat
                          and dairy.. In the Netherlands, a very similar dish called ”philosopher’s stew”
                          () often adds ingredients like beans, apples, prunes, or apple sauce..
   RECOMP (abs)           Shepherd’s pie is a dish made with leftover roasted meat and mashed potato on
                          the bottom, with variations including a version with beef or lamb and a layer
                          of breadcrumbs and cheese on top. The dish has a history of being used as a
                          means of using leftover roasted meat and has variations on the toppings.
   LLMLingua2             Shepherd’s pie History early cookery books dish leftover roasted meat lined
   (comp.50%)             mashed potato mashed potato crust top Variations similar dishes potato-topped
                          pies include modern ”Cumberland pie” beef or lamb breadcrumbs cheese me-
                          dieval modern-day Cumbria pastry crust filling meat fruits spices Quebec vari-
                          ation cottage pie ”Pâté ground beef bottom canned corn middle mashed potato
                          top ”shepherdess pie” vegetarian without meat vegan version without meat dairy
                          Netherlands similar dish ”philosopher’s stew” adds ingredients beans apples
                          prunes apple sauce Brazil dish manioc puree hides sun-dried meat
   LongLLMLingua          Shepherd’s pie. Other potato-topped pies include: The modern ”Cumberland
   (comp.       50%).     pie” is a version with either beef or lamb and a layer of breadcrumbs and cheese
   Processes all pas-     on top. In medieval times, and modern-day Cumbria, the pastry crust had a
   sages      together    filling of meat with fruits and spices.. In Quebec, a variation on the cottage
   and    dynamically     pie is called ”Pâté chinois”. It is made with ground beef on the bottom layer,
   decides on the         canned corn in the middle, and mashed potato on top.. The ”shepherdess pie” is
   compression ratio      a vegetarian version made without meat, or a vegan version made without meat
   of each passage.       and dairy.. In the Netherlands, a very similar dish called ”philosopher’s stew”
                          () often adds ingredients like beans, apples, prunes, or apple sauce.. In Brazil,
                          a dish called in refers to the fact that a manioc puree hides a layer of sun-dried
                          meat.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Example of context pruning with various approaches. Provence correctly detects that
the entire passage is relevant to the query, same as LongLLMLingua, while RECOMP (ext) is by
design not capable of making such a decision.

   Question               where does the sweetness of fruit come from
   Original context       Sweetness. A number of plant species produce glycosides that are sweet at
                          concentrations much lower than sugar. The most well-known example is gly-
                          cyrrhizin, the sweet component of licorice root, which is about 30 times sweeter
                          than sucrose. Another commercially important example is stevioside, from the
                          South American shrub ”Stevia rebaudiana”. It is roughly 250 times sweeter
                          than sucrose. Another class of potent natural sweeteners are the sweet proteins
                          such as thaumatin, found in the West African katemfe fruit. Hen egg lysozyme,
                          an antibiotic protein found in chicken eggs, is also sweet.
   Provence               Sweetness. A number of plant species produce glycosides that are sweet at
                          concentrations much lower than sugar. The most well-known example is gly-
                          cyrrhizin, the sweet component of licorice root, which is about 30 times sweeter
                          than sucrose. Another commercially important example is stevioside, from the
                          South American shrub ”Stevia rebaudiana”. It is roughly 250 times sweeter
                          than sucrose. Another class of potent natural sweeteners are the sweet proteins
                          such as thaumatin, found in the West African katemfe fruit. Hen egg lysozyme,
                          an antibiotic protein found in chicken eggs, is also sweet.
   RECOMP         (ext,   It is roughly 250 times sweeter than sucrose. Another commercially important
   top-3)                 example is stevioside, from the South American shrub ”Stevia rebaudiana”. A
                          number of plant species produce glycosides that are sweet at concentrations
                          much lower than sugar.
   RECOMP (abs)           [empty context]
   LLMLingua2             Sweetness plant species produce glycosides sweet lower sugar glycyrrhizin
   (comp.50%)             sweet licorice root 30 times sweeter sucrose stevioside South American shrub
                          ”Stevia 250 times sweeter sucrose sweeteners sweet proteins thaumatin West
                          African katemfe fruit Hen egg lysozyme antibiotic protein chicken eggs sweet
   LongLLMLingua          Sweetness. A number of plant species produce glycosides that are sweet at
   (comp. 50%)            concentrations much lower than sugar. The most well-known example is gly-
                          cyrrhizin, the sweet component of licorice root, which is about 30 times sweeter
                          than sucrose. Another commercially important example is stevioside, from the
                          South American shrub ”Stevia rebaudiana”. It is roughly 250 times sweeter
                          than sucrose. Another class of potent natural sweeteners are the sweet proteins
                          such as thaumatin, found in the West African katemfe fruit. Hen egg lysozyme,
                          an antibiotic protein found in chicken eggs, is also sweet.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Example of context pruning with various approaches. Provence selects one most relevant
sentence, which is also ranked first by RECOMP (ext). RECOMP (abs) decides that no information
is relevant to the query, while LongLLMLingua on the contrary keeps the entire input, dropping
some punctuation marks. LLMLingua2 removes too many tokens which makes text hardly under-
standable.

   Question               what was the tower of london originally used for
   Original context       Tower of London. In the 16th century, the Tower acquired an enduring repu-
                          tation as a grim, forbidding prison. This had not always been the case. As a
                          royal castle, it was used by the monarch to imprison people for various reasons,
                          however these were usually high-status individuals for short periods rather than
                          common citizenry as there were plenty of prisons elsewhere for such people.
                          Contrary to the popular image of the Tower, prisoners were able to make their
                          life easier by purchasing amenities such as better food or tapestries through
                          the Lieutenant of the Tower. As holding prisoners was originally an inciden-
                          tal role of the Tower – as would have been the case for any castle – there
                          was no purpose-built accommodation for prisoners until 1687 when a brick
                          shed, a ”Prison for Soldiers”, was built to the north-west of the White Tower.
                          The Tower’s reputation for torture and imprisonment derives largely from 16th-
                          century religious propagandists and 19th-century romanticists.
   Provence               Tower of London. As a royal castle, it was used by the monarch to imprison
                          people for various reasons, however these were usually high-status individuals
                          for short periods rather than common citizenry as there were plenty of prisons
                          elsewhere for such people.
   RECOMP         (ext,   As a royal castle, it was used by the monarch to imprison people for various
   sorted top-3 sents)    reasons, however these were usually high-status individuals for short periods
                          rather than common citizenry as there were plenty of prisons elsewhere for
                          such people. This had not always been the case. The Tower’s reputation for
                          torture and imprisonment derives largely from 16th-century religious propagan-
                          dists and 19th-century romanticists.
   RECOMP (abs)           [empty context]
   LLMLingua2             Tower London 16th century grim prison royal castle monarch high-status com-
   (comp.25%)             mon citizenry prisoners amenities food Lieutenant Tower no-built accommoda-
                          tion until 1687 ”Prison for north-west White Tower reputation torture imprison-
                          ment 16th-century propagandists 19th-century romanticists
   LongLLMLingua          Tower of London In the 6th century, the acquired an enduring reputation as
   (comp. 25%)            grim, forbidd prison. This had always been the case As a royal castle, it was
                          by the to imprison people for various reasons however these were usually high-
                          status individuals for short rather than common citizenry as there were plenty
                          of prisons elsewhere for such people. Contrary popular of the Tower, prison-
                          ers were able to make their life easier purchasing amenities such better food
                          or tapestries through Lieutenant of the Tower. holding prisoners was originally
                          incident role of the– would have been the case for any – was purpose- accom-
                          modation for prisoners until 167 a ”Prison for Sold”, was to thewest of White
                          Tower. The’s reputation torture imprisonment derives largely from 6th- reli-
                          gious propagandists and 19th-century romanticists.


                                                    25
