Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROVABLE U NCERTAINTY D ECOMPOSITION                                                               VIA
H IGHER -O RDER C ALIBRATION
 Gustaf Ahdritz                               Aravind Gollakota                       Parikshit Gopalan
 Harvard University∗                          Apple                                   Apple

                             Charlotte Peale                                 Udi Wieder
                             Stanford University∗                            Apple



                                                  A BSTRACT

             We give a principled method for decomposing the predictive uncertainty of a
             model into aleatoric and epistemic components with explicit semantics relating
             them to the real-world data distribution. While many works in the literature have
             proposed such decompositions, they lack the type of formal guarantees we pro-
             vide. Our method is based on the new notion of higher-order calibration, which
             generalizes ordinary calibration to the setting of higher-order predictors that pre-
             dict mixtures over label distributions at every point. We show how to measure
             as well as achieve higher-order calibration using access to k-snapshots, namely
             examples where each point has k independent conditional labels. Under higher-
             order calibration, the estimated aleatoric uncertainty at a point is guaranteed to
             match the real-world aleatoric uncertainty averaged over all points where the pre-
             diction is made. To our knowledge, this is the first formal guarantee of this type
             that places no assumptions whatsoever on the real-world data distribution. Im-
             portantly, higher-order calibration is also applicable to existing higher-order pre-
             dictors such as Bayesian and ensemble models and provides a natural evaluation
             metric for such models. We demonstrate through experiments that our method
             produces meaningful uncertainty decompositions for image classification.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Decomposing predictive uncertainty into aleatoric and epistemic components is of fundamental im-
portance in machine learning and statistical prediction (Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021; Abdar
et al., 2021). Aleatoric (or data) uncertainty is the inherent uncertainty in the prediction task at hand,
arising from randomness present in nature’s data generating process, while epistemic (or model) un-
certainty arises from a model’s lack of perfect knowledge about nature. Accurate estimates of these
quantities are of great use to practitioners, as they allow them to understand whether the difficulty
of their prediction task arises primarily from the data or their model.
As a running example, consider the task of predicting based on an X-ray scan whether a bone will
require a cast. Suppose our model issues a 50% prediction for a scan. This could occur because the
scan is genuinely ambiguous. A very different scenario is one where the model is unable to decide
between two diagnoses: one where a cast is unambiguously necessary and one where it is not. In
both scenarios, the total predictive uncertainty is the same. However, the nature of this uncertainty
differs; in the first scenario, it is purely aleatoric, while in the second, it is entirely epistemic.
For any such explanation of a model’s uncertainty to be trusted, it must be accompanied by some
meaningful semantics telling us what it means about the real world. The canonical example of such
a notion in the prediction literature is calibration, which requires that whenever our model predicts
a certain distribution of outcomes, we actually observe that distribution of outcomes on average.
In our X-ray example, a 50% prediction would be calibrated if exactly half of all scans with the
same prediction did ultimately require casts. But this would be true regardless of which of the two
    ∗
        Work done while interning at Apple. Authors in alphabetical order.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Snapshots from Multiple       Higher-Order Predictions                     True Bayes Mixture
            Doctor Opinions
                                       High aleatoric, low epistemic
                                                                                   f*(     )               f*(     )
                                                                                   = 0.5
                                                                                                           = 0.5
                                             f(x) =
                                                        0.5        0.5
                                                                               =
                                                             0.5
                                                                         0.5
                                                                                           f*(         )               f*(     )
                                                                                               = 0.5                   = 0.5
                                     𝔼x∼[x][ f*(x)] = 0.5
                                                                                   f*(     )               f*(     )
                                             f(x) =
                                                                    0
                                                         1                          =1
                                                                          1
                                                                               =                            =0
                                                              0
                                                                                           f*(         )               f*(     )
                                                                                               =0                       =1
                                       Low aleatoric, high epistemic


Figure 1: An illustration of higher-order calibration using the X-ray classification example. We
depict scenarios 1 and 2 on the top and bottom respectively. On the left, we have instances grouped
together into one level set [x] by the predictor. By learning from snapshots drawn from the level set
in either case, we are able to predict mixtures that match the true Bayes mixture f ∗ ([x]).

scenarios above we were in. Standard calibration is purely a guarantee regarding total predictive
uncertainty, and does not account for the source of uncertainty. Accordingly, we ask:

         Can we build a theory of calibration that lets us decompose uncertainty into epis-
         temic and aleatoric components and give explicit semantics for these components?

In this work we answer this question by proposing a theory of higher-order calibration, a general-
ization of ordinary (first-order) calibration. This theory pertains to higher-order predictors, which
predict mixtures of distributions over outcomes rather than just single distributions. Thus in the first
scenario of the X-ray example, we might predict a mixture concentrated on the 50% distribution,
while in the second we might predict an equal mixture of 100% and 0% (see Figure 1). As we
shall discuss, higher-order predictors arise in many settings, including in Bayesian and ensemble
methods. In a nutshell, a higher-order predictor is higher-order calibrated if whenever it predicts a
certain mixture of distributions, then we do observe that mixture of distributions over outcomes in
aggregate. The main contributions of our work are as follows:
1. We propose the notion of higher-order calibration, motivated by the question of rigorously de-
   composing predictive uncertainty into aleatoric and epistemic components. We consider standard
   uncertainty decompositions from the Bayesian literature (Houlsby et al., 2011; Hofman et al.,
   2024; Kotelevskii & Panov, 2024) and prove that under higher-order calibration, a predictor’s es-
   timate of its aleatoric uncertainty matches the real-world aleatoric uncertainty averaged over all
   points with the same prediction. Similarly, the epistemic uncertainty matches the true “variance”
   in real-world label distributions over such points.
2. We propose a tractable relaxation termed k th -order calibration, which approaches higher-order
   calibration for large k. Our theory builds on and generalizes recent work by Johnson et al.
   (2024), which studied the k = 2 case. We show that for certain entropy functions, even small
   values of k (like 2) yield provable uncertainty decomposition.
3. We give practical methods for achieving higher-order calibration using access to k-snapshots,
   namely examples with k independent conditional labels per instance, by leveraging connections
   to the problem of mixture learning (Li et al., 2015).
4. We verify that our methods yield useful decompositions in real image classification tasks.
Main result: provable uncertainty decomposition. Suppose nature generates random labeled
data (x, y) ∈ X × Y, where X is the instance space and Y the label space, which in this paper we
assume is discrete. Let ∆Y be the space of probability distributions over Y. Let f ∗ : X → ∆Y
map each instance x to the conditional distribution of y | (x = x). We make no assumptions about
the marginal distribution or the form of f ∗ . Thus each x has true aleatoric uncertainty AU∗ (x) =
H(f ∗ (x)), where H is a measure of variability or entropy. Epistemic uncertainty, by contrast, will
emerge as a property of our predictor. We denote random variables using boldface throughout. See
Appendix A for an extended discussion of notation.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 1.1 (Higher-order predictors and calibration). A higher-order predictor f : X → ∆∆Y
is a function that maps each instance to a distribution over ∆Y (the space of such mixtures is denoted
∆∆Y). Let [x] = {x′ ∈ X : f (x′ ) = f (x)} denote the level set of f that x lies in. Let the Bayes
mixture f ∗ ([x]) ∈ ∆∆Y be the distribution of f ∗ (x) | (x ∼ [x]), where x ∼ [x] denotes a draw
from the marginal distribution DX restricted to [x]. We say f is higher-order calibrated if for every
x, f (x) = f ∗ ([x]).

Higher-order calibration guarantees that our prediction f (x) is a proxy for the true “Bayes mixture”
of ground truth distributions f ∗ (x) as we range over x ∼ [x]. This implies that any quantity defined
in terms of the predicted mixture has a “real-world” interpretation as the corresponding quantity
defined in terms of the Bayes mixture. This turns out to be a powerful guarantee.
We now consider the well-studied “mutual information decomposition” of predictive uncertainty
(see e.g. Houlsby et al. (2011); Gal (2016)), and see what semantics it has under higher-order
calibration.
   P         We state it in terms of the Shannon entropy H : ∆Y → R, given by H(p) =
− y∈Y py log py . Let π = f (x) ∈ ∆∆Y be the predicted mixture at an instance x. The in-
duced marginal distribution of y when we draw p ∼ π at random and then draw y ∼ p is given by
p = E[p], the centroid of π. The mutual information decomposition is as follows1 :
                 H(p)                   =                   E [H(p)]                  +       H(p) − E [H(p)]                (1.1)
                 | {z }                                 p∼π                                         p∼π
      Predictive uncertainty PU(f :x)                   |      {z }                           |     {z      }
                                            Aleatoric uncertainty estimate AU(f :x)         Epistemic uncertainty EU(f :x)

Theorem 1.2 (Uncertainty decomposition under higher-order calibration). Suppose f is higher-
order calibrated. Let π ∗ = f ∗ ([x]) be the Bayes mixture over the level set [x], and let p∗ =
Ep∗ ∼π∗ [p∗ ]. Then
        • The aleatoric uncertainty estimate is accurate on average:
                              AU(f : x) = E [H(p)] =                     E [H(p∗ )] = E [AU∗ (x)].
                                                   p∼π                 p∗ ∼π ∗                  x∼[x]

        • The epistemic uncertainty is exactly the average divergence of p∗ ∼ π ∗ to the mean p∗ :
                                EU(f : x) = E [DKL (p ∥ p)] =                         E [DKL (p∗ ∥ p∗ )].
                                                      p∼π                         p∗ ∼π ∗


1.1    L EARNING FROM SNAPSHOTS AND k TH - ORDER CALIBRATION

Theorem 1.2 highlights the power of higher-order calibration. But how do we achieve it or even
check if a predictor satisfies it? The key difficulty is that for any x, we never see f ∗ (x) explicitly,
but only get samples drawn from it.
It turns out that checking high-order calibration requires going beyond the standard learning model.
To see why, returning to our X-ray example, let x be the given scan, and let [x] be all scans that
also get a similar 50% prediction. Assume that [x] is large so that we never see the same image
twice. In scenario 1, the set [x] consists entirely of genuinely ambiguous scans. In scenario 2, [x]
consists of an equal balance of unambiguously positive and negative cases. Then if all we receive
are ordinary labeled examples with a single label per image, we see a 50-50 distribution of labels in
both scenarios 1 and 2 and have no hope of telling them apart.2
Suppose instead that for each image x, we receive 2 labels, each of them drawn independently from
f ∗ (x) (e.g. from consulting two independent doctors). A little thought reveals that we can now tell
the two scenarios apart quite easily. Scenario 1 results in pairs of labels distributed uniformly over
the set {00, 01, 10, 11}, whereas scenario 2 only produces either 00 or 11, but never 01 or 10.
We formalize the above intuition by augmenting the classic learning setting: we assume that we
have access to k-snapshots, namely independent conditional samples y1 , . . . , yk ∼ f ∗ (x) for each
sample x.There are many learning settings where one can expect to have access to k-snapshots. In
crowd-sourcing settings each x can be shown to multiple experts, each of whom answers with their
own label yi . We can model these yi s as independent draws from the true conditional distribution
   1
     To avoid confusion, note that we always view H as taking in an object of type ∆Y. When p is itself a
random variable, i.e. a random distribution, H(p) is also a random variable.
   2
     This can be formalized using the outcome indistinguishability framework (Dwork et al., 2021).


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


f ∗ (x). Here k is decided by the number of experts we can call upon. A different setting is one
where we want to distill a large teacher model into a smaller student model. In this case we have
oracle access to the teacher and can ask for k-snapshots for large k. Of course not every setting
admits such access, for instance health outcomes which by definition occur only once per patient.3
A k-snapshot of labels from Y can be seen as a coarse representation of a distribution in ∆Y by
considering its normalized histogram. A distribution over k-snapshots is thus a coarse representation
of a mixture in ∆∆Y. By framing our goal as that of learning a k-snapshot predictor from k-
snapshot examples, we obtain an effective way of learning an (approximate) higher-order predictor.
This naturally defines a hierarchy of calibration notions, which we term k th -order calibration, that
ranges from ordinary first-order calibration when k = 1 to (full) higher-order calibration as k → ∞.
Our work builds on and generalizes the elegant recent work of Johnson et al. (2024), who consider
the case of k = 2; we discuss this further in related work. Moreover, k th -order calibration essentially
reduces to ordinary first-order calibration over the extended label space of k-snapshots; the only
subtlety is in the choice of metric over this space. This leads to a simple and general recipe: we
can leverage any general-purpose procedure guaranteeing first-order calibration over this extended
label space to achieve k th -order calibration.
                                    √           We prove formally that k th -order calibration converges
to higher-order calibration at a 1/ k rate (see Theorem 2.4).
We also provide a different way of achieving k th -order calibration using a purely post-hoc routine,
analogous to first-order calibration procedures such as Platt scaling. Suppose we start from an
ordinary first-order calibrated model. We can consider its level set partition [·] (or more generally
any desired partition [·] of the space, with [x] denoting the equivalence class of x). Now, higher-order
calibration with respect to [·] entails exactly the following: for any given equivalence class [x], we
need to learn the true Bayes mixture f ∗ ([x]). Thus we have reduced our problem to a collection of
pure mixture learning problems. This problem has been studied before in the theoretical computer
science literature (Li et al., 2015). We leverage these ideas to provide a simple post-hoc k th -order
calibration procedure whose sample complexity scales as |Y|k (see Theorem 2.6).
Importantly, for common choices of entropy functions (like Brier entropy), we show in Theorem
3.3 that k th -order calibration for small k (k = 2 for Brier) suffices to approximate the uncertainty
decomposition guarantees from Theorem 1.2. This relies on a key property of k th -order calibration
that we prove: it gives good estimates of the first k moments of the Bayes mixture over the level sets
(Theorem 2.5). k th -order calibration is thus a natural goal in itself for uncertainty decomposition.

1.2    R ELATED WORK

Bayesian methods and mixture-based uncertainty decompositions. The predominant modern
approach to uncertainty decomposition has been the Bayesian one (see e.g. Gal (2016); Mena et al.
(2021)), wherein one uses Bayesian inference to obtain for any given instance a full posterior distri-
bution over a family of models, or equivalently over corresponding distributions of outcomes. In this
way every Bayesian model is a higher-order predictor. A similar logic holds for ensemble models
(Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017).
A number of works in the Bayesian literature have studied uncertainty decompositions based on
predicted mixtures (sometimes termed second-order or higher-order distributions) (Houlsby et al.,
2011; Depeweg et al., 2018; Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021; Malinin & Gales, 2021; Wimmer
et al., 2023; Schweighofer et al., 2023; Sale et al., 2023c;a; Kotelevskii & Panov, 2024; Hofman
et al., 2024). Bayesian neural networks (Lampinen & Vehtari, 2001) and variants (Malinin & Gales,
2018; Sensoy et al., 2018; Osband et al., 2023) can also be seen as explicit constructions of cer-
tain types of parameterized higher-order predictors. We build on these works, and in particular on
Hofman et al. (2024); Kotelevskii & Panov (2024), for our analysis of uncertainty decompositions.
While the idea of predicting mixtures is already present in these works, they do not consider any
formal semantics such as calibration. The real-world semantics of Bayesian methods typically arise
from the following type of asymptotic consistency guarantee (see e.g. Doob’s theorem (Miller,
2018)): if the model class is well-specified (i.e. the unknown f ∗ is realizable by the class), and
Bayesian inference is computationally feasible (at least in some approximate sense), then in the
   3
     While this is a limitation of our method, it is inherent to the task — as just noted, if a predictor is unable to
separate instances in a set [x], it cannot distinguish between scenarios like those in the X-ray example.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


limit as the sample size grows large, the posterior becomes tightly concentrated around the true f ∗ .
In practice, however, it is often very difficult (or impossible) to test that the model class is indeed
well-specified, as well as to perform true Bayesian inference over expressive classes. In such cases,
it is not clear what semantics (if any) hold for the resulting uncertainty decomposition. This is the
key gap we address with higher-order calibration. We note that higher-order calibration can treated
as an evaluation metric for any higher-order predictor, even if it is misspecified or poorly fit.
Pair prediction and second-order calibration. The k = 2 case of k th -order calibration was
introduced and studied by Johnson et al. (2024). Our work builds on theirs and greatly extends
their notion of second-order calibration by defining the limiting notion of higher-order calibration
that is implicit in their work. This allows us to view k th -order calibration as defining a natural
hierarchy between first-order and higher-order calibration. We believe this considerably clarifies
the conceptual principles at play and also provides a bridge to the Bayesian literature. We draw on
recent work on calibration (Błasiok et al., 2023; Gopalan et al., 2024b;a) to provide a full-fledged
theory of higher-order calibration error and more. The idea of joint prediction has separately been
studied by Wen et al. (2021); Osband et al. (2023); Durasov et al. (2024); Lee et al. (2024).

Please see Appendix B for a full discussion of additional related work.

2    H IGHER - ORDER CALIBRATION
In this section we define higher-order and k th -order calibration in full generality, and describe meth-
ods for achieving them.Recall that a partition of the space X is a collection of disjoint subsets, or
equivalence classes, whose union is the entire space. For any x ∈ X , we use [x] ⊆ X to refer to
its equivalence class, and we use [·] as shorthand for the entire partition. The Bayes mixture over an
equivalence class [x], denoted f ∗ ([x]), is the mixture obtained by drawing x ∼ [x] (according to the
marginal distribution DX restricted to [x]) and considering f ∗ (x). We define approximate higher-
order calibration to allow for some error between the predicted distribution and the Bayes mixture,
where we measure closeness between mixtures in ∆∆Y using the Wasserstein distance with respect
to the ℓ1 (or statistical) distance between distributions in ∆Y. Recall that for us Y is discrete.
Definition 2.1 (Approximate higher-order calibration). We say a higher-order predictor f : X →
∆∆Y is ϵ-higher-order calibrated to f ∗ wrt a partition [·] if for all x ∈ X ,4
                  W1 (f (x), f ∗ ([x])) =           inf            E(p,p∗ )∼µ [∥p − p∗ ∥1 ] ≤ ϵ,
                                            µ∈Γ(f (x),f ∗ ([x]))

where we use Γ(π, π ′ ) to denote the set of all couplings of π and π ′ .

Even with this relaxation, it is unclear how to measure higher-order calibration error, since we never
get access to f ∗ itself. As a tractable path towards this goal, we will introduce the model of learning
from k-snapshots and k th -order calibration.
Definition 2.2 (k-snapshots and k th -order projections). A k-snapshot for x ∈ X is a tuple s =
(y1 , . . . , yk ) ∈ Y k where each label yi is drawn independently from f ∗ (x). For a mixture π ∈
∆∆Y, its k th -order projection is the k-snapshot distribution projk (π) ∈ ∆Y (k) defined as follows:
       • We draw p ∼ π and a k-snapshot s = (y1 , ..., yk ) by sampling k times i.i.d. from p.
       • We output Unif(y1 , . . . , yk ).
Here Y (k) denotes the space of such uniform distributions over snapshots (aka normalized his-
tograms). Thus Y (k) ⊆ ∆Y is a coarsened version (with granularity 1/k) of the space ∆Y.

In the model of learning with k-snapshots, we receive pairs (x, s) where x ∼ DX and s ∈ Y k
is a k-snapshot for x, and the goal is to learn a “k-snapshot predictor” that predicts a distribution
over possible k-snapshots drawn from a given x ∈ X . While this distribution could be represented
directly over Y k , we can simplify our approach by leveraging a key property of k-snapshots: the yi s
are each drawn iid. Consequently, the order of the tuple does not matter. Thus, instead of viewing a
k-snapshot as a tuple (y1 , ..., yk ) ∈ Y k , we will view it as the distribution Unif(y1 , ..., yk ) ∈ Y (k) ⊆
   4
     Throughout this paper, for simplicity we require closeness for all equivalence classes [x]. A more relaxed
notion would only require it to hold with high probability over equivalence classes.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


∆Y. The goal of k-snapshot prediction is to learn a predictor g : X → ∆Y (k) such that for each
x ∈ X , g(x) is close to projk (f ∗ (x)), the true distribution of k-snapshots for x.
Viewing the space Y (k) as a subset of ∆Y, and hence the space ∆Y (k) as a subset of ∆∆Y, is an
important conceptual simplification. Firstly, because g(x) ∈ ∆Y (k) ⊆ ∆∆Y, a k-snapshot predic-
tor can be directly viewed as a higher-order predictor with no extra effort. Secondly, it suggests a
non-obvious error metric for k-snapshot prediction which turns out to be the right one: we simply
use the Wasserstein distance on ∆∆Y as our distance measure between two distributions over snap-
shots. (This is a better measure than obvious choices like viewing Y (k) as a discrete space and using
statistical distance. See Appendix A for some more discussion of alternative representations.) We
define calibration for k-snapshot prediction analogously to the higher-order setting:
Definition 2.3 (Approximate k th -order calibration). We say a k-snapshot predictor g : X → ∆Y (k)
is ϵ-k th -order calibrated wrt f ∗ and a partition [·] if for all x ∈ X , W1 (g(x), projk f ∗ ([x])) ≤ ϵ.

2.1   K EY PROPERTIES OF k TH - ORDER CALIBRATION

We highlight three advantages of k th -order calibration as a relaxation of higher-order calibration.
Tractability. Verifying higher-order calibration for a predictor requires knowledge of f ∗ , which is
generally unknown. In contrast, k th -order calibration is defined relative to the k th -order projection
of f ∗ on each partition. This projection corresponds exactly to the distribution we observe when
collecting k-snapshots as data. Thus, k th -order calibration can be easily verified by comparing the
empirical distribution of k-snapshot data against the predictor’s output distribution. This makes k th -
order calibration a practical metric for assessing predictor performance. Beyond verification, k th -
order calibration also comes with simple methods for achieving it, which we detail in Section 2.2.
Convergence to higher-order calibration. As one might expect, k th -order calibration for large k
is closely related to higher-order calibration. In particular, we can precisely characterize the rate at
which k th -order calibration approaches higher-order calibration as k → ∞. The proof can be found
in Appendix D.3, and follows via a concentration argument:
                                                                                               (k)
Theorem 2.4 (k th -order calibration implies higher-order calibration.5 ). If g : X√ → ∆Y          is ϵ-
  th
k -order calibrated with respect to a partition [·], then it is also (ϵ + |Y|/(2 k))-higher-order
calibrated with respect to the same partition [·].
This shows the convergence of approximate k th -order calibration to approximate higher-order cali-
bration in a way that preserves the approximation error.
Moment recovery via k th -order calibration. At small values of k, k th -order calibration can still
guarantee valuable information about the mixture distribution over each partition, if not about the
higher-order calibration of a predictor. In particular, a k th -order calibrated predictor gives good
estimates of the first k moments of f ∗ ([x]). This should be contrasted with higher-order calibration,
which tells us the full distribution of f ∗ ([x]). In settings where we only care about the first k
moments of f ∗ ([x]), this tells us that k th -order calibration can substitute for higher-order calibration.
For simplicity, we restrict to the binary case, where ∆∆Y can be identified with ∆[0, 1].
Theorem 2.5 (Moment estimates from k th -order calibration). Let Y = {0, 1}, and let g : X →
∆Y (k) be ϵ-k th -order calibrated with respect to a partition [·]. Then for each x ∈ X , we can use
g(x) to generate a vector of moment estimates (m1 , . . . , mk ) ∈ Rn such that for each i ∈ [k],

                                       mi − E [f ∗ (x)i ] ≤ iϵ/2.
                                             x∼[x]

This is proved in Appendix D.4 by showing that the first k moments of a mixture can be exactly
recovered from the mixture’s k th -order projection. This allows us to get a calibrated vector of pre-
dictions for the first k moments from a k th -order calibrated predictor. It implies that we can make
calibrated predictions for the expectation of any low-degree polynomial with bounded coefficients
evaluated on f ∗ (x). This property will be useful for estimating aleatoric uncertainty using k th -order
calibration (Theorems 3.3, E.8) and giving prediction sets with coverage guarantees (Appendix F).
   5
     We present this theorem in a simplified manner to emphasize the connections between kth - and higher-
order calibration error. See Appendix D.2 for additional guarantees that both lower- and upper- bound the
higher-order calibration error within a partition in terms of the kth -order error.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2   ACHIEVING k TH - ORDER CALIBRATION

We present two simple methods for k th -order calibration based on common approaches for first-order
calibration: minimizing a proper loss, or post-processing the level sets of a learned predictor.
Learning directly from snapshots. Our definition of k th -order calibration is immediately accom-
panied by a natural method for achieving it: view the learning problem as a multiclass classification
problem over the extended label space Y (k) of k-snapshots, and use any off-the-shelf procedure that
tries to achieve ordinary first-order calibration over this space when we draw true k-snapshots from
nature. Perfect first-order calibration over Y (k) means exactly that g(x) = projk f ∗ ([x]) for all x,
which is equivalent to k th -order calibration. A simple concrete method is to minimize a proper multi-
class classification loss over the label space Y (k) (such as cross entropy) over an expressive function
class. This is the method followed in Johnson et al. (2024) for achieving second-order calibration.
Post-hoc calibration using snapshots. Here we describe a simple alternative way of achieving
k th -order calibration using a pure post-processing routine which allows us to turn any ordinary first-
order predictor into a higher-order calibrated predictor, thereby “eliciting” its epistemic uncertainty.
This method requires only a calibration set of k-snapshots rather than a full training set.
Let us briefly recall the standard post-processing procedure for achieving first-order calibration.6
For a partition [·], first-order calibration requires that for every x, f (x) = Ex∼[x] [f ∗ (x)]. If this is
not the case, then we “patch” the prediction at x to be the centroid of the Bayes mixture within its
partition, Ex∼[x] [f ∗ (x)]. That is, we have reduced the problem to that of learning the mean label
distribution over a given set [x]. We implement this by drawing a sufficiently large sample from
each set [x] in the partition and use the empirical distribution as an estimate of the true mean.
Our procedure for post-hoc k th -order calibration is a very natural extension of this algorithm. Let
a partition [·] be given (perhaps arising from an initial first-order predictor). For each equivalence
class [x] in the partition, instead of simply trying to estimate the centroid of the Bayes mixture, we
will now try to learn the entire Bayes mixture (or technically its k th -order projection projk f ∗ ([x])).
That is, we reduce to mixture learning instead of mere distribution learning. Mixture learning has
been previously explored in the literature; e.g. Li et al. (2015) give algorithms for learning mixtures
given access to snapshots. While their methods could be applied for post-processing for higher-order
calibration, their focus on learning complete mixtures rather than their k th -order projections (as is
sufficient for k th -order calibration) leads to different guarantees and snapshot size requirements.
We present a simple post-processing algorithm for achieving k th -order calibration using a calibration
set of k-snapshots from each [x]. Our algorithm is as follows: given N k-snapshots — viewed as
distributions p1 , ..., pN ∈ Y (k) ⊆ ∆Y — drawn from projk f ∗ ([x]), output the empirical mixture,
i.e. Unif(p1 , ..., pN ). We can use standard concentration arguments to show that for sufficiently
large N , this will give a good estimate of projk f ∗ ([x]) and hence a k th -order calibrated predictor.
Theorem 2.6 (Empirical estimate of k th -order projection guarantee). Consider any x ∈ X , and
a sample p1 , ..., pN ∈ Y (k) where each pi is drawn i.i.d. from projk f ∗ ([x]). Given ϵ > 0 and
0 ≤ δ ≤ 1, if N ≥ (2(|Y (k) | log(2) + log(1/δ)))/ϵ2 , then we can guarantee that with probability
at least 1 − δ over the randomness of the sample we will have
                                W1 (projk f ∗ ([x]), Unif(p1 , ..., pN )) ≤ ϵ.

The proof of this theorem can be found in Appendix D.5. We note that |Y (k) | is exactly the number of
multisets of size k that can be chosen from ℓ items, with repeats. Thus, |Y (k) | = k+ℓ−1   ℓ−1   ≤ ℓk and
                  (k)        k
so replacing |Y | with ℓ also gives the desired guarantee. In the special case of binary prediction,
|Y (k) | simplifies to just k + 1, resulting in a bound that is linear in the size of the snapshot.

3     U NCERTAINTY DECOMPOSITIONS
Having defined higher-order and k th -order calibration, we show how these notions can be leveraged
to provide meaningful semantics for decomposing predictive uncertainty. Let any concave general-
   6
     Here we mean distribution calibration with respect to distributions in ∆Y for any discrete space Y, but the
reader can consider the binary case for simplicity. There, distribution learning reduces to mean estimation.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ized entropy function G : ∆Y → R be given (e.g., the Shannon entropy; see Appendix C.1 for more
details). Fix a point x ∈ X , and let the predicted mixture at x be f (x) ∈ ∆∆Y. Consider a random
distribution p ∼ f (x) drawn from this mixture, viewed as a random vector on the simplex in Rℓ .
The induced marginal distribution of y when we draw p ∼ f (x) and then draw y ∼ p is given by
p = E[p], the centroid of f (x).7 Perhaps the most studied decomposition is the “mutual information
decomposition” (Houlsby et al., 2011; Gal, 2016), which we restate here. Our formulation in terms
of generalized entropy follows that of Hofman et al. (2024); Kotelevskii & Panov (2024).8
                           G(p)              =           E[G(p)]                  +   G(p) − E[G(p)]           (3.1)
                           | {z }                        | {z }                       |     {z     }
                    Predictive uncertainty       Aleatoric uncertainty estimate       Epistemic uncertainty


The predictive uncertainty is the total entropy in a random outcome y drawn marginally from π.
The aleatoric uncertainty estimate is the conditional entropy in y given the mixture component p.
The epistemic uncertainty is precisely the mutual information between y and p; it is non-negative
by Jensen’s inequality. It can be equivalently written as a variance-like quantity, Ep∼π [D(p ∥ p)],
where D is the divergence associated with G (e.g., the KL divergence for the Shannon entropy).
Accordingly we define the following estimates for uncertainty.
Definition 3.1. Let G : ∆Y → R be a concave generalized entropy function. For a higher-order
predictor f : X → ∆∆Y, we define the predictive, aleatoric, and epistemic uncertainties of f at x
with respect to G as

                             PUG (f : x) = G      E [p]
                                                               p∼f (x)

                                  AUG (f : x) =               E [G(p)]
                                                          p∼f (x)

                                    EUG (f : x) = PUG (f : x) − AUG (f : x).

These quantities are meaningful mainly for higher-order predictors. Nature itself only associates a
pure distribution f ∗ (x) with every x, and has only true aleatoric uncertainty: AU∗G (x) = G(f ∗ (x)).
The mutual information decomposition (Eq. (3.1)) is purely a function of our prediction and inde-
pendent of nature. Under what conditions does it tell us something meaningful about true aleatoric
uncertainty? It turns out that higher-order calibration is a sufficient condition: it guarantees that our
estimate of aleatoric uncertainty at a point x equals the average true aleatoric uncertainty over [x].
Lemma 3.2. If f : X → ∆∆Y is perfectly higher-order calibrated, then for all x ∈ X ,
                                             AUG (f : x) = E [AU∗G (x)].
                                                                   x∼[x]


This is proved in Appendix E and establishes the first part of Theorem 1.2. At first, higher-order
calibration may seem like a very strong condition that just happens to provide calibrated uncertainty
estimates. In fact, Theorem E.2 will show that higher-order calibration is a necessary condition
for a predictor to produce calibrated estimates of aleatoric uncertainty with respect to all concave
entropy functions. In this way we see that higher-order calibration identifies a predictor’s epistemic
uncertainty in bucketing multiple potentially different points into a single equivalence class [x]. Our
estimate of aleatoric uncertainty captures the average true aleatoric uncertainty in f ∗ (x) as x ∼ [x],
and our epistemic uncertainty can be thought of as the true “variance”9 in f ∗ (x) as x ∼ [x].
Uncertainty decomposition from k th -order calibration. While Lemma 3.2 draws an important
connection between higher-order calibration and uncertainty estimation, it does not allow for cali-
bration error. Even if it did, achieving sufficiently small higher-order calibration error might require
k th -order calibration for large k by Theorem 2.4. What if we can only guarantee k th -order calibration
for reasonably small k? Is this of any use towards the goal of rigorous uncertainty decomposition?
    7
      In the context of Bayesian models, f (x) is often called the posterior predictive distribution, and p is often
called the Bayesian model average (BMA).
    8
      In general there are multiple approaches to uncertainty decomposition given a predicted mixture. Here we
focus on the mutual information decomposition. In Appendix C we discuss other natural mixture-based de-
compositions and show how they can also be endowed with meaningful semantics via higher-order calibration.
    9
      In particular, it is the divergence of f ∗ (x) for x ∼ [x] from the centroid Ex∼[x] [f ∗ (x)], as formalized in
Theorem 1.2 and more generally in Lemma C.1.


                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We show that for the two most commonly used entropy functions, the binary Brier and Shannon
entropies, the answer is yes. In fact, the former only requires k = 2. We prove a general result
which applies to any uniformly continuous entropy function. The key insight is that k th -order cali-
bration provides us with good estimates of the first k moments of the Bayes mixture (Theorem 2.5).
The Brier entropy is a degree 2 polynomial, whereas we show that the Shannon entropy has good
approximations by low-degree polynomials. A similar guarantee applies to all uniformly continuous
functions via Jackson’s theorem. Taken together, these results show that k th -order calibration is a
natural and tractable goal in itself for uncertainty decomposition. We state the following theorem
informally; formal statements and proofs (with sample complexity) may be found in Appendix E.3.
Theorem 3.3 (Estimating entropy functions; informal). We can obtain estimates AU  dG satisfying

                                     dG − E [AU∗G (x)] ≤ ϵ
                                     AU
                                              x∼[x]

using only k th -order calibration for the following common entropy functions G:

       • For Brier entropy GBrier (p) = 4p(1 − p) using (ϵ/8)-second-order calibration;
       • For Shannon entropy GShannon (p) = −p log p − (1 − p) log(1 − p) using ϵ′ -k th -order cali-
         bration, where ϵ′ ≤ ϵ/ exp(Θ(k)) and k ≥ Θ((1/ϵ)ln 4 );
       • For any uniformly continuous G with modulus of continuity     √ ωG (see Definition E.3) using
         ϵ′ -k th -order calibration where ϵ′ satisfies ωG (ϵ′ + |Y|/(2 k)) ≤ ϵ.

4   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we describe experiments on training higher-order calibrated models using k-
snapshots. We focus on the task of classifying ambiguous images using CIFAR-10H (Peterson
et al., 2019), a relabeling of the test set of CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009). For additional experi-
ments, including comparisons with other uncertainty decomposition methods, see Appendix G.
CIFAR-10H is an image recognition dataset of 10,000 32 × 32 color images with 10 possible classes
(e.g. truck, deer) and with at least 50 independent human annotations per image. Thus Y is the
space of 10 possible entities, and for each image x ∈ X , we treat the normalized histogram of its ≥50
independent ground-truth annotations as a distribution f ∗ (x) over Y. In other words, f ∗ (x) ∈ ∆Y
is the uniform distribution over the independent annotations of x. All entropy computations are done
with respect to this distribution. There is disagreement among annotators: the mean true aleatoric
uncertainty E[AU∗H (x)] = E[H(f ∗ (x))] is 0.17 (STD 1.2), where H is the Shannon entropy.
We first train a regular 1-snapshot ResNet (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) on 45,000 images from
the CIFAR training set, setting aside the remaining 5,000 for validation. We then apply our post-hoc
calibration algorithm (see Section 2.2) to CIFAR-10H, using half as a calibration set and the other
half as a test set. For more details, see Appendix G. In this way we obtain a k th -order predictor
g : X → ∆Y (k) . The induced marginal first-order predictor g : X → ∆Y is g(x) = Ep∼g(x) [p].
In this high-dimensional setting, it is infeasible to compute the true level set partition of g. We
instead use a coarse-grained partition defined in terms of g. For each possible class (e.g. truck),
we bin together all images x where g(x) takes its maximum value at that class and where that value
lies in one of 10 slices of [0, 1] (e.g. [0.8, 0.9]). Thus we obtain a partition with 100 bins in total.
In Appendix G we report higher-order calibration error as measured by Wasserstein error ϵ in Defi-
nition 2.3. As a more easily interpretable measure, we also compute the aleatoric estimation error:
                            EAU (x) = AUH (g : x) − E [AU∗H (x)]                                  (4.1)
                                                          x∼[x]

In Figure 2, we report the mean aleatoric estimation error over all images, Ex [EAU (x)]. As ex-
pected, predictions of aleatoric uncertainty grow more accurate as the size of the snapshots used to
calibrate the model is increased, and there is a significant benefit to going beyond k = 2.
To illustrate the advantages of accurate estimates of aleatoric uncertainty, we include in Figure 3
examples of images skewed most towards pure “epistemic” or “aleatoric” uncertainty. The former


                                                   9
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  0.5


Mean absolute error (aleatoric)
                                  0.4

                                  0.3

                                  0.2

                                  0.1

                                              1    2    3   4     5   6    7    8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
                                                                                                                                 Snapshot size
                                                                                    Predicted AU = 0.46                                          Predicted AU = 0.47                                      Predicted AU = 0.5
                                                                                    Ground truth AU = 0.47                                       Ground truth AU = 0.47                                   Ground truth AU = 0.51


                                        0.2       0.4       0.6           0.8        1.0        1.2          0.0   0.2     0.4       0.6     0.8           1.0        1.2   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   1.2     1.4      1.6
                                                                                                                    Entropy of mixture components
      Figure 2: Calibrating models with k-snapshots yields accurate uncertainty decompositions. Top: Average
      aleatoric uncertainty estimation error (Eq. (4.1)) of calibrated CIFAR-10 models. Bottom: For three of the
      highest-entropy equivalence classes, we depict the distribution of entropies ranging over the predicted mixture
      (gray) and the Bayes mixture (green). We see that the distributions and in particular the means are similar.


      Figure 3: Qualitatively, accurate estimates of aleatoric uncertainty help separate unusual, poorly learned
      images (mostly epistemic) from genuinely ambiguous ones (mostly aleatoric). Top: CIFAR-10H images
      with the highest ratio of epistemic uncertainty to aleatoric uncertainty (depicted by colored bars), as estimated
      by a well-higher-order-calibrated model. Bottom: The most aleatoric images according to the same model.

      category mainly consists of images that are unusual in some way, e.g. images of objects at unusual
      angles, or closely cropped images. Nevertheless, all are relatively easy for humans to identify, and
      thus point to cases where the model could be improved. The “aleatoric” images, on the other hand,
      include mostly low-quality or otherwise ambiguous pictures on which the annotators do in fact
      disagree. Interestingly, this section also includes a few images (e.g. the fifth image, of a cat being
      held by a human) that do not seem ambiguous per se but did in fact divide annotators. This indicates
      that the mixture model has learned something about aleatoric uncertainty in the label distribution not
      obvious to the naked eye. Such insights can help practitioners fine-tune their data collection efforts.

       5                                  C ONCLUSION
      This work introduces higher-order calibration as a rigorous framework for decomposing predictive
      uncertainty with clear semantics, guaranteeing that our predictor’s aleatoric uncertainty estimate
      matches the true average aleatoric uncertainty over points where the prediction is made. We also
      propose k th -order calibration as a tractable relaxation, showing that even small values of k can yield
      meaningful uncertainty decompositions. We demonstrate both training-time and post-hoc methods
      for achieving k th -order calibration using k-snapshots. Our method offers significant advantages over
      existing methods in that it is distribution-free, tractable, and comes with strong provable guarantees.
      The main limitation of our work is that achieving k th -order calibration for any k > 1 fundamentally
      requires access multiple independent labels per data instance. While this requirement is satisfied in
      many scenarios, such as crowd-sourcing or model distillation, it is not always satisfiable. Addition-
      ally, our sample complexity scales with |Y|k , which could become prohibitive for large label spaces
      or larger k. Open questions for future research include: (a) techniques for reducing our dependence
      on label size and k, (b) applications to active learning and (c) out-of-distribution detection, and (d)
      formally studying the tradeoff between collecting more conditional labels versus more labeled data.


                                                                                                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Kunal Talwar and Moises Goldszmidt for helpful discussions. Charlotte
Peale is grateful to be supported by the Apple Scholars in AI/ML PhD fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Moloud Abdar, Farhad Pourpanah, Sadiq Hussain, Dana Rezazadegan, Li Liu, Mohammad
 Ghavamzadeh, Paul Fieguth, Xiaochun Cao, Abbas Khosravi, U Rajendra Acharya, et al. A
 review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning: Techniques, applications and challenges.
 Information fusion, 76:243–297, 2021. 1, B
Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and
  distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511, 2021. B
Emad Barsoum, Cha Zhang, Cristian Canton Ferrer, and Zhengyou Zhang. Training deep networks
  for facial expression recognition with crowd-sourced label distribution. In ACM International
  Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI), 2016. G.3
Viktor Bengs, Eyke Hüllermeier, and Willem Waegeman. Pitfalls of epistemic uncertainty quantifi-
  cation through loss minimisation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.06102.
  B
Jarosław Błasiok, Parikshit Gopalan, Lunjia Hu, and Preetum Nakkiran. A unifying theory of dis-
   tance from calibration. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Com-
   puting, pp. 1727–1740, 2023. 1.2
Clément L Canonne.     A short note on learning discrete distributions.           arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.11457, 2020. D.5
Michele Caprio, David Stutz, Shuo Li, and Arnaud Doucet. Conformalized credal regions for clas-
 sification with ambiguous ground truth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04852, 2024. B
Leonardo Cella and Ryan Martin. Validity, consonant plausibility measures, and conformal predic-
  tion. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 141:110–130, 2022. ISSN 0888-613X.
  doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijar.2021.07.013. Probability and Statistics: Foundations and His-
  tory. In honor of Glenn Shafer. B
Siu Lun Chau, Antonin Schrab, Arthur Gretton, Dino Sejdinovic, and Krikamol Muandet. Credal
  two-sample tests of epistemic ignorance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12921, 2024. B
A. DasGupta. Fundamentals of Probability: A First Course. Springer Texts in Statistics. Springer
  New York, 2010. ISBN 9781441957795. E.2
Stefan Depeweg, Jose-Miguel Hernandez-Lobato, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Steffen Udluft. Decom-
  position of uncertainty in bayesian deep learning for efficient and risk-sensitive learning. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1184–1193. PMLR, 2018. 1.2
Nikita Durasov, Nik Dorndorf, Hieu Le, and Pascal Fua. Zigzag: Universal sampling-free uncer-
  tainty estimation through two-step inference. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
  ISSN 2835-8856. 1.2
Cynthia Dwork, Michael P Kim, Omer Reingold, Guy N Rothblum, and Gal Yona. Outcome in-
  distinguishability. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pp. 1095–1108, 2021. 2
Yarin Gal. Uncertainty in deep learning. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge, 2016. 1, 1.2, 3
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016. 1.2
Alison L Gibbs and Francis Edward Su. On choosing and bounding probability metrics. Interna-
  tional statistical review, 70(3):419–435, 2002. D.1, D.2


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Isaac Gibbs, John J Cherian, and Emmanuel J Candès. Conformal prediction with conditional guar-
   antees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12616, 2023. B
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.
   Journal of the American statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, 2007. C.1, E.2
Parikshit Gopalan, Lunjia Hu, and Guy N Rothblum. On computationally efficient multi-class cali-
  bration. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR, 2024a. 1.2
Parikshit Gopalan, Princewill Okoroafor, Prasad Raghavendra, Abhishek Shetty, and Mihir Sing-
  hal. Omnipredictors for regression and the approximate rank of convex functions. In The Thirty
  Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR, 2024b. 1.2
Cornelia Gruber, Patrick Oliver Schenk, Malte Schierholz, Frauke Kreuter, and Göran Kauer-
  mann. Sources of uncertainty in machine learning–a statisticians’ view. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.16703, 2023. B
Dan Hendrycks, Norman Mu, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Justin Gilmer, and Balaji Lakshmi-
  narayanan. Augmix: A simple method to improve robustness and uncertainty under data shift. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. G.1
Paul Hofman, Yusuf Sale, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Quantifying aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty
  with proper scoring rules. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12215, 2024. 1, 1.2, 3, C
Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. Bayesian active learning for
  classification and preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745, 2011. 1, 1, 1.2, 3, C
Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning:
  An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine learning, 110(3):457–506, 2021. 1, 1.2, B
Daniel D. Johnson, Daniel Tarlow, David Duvenaud, and Chris J. Maddison. Experts don’t cheat:
  Learning what you don’t know by predicting pairs. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2024. 2, 1.1, 1.2, 2.2, B, G.1, G.2,
  G.3, G.4, 5
Christopher Jung, Changhwa Lee, Mallesh Pai, Aaron Roth, and Rakesh Vohra. Moment multical-
  ibration for uncertainty estimation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2634–2678. PMLR,
  2021. B
Mira Jürgens, Nis Meinert, Viktor Bengs, Eyke Hüllermeier, and Willem Waegeman. Is epis-
 temic uncertainty faithfully represented by evidential deep learning methods? arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2402.09056, 2024. B
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba.        Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.       CoRR,
  abs/1412.6980, 2014. G.1
Nikita Kotelevskii and Maxim Panov. Predictive uncertainty quantification via risk decompositions
  for strictly proper scoring rules, 2024. 1, 1.2, 3, C
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Tech Report, 2009. 4
Meelis Kull and Peter Flach. Novel decompositions of proper scoring rules for classification:
 Score adjustment as precursor to calibration. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
 Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2015, Porto, Portugal, September 7-11, 2015,
 Proceedings, Part I 15, pp. 68–85. Springer, 2015. B, C, C.4
Salem Lahlou, Moksh Jain, Hadi Nekoei, Victor Ion Butoi, Paul Bertin, Jarrid Rector-Brooks,
  Maksym Korablyov, and Yoshua Bengio. DEUP: Direct epistemic uncertainty prediction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2102.08501, 2021. B
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017. 1.2


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jouko Lampinen and Aki Vehtari. Bayesian approach for neural networks—review and case studies.
  Neural networks, 14(3):257–274, 2001. 1.2
Yonghoon Lee, Rina Foygel Barber, and Rebecca Willett. Distribution-free inference with hierar-
  chical data, 2024. 1.2
Jian Li, Yuval Rabani, Leonard J Schulman, and Chaitanya Swamy. Learning arbitrary statistical
   mixtures of discrete distributions. In Proceedings of the forty-seventh annual ACM symposium on
   Theory of computing, pp. 743–752, 2015. 3, 1.1, 2.2
Jeremiah Liu, Zi Lin, Shreyas Padhy, Dustin Tran, Tania Bedrax Weiss, and Balaji Lakshmi-
   narayanan. Simple and principled uncertainty estimation with deterministic deep learning via
   distance awareness. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:7498–7512, 2020. B
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2017. G.1
Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Predictive uncertainty estimation via prior networks. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018. 1.2
Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Uncertainty estimation in autoregressive structured prediction. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 1.2, C, C.3
José Mena, Oriol Pujol, and Jordi Vitrià. A survey on uncertainty estimation in deep learning
  classification systems from a bayesian perspective. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(9):
  1–35, 2021. 1.2
Jeffrey W Miller. A detailed treatment of doob’s theorem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.03122, 2018.
   1.2
Zachary Nado, Neil Band, Mark Collier, Josip Djolonga, Michael W. Dusenberry, Sebastian Far-
  quhar, Qixuan Feng, Angelos Filos, Marton Havasi, Rodolphe Jenatton, Ghassen Jerfel, Jeremiah
  Liu, Zelda Mariet, Jeremy Nixon, Shreyas Padhy, Jie Ren, Tim G. J. Rudner, Faris Sbahi, Yeming
  Wen, Florian Wenzel, Kevin Murphy, D. Sculley, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Jasper Snoek, Yarin
  Gal, and Dustin Tran. Uncertainty baselines: Benchmarks for uncertainty & robustness in deep
  learning. In Bayesian Deep Learning Workshop, NeurIPS, 2021. G.1
I.P. Natanson. Constructive Function Theory, volume 1 of Constructive Function Theory. Ungar,
   1964. E.3
Ian Osband, Zheng Wen, Seyed Mohammad Asghari, Vikranth Dwaracherla, Morteza Ibrahimi,
  Xiuyuan Lu, and Benjamin Van Roy. Epistemic neural networks. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:2795–2823, 2023. 1.2, G.2
Deep Shankar Pandey and Qi Yu. Learn to accumulate evidence from all training samples: theory
  and practice. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26963–26989. PMLR, 2023.
  B
Joshua Peterson, Ruairidh Battleday, Thomas Griffiths, and Olga Russakovsky. Human uncertainty
  makes classification more robust. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 9616–9625, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00971. 4
Theodore J Rivlin. An introduction to the approximation of functions. Courier Corporation, 1981.
  E.7
Aaron Roth. Uncertain: Modern topics in uncertainty estimation. Unpublished Lecture Notes, pp.
  2, 2022. B
Yusuf Sale, Viktor Bengs, Michele Caprio, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Second-order uncertainty quan-
  tification: A distance-based approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00995, 2023a. 1.2, C
Yusuf Sale, Michele Caprio, and Eyke Höllermeier. Is the volume of a credal set a good measure for
  epistemic uncertainty? In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1795–1804. PMLR, 2023b.
  B


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yusuf Sale, Paul Hofman, Lisa Wimmer, Eyke Hüllermeier, and Thomas Nagler. Second-order
  uncertainty quantification: Variance-based measures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00276, 2023c.
  1.2, C
Kajetan Schweighofer, Lukas Aichberger, Mykyta Ielanskyi, and Sepp Hochreiter. Introduc-
  ing an improved information-theoretic measure of predictive uncertainty. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.08309, 2023. 1.2, C, C.3
Murat Sensoy, Lance Kaplan, and Melih Kandemir. Evidential deep learning to quantify classifica-
 tion uncertainty. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018. 1.2
Telmo Silva Filho, Hao Song, Miquel Perello-Nieto, Raul Santos-Rodriguez, Meelis Kull, and Peter
  Flach. Classifier calibration: a survey on how to assess and improve predicted class probabilities.
  Machine Learning, 112(9):3211–3260, 2023. B
Hao Song, Tom Diethe, Meelis Kull, and Peter Flach. Distribution calibration for regression. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5897–5906. PMLR, 2019. B
Flemming Topsøe. Bounds for entropy and divergence for distributions over a two-element set. J.
  Ineq. Pure Appl. Math, 2(2), 2001. E.3
Joost Van Amersfoort, Lewis Smith, Yee Whye Teh, and Yarin Gal. Uncertainty estimation using a
  single deep deterministic neural network. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  9690–9700. PMLR, 2020. B
Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world,
  volume 29. Springer, 2005. B
Zheng Wen, Ian Osband, Chao Qin, Xiuyuan Lu, Morteza Ibrahimi, Vikranth Dwaracherla, Mo-
  hammad Asghari, and Benjamin Van Roy. From predictions to decisions: The importance of joint
  predictive distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.09224, 2021. 1.2
David Widmann, Fredrik Lindsten, and Dave Zachariah. Calibration tests in multi-class classifi-
  cation: A unifying framework. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
  B
Lisa Wimmer, Yusuf Sale, Paul Hofman, Bernd Bischl, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Quantifying aleatoric
  and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning: Are conditional entropy and mutual information
  appropriate measures? In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2282–2292. PMLR, 2023.
  1.2, C
JE Yukich. Optimal matching and empirical measures. Proceedings of the American Mathematical
  Society, 107(4):1051–1059, 1989. D.5
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Richard C. Wilson, Edwin R.
  Hancock, and William A. P. Smith (eds.), Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference
  2016, BMVC 2016, York, UK, September 19-22, 2016. BMVA Press, 2016. 4


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Review of notation and preliminaries                                                         15

      B Further related work                                                                         18

      C Alternative uncertainty decompositions and semantics                                         19
        C.1 Proper losses and generalized entropy functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
        C.2 Loss-based semantics of the mutual uncertainty decomposition . . . . . . . . . .         21
        C.3 The Total Mutual Information decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22
        C.4 Loss decompositions and higher-order calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22

      D Proofs from Section 2                                                                        23
        D.1 Useful lemmas about Wasserstein distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         23
        D.2 Sandwich bounds for k-snapshot and higher-order predictors . . . . . . . . . . .         23
        D.3 Proof of Theorem 2.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
        D.4 Proof of Lemma 2.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
        D.5 Proof of Theorem 2.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29

      E Proofs and discussion from Section 3                                                         30
        E.1 Proof of Lemma 3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30
        E.2 Equivalence between perfect higher-order calibration and calibrated uncertainty
             estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
        E.3 Proofs associated with Theorem 3.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32

      F Higher-order prediction sets                                                                 37
        F.1 Moment-based prediction sets from kth -order calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . .       38

      G Additional experiments                                                                   39
        G.1 Experimental details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
        G.2 Evaluating other uncertainty estimation methods in terms of higher-order calibration 40
        G.3 Comparing our higher-order calibration algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
        G.4 Binary regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41



A    R EVIEW OF NOTATION AND PRELIMINARIES

Notation. We denote our instance space, or domain, by X , and our outcome space by Y. We will
focus on discrete or categorical spaces Y = {0, . . . , ℓ − 1}. We denote the space of probability
distributions on Y by ∆Y, and the space of (higher-order) distributions on ∆Y, or mixtures, by
∆∆Y. The space ∆Y can be identified with the (ℓ − 1)-dimensional simplex, denoted ∆ℓ and
viewed as a subset of Rℓ . We will often think of an element of ∆Y as a vector in ∆ℓ ⊂ Rℓ (namely
with ℓ nonnegative entries summing to one). It will often be illustrative to consider the binary case
Y = {0, 1}, where we can identify ∆Y with a single parameter in [0, 1], namely the bias, or the
probability placed on 1. A distribution, i.e. an element of ∆Y, will typically be denoted by p. A
mixture, i.e. an element of ∆∆Y, will typically be denoted by π.
We follow the convention of denoting random variables using boldface. Thus given a distribution
p ∈ ∆Y, a random outcome from this distribution will be denoted by y ∼ p. Similarly, given a
mixture π ∈ ∆∆Y, a random distribution drawn from the mixture (i.e. a random mixture component
drawn according to the mixture weights) will be denoted by p ∼ π.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We refer to a k-tuple of labels (y1 , . . . , yk ) drawn iid from a distribution p ∈ ∆Y as a k-snapshot.
Since the yi are drawn iid, the order of the tuple does not matter, and we generally symmetrize
the snapshot and identify it with the distribution Unif(y1 , . . . , yk ). We denote the space of all
such distributions or symmetrized k-snapshots by Y (k) .10 Note that Y (k) ⊆ ∆Y. The space of
distributions over symmetrized k-snapshots will be denoted ∆Y (k) .
Learning setup. We model nature’s data generating process as a marginal distribution DX on X
paired with a conditional distribution function f ∗ : X → ∆Y, where f ∗ (x) describes the distribu-
tion of y | x = x. We make no assumptions about DX or the form of f ∗ . Recall that we define
a higher-order predictor as a mapping f : X → ∆∆Y. Even though nature is a pointwise pure
distribution f ∗ : X → ∆Y, we model f as predicting mixtures to allow it to express epistemic
uncertainty.
A partition of the space X is a collection of disjoint subsets, or equivalence classes, whose union
is the entire space. For any x ∈ X , we use [x] ⊂ X to refer to its equivalence class, and we use
[·] as shorthand for the entire partition. The Bayes mixture over an equivalence class [x], denoted
f ∗ ([x]) ∈ ∆∆Y by a slight abuse of notation, is the mixture obtained by drawing x ∼ [x] according
to the marginal distribution DX restricted to [x] and considering f ∗ (x). That is, every x′ ∈ [x]
contributes a mixture component f ∗ (x′ ) to f ∗ ([x]), with mixture weight given by the weight of x′
under DX restricted to [x].
A note on the role of partitions. Partitions play an essential role in any formulation of calibration
for supervised learning. Consider an ordinary first-order predictor f : X → ∆Y learned from the
data. We view this predictor as a complete summary of all the information the algorithm has learnt.
In particular, all instances x that receive the same value of f (x) (i.e., lie in the same level set) are
de facto not being distinguished from one another by f . This may be because they are in fact highly
similar, or because f simply has not learnt enough to distinguish between them. In fact, in this view
a predictor f is exactly the same as specifying a level set partition (and values for each level set) —
i.e. a predictor and a partition are in exact one-to-one correspondence. First-order calibration states
precisely that over all instances that receive the same prediction, the predicted outcome distribution
matches the true marginal outcome distribution (over all such instances).
In practice, we naturally relax the level set partition to merely be an approximate level set partition,
or in general an even coarser partition [·] of our choice (for reasons of tractability). Nevertheless, a
partition should always be thought of as expressing that points in an equivalence class are “similar”
to each other from the point of view of the predictor. Any formulation of calibration for supervised
learning thus has the following form: in aggregate over all points that are treated similarly by the
predictor, the prediction is faithful to nature. Our definition of higher-order calibration takes this
form as well.
Alternative k th -order representations of mixtures.In this paper we have chosen to represent the
k th -order projection of a mixture as a distribution over k-snapshots, treating each snapshot as a
uniform distribution over its elements. More generally one can work with other representations.
The following are three natural ways to define the k th -order projection of a mixture that will all turn
out to be equivalent for us:

       1. As a k-snapshot distribution, an object in ∆Y k : The k-snapshot projection of a mixture π is
          the k-tuple distribution arising from drawing a random p ∼ π, and drawing y1 , . . . , yk ∼ p
          iid.
       2. As a k th -moment tensor, an object in (Rℓ )⊗k : The k th -moment tensor of a mixture π is
          exactly the object E[p⊗k ], where p ∼ π.11
       3. As a symmetrized k-snapshot distribution, an object in ∆Y (k) : The symmetrized k-
          snapshot projection of a mixture π is the distribution arising from drawing p ∼ π, then
          drawing (y1 , . . . , yk ) ∼ p, and considering Unif(y1 , . . . , yk ). This is how we originally
          defined projk π (see Definition 2.2).

  10
     It is equivalent to the space Y k modulo permutations.
  11
     To avoid confusion, note that here we view p as a random vector on the simplex, and thus these are
moments of probability masses, not of the labels in Y themselves. The latter is in any case not well-defined for
us since Y is a categorical space.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Observe that the pmf of the k-snapshot projection of π is given exactly by the k th -moment tensor
of π: that is, for any tuple (y1 , . . . , yk ) ∈ Y k , the probability mass placed on it by the k-snapshot
projection is
                                    E[py1 · · · pyk ] = E[p⊗k ](y1 ,...,yk ) .
Moreover, this quantity is clearly invariant to permutations of the tuple. Thus it is clear that the sym-
metrized k-snapshot projection of π contains exactly the same information as the (unsymmetrized)
k-snapshot projection, just more compactly represented. To be explicit, we can pass from a k-
snapshot distribution to a symmetrized k-snapshot distribution by summing the probability mass
over all permutations of a given tuple, and we can similarly pass from the latter to the former by
distributing the weight of a given symmetrized snapshot evenly over all tuples that are equivalent to
it up to permutation.
In this sense the three k th -order representations above of a true higher-order mixture π are all for-
mally equivalent, and we can in principle refer simply to the k th -order projection projk π of π with-
out specifying a particular representation. Notice that from projk π we can also form projj π for all
j ≤ k, simply by appropriate marginalization (e.g., take the marginal distribution over the first j
elements of each tuple).
We could formally define k th -order calibration in terms of any of these representations. But for the
purposes of this paper the symmetrized representation is by far the most convenient since it allows
us to view Y (k) as a subset of ∆Y.
Note that in general an arbitrary distribution over Y k need not be the k-snapshot projection of any
mixture, and similarly an arbitrary tensor in (Rℓ )⊗k need not be the k th -moment tensor of any
mixture. However when these objects do arise from snapshots of some mixture π, then they are
equivalent to each other.
Worked X-ray example. For illustrative purposes, we walk through our running X-ray example
using fully elaborated notation. Our instance space X is the space of X-ray scans. The outcome
space Y is binary: possible values are “does not require cast” (0) and “requires cast” (1). Note
that in general Y may be any finite label space, but binary outcome spaces offer some convenient
simplifications. For example, in this case, a distribution over Y can be represented by a single value
in [0, 1], namely the probability of “requires cast”. We denote the population distribution over scans
by DX . We assume there exists an idealized conditional distribution function f ∗ : X → ∆Y, with
f ∗ (x) representing the idealized probability, taken over all doctors’ opinions, of whether x requires
a cast.
A first-order predictor outputs a single distribution over Y for every x, i.e. a single prediction for
the distribution of doctors’ opinions for this x. As such, it expresses a composite kind of predictive
uncertainty. Even if it were perfectly first-order calibrated, this would only tell us that the prediction
at x matches the average opinion ranging over the level set [x] of points with the same prediction
as at x. There is no way to tell whether an uncertain prediction corresponds to a scenario where the
predictor is perfect and there is genuine disagreement in doctors’ opinions (its uncertainty is mostly
aleatoric), or one where the predictor itself is uncertain even if doctors are not (its uncertainty is
mostly epistemic). We illustrate this problem in Figure 1. Therefore, our goal is to learn f : X →
∆∆Y, a higher-order predictor which outputs a mixture of distributions in ∆Y at every x. That is,
in our example it outputs a distribution over the interval [0, 1] rather than a single value in [0, 1].
To obtain a calibrated higher-order predictor, we can apply one of the algorithms in Section 2.2. For
concreteness we opt for the second one, which calibrates a first-order predictor post hoc. First, we
train a first-order predictor f in the usual fashion on a training set of tuples {(xi , yi )}i∈[N ] , where
for each i, xi is sampled independently from DX and yi is sampled from f ∗ (xi ) (simulating an
individual doctor’s opinion). We use the trained predictor to compute a partition [·] over the input
space. The canonical “level set partition” places any given X-ray x in the equivalence class [x]
of all other inputs that f assigns approximately the same prediction (at some desired coarseness).
(For example, [x] might correspond to all images for which the probability assigned by f lies in
[0.6, 0.65].) Next, for every such class [x] we sample a calibration set {(xj , yj1 , ..., yjk }j∈[C] of k-
snapshots. Within a snapshot, each of the k labels yjℓ (ℓ ∈ [k]) is sampled completely independently
of the others, corresponding to asking k different doctors for their opinion on the scan. Each k-
snapshot can be turned into a distribution in ∆Y: we count the occurrences of each discrete label,
turn them into a histogram, and normalize it. The larger the value of k, the more closely this


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distribution will resemble the ground-truth distribution f ∗ (xj ). Finally, we calibrate the model by
replacing the model’s shared prediction for each equivalence class (namely f (x)) with the uniform
mixture of the k-snapshot distributions for each of the calibration set inputs that fall into that class.
The resulting predictor is our higher-order predictor f . (Technically, for finite k, f outputs discrete
distributions in ∆Y (k) , not ∆∆Y, but this approximation also improves as k grows.)
Our theory shows that, for large enough N , C, and k, this predictor will be k-th order calibrated,
meaning that its estimates of epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty are guaranteed to be good approx-
imations of their actual values. For a given input x, aleatoric uncertainty is estimated by measuring
the average entropy of all of the k-snapshot distributions in the prediction for [x], and approaches
the true aleatoric uncertainty: the value E[G(f ∗ (z))|z ∼ [x]], or the expected entropy (measured by
G) of the ground-truth label distributions for all inputs in the same equivalence class as x. Epistemic
uncertainty, by contrast, is the remainder of the predictive uncertainty (see Eq. (3.1)). It turns out
to equal a measure of the “variance” (more precisely the average divergence to the mean) of f ∗ (z)
ranging over z ∼ [x] (see Lemma C.1).


B    F URTHER RELATED WORK

Related notions of calibration. Our notion of first-order calibration over a general discrete label
space Y is the same as the notion of canonical or distribution calibration due to Kull & Flach (2015);
Widmann et al. (2019) (see also Silva Filho et al. (2023) for a broad survey). This was extended
to the regression setting (Y = R) by Song et al. (2019); Jung et al. (2021). While the latter works
are related to ours (especially in the binary case where ∆Y can be identified with [0, 1]), the key
difference is that we only ever observe labels in the discrete space Y and never in the continuous
space ∆Y. In the limit as snapshot size k → ∞ (so that we effectively observe f ∗ (x) with each
example), higher-order calibration over Y can be thought of as reducing to distribution calibration
for (high-dimensional) regression over the space ∆Y. However, no provable guarantees are known
for the latter problem, whereas we actually provide provable algorithms using only finite-length
snapshots.
Distribution-free uncertainty quantification and conformal prediction. Our techniques share
a common spirit with the literature on distribution-free uncertainty quantification and especially
conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021; Cella & Martin, 2022). This
literature also makes minimal assumptions about the data-generating process and provides formal
frequentist guarantees, typically prioritizing prediction intervals (or sets) for the labels. Our work
provides “higher-order prediction sets” for entire probability vectors conditional on an equivalence
class (see Appendix F). See Jung et al. (2021); Gibbs et al. (2023) for related work on conditional
coverage guarantees. A key common theme in all these works as well as in ours is the use of post-
hoc calibration as a way of imbuing ordinary predictors with formal coverage-like guarantees; see
Roth (2022) for lecture notes on the topic and (Johnson et al., 2024, Appendix C) for an extended
discussion of the relationship between second-order calibration and conformal prediction.
Other notions of epistemic uncertainty. In recent years one popular alternative approach to defin-
ing epistemic uncertainty is to view it as a measure of whether an instance is “out of distribution”
(see e.g. Liu et al. (2020); Van Amersfoort et al. (2020)). While sometimes reasonable, we believe
this is not always justifiable. We instead define our epistemic uncertainty measure based on first
principles, and allow for epistemic uncertainty to occur even in-distribution.
Another formulation of epistemic uncertainty studied in Lahlou et al. (2021) is as a kind of excess
risk measure, assuming an oracle estimator for aleatoric uncertainty. See also Kull & Flach (2015)
for similar decompositions.
Pitfalls of uncertainty quantification via mixtures and credal sets. Mixtures (also termed second-
order or higher-order probability distributions) are common tools for modeling uncertainty (e.g. in
Bayesian methods). However, they have been critiqued (see e.g. Bengs et al. (2022); Pandey & Yu
(2023); Jürgens et al. (2024)) on the grounds that it is unsound to learn a mixture (a “Level-2” object
in ∆∆Y) using ordinary labeled examples (“Level-0” objects in Y). We agree with this critique, and
it is why we instead learn a Level-2 predictor from k-snapshots, i.e. multilabeled examples (which
are approximations of Level-1 objects in ∆Y). Without k-snapshots, existing approaches to using
higher-order distributions fall short in various ways. Our work arguably identifies exactly how these


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


approaches fall short, and proposes (a) learning from k-snapshots as a principled way of learning
mixtures, and (b) higher-order calibration as a principled way of ensuring that these mixtures have
clear frequentist semantics.
Such concerns have also spurred research into alternative approaches that avoid mixtures, such as
credal sets (see e.g. Sale et al. (2023b); Chau et al. (2024)). Credal sets are incomparable to mixtures,
although for many purposes a nonempty credal set of distributions functions similarly to the uniform
mixture over that set, and insofar as they do, they can be miscalibrated in the sense that we propose.
In concurrent work, Caprio et al. (2024) introduces a notion of calibration for credal sets similar in
flavor to our own (see Appendix F in particular). Ultimately, these and other alternative formalisms
make different tradeoffs in capturing a subtle real-world concept, and we work with mixtures as they
are natural, expressive, and, importantly, allow proving formal semantics of the type we show in this
work.
Further references. The area of uncertainty quantification and decomposition is vast, and here we
have only mentioned works most related to ours (to the best of our knowledge). We refer the reader
to the surveys by Hüllermeier & Waegeman (2021); Abdar et al. (2021); Gruber et al. (2023) as well
as the related work sections of Lahlou et al. (2021); Johnson et al. (2024) for much more.


C        A LTERNATIVE UNCERTAINTY DECOMPOSITIONS AND SEMANTICS

Many uncertainty decompositions have been considered in the literature (Houlsby et al., 2011; Kull
& Flach, 2015; Malinin & Gales, 2021; Wimmer et al., 2023; Schweighofer et al., 2023; Sale et al.,
2023a;c; Kotelevskii & Panov, 2024; Hofman et al., 2024), each making different tradeoffs (see e.g.
Wimmer et al. (2023) for an explicit axiomatic formulation of desiderata for such decompositions).
Using the unified language of generalized entropy functions and proper losses, we provide a discus-
sion of some of these alternative uncertainty decompositions. We also discuss further interpretations
of the components of the mutual information decomposition.
We first begin with an overview of proper losses and their associated generalized entropy functions.

C.1      P ROPER LOSSES AND GENERALIZED ENTROPY FUNCTIONS

Generalized entropy functions are closely associated with proper loss functions L : Y × ∆Y → R,
where L(y ∥ p) is to be interpreted as the loss incurred when we predict the distribution p and
observe the outcome y. We can extend these to functions L : ∆Y × ∆Y → R expressing the
overall expected loss of p with respect to a true outcome distribution p∗ by letting L(p∗ ∥ p) =
Ey∼p∗ [L(y ∥ p)].12 We call the loss (strictly) proper if for all p∗ , it is (strictly) minimized when
p = p∗ , and strictly proper if this is the unique minimizer. Define the generalized entropy function
and the generalized (Bregman) divergence respectively as

                       G(p∗ ) = L(p∗ ∥ p∗ ), D(p∗ ∥ p) = L(p∗ ∥ p) − G(p∗ )

Note that in all of these expressions, the expectation is always taken wrt the first argument. The first
argument is usually (although not always) interpreted as the truth, and the second as the estimate or
prediction.
A basic and important characterization of proper losses (under mild regularity assumptions; bound-
edness suffices) is the following (see (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007, Theorems 1-2 and Figure 1)): the
loss L is (strictly) proper iff its associated generalized entropy function G is (strictly) concave, and
for all p, L(· ∥ p) is the gradient of G at p.13 In effect, this means that to specify a proper loss it is
sufficient to specify a concave generalized entropy function G; the loss and divergence can then be
obtained in terms of its gradient.
The most important examples of entropy functions are:

    The extension is natural and consistent if we view y ∈ Y as a point distribution 1[y] ∈ ∆Y.
    12

    Here L(· ∥ p) denotes the vector (L(0 ∥ p), . . . , L(ℓ − 1 ∥ p)) ∈ Rℓ . Moreover, technically the concave
    13

analog of a subgradient (a “supergradient”, or equivalently an actual subgradient of −G) suffices. In any case
we mainly work with strictly concave functions, where this distinction does not arise.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       1. Shannon entropy, GShannon (p) = y∈Y py log p1y . The associated loss LShannon (p ∥ p′ ) =
                                             P
                        1                                                                          ′
          P
            y∈Y py log p′y is the cross-entropy loss, and the associated divergence DShannon (p ∥ p ) =
          P            py
            y∈Y py log p′ is precisely the KL divergence. The associated pointwise loss function is
                              y

          the log loss, LShannon (y ∥ p) = log p1y . In the binary case, GShannon : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is just
          the binary entropy function p 7→ p log p1 + (1 − p) log 1−p  1
                                                                         . Note that our log always has
          base 2 by convention.
       2. Brier entropy GBrier (p) = 1 − ∥p∥2 (also known by many other names, including Gini
          impurity). The associated loss turns out to be LBrier (p ∥ p′ ) = ∥p − p′ ∥2 + 1 − ∥p∥2 ,
          and the associated divergence DBrier (p ∥ p′ ) = ∥p − p′ ∥2 is precisely the squared Eu-
          clidean distance. The associated pointwise loss function is (the negation of) the Brier score,
          LBrier (y ∥ p) = ∥p − 1[y]∥2 , where 1[y] denotes the indicator vector of y. In the binary
          case, GBrier : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is given by p 7→ 2p(1 − p).14
Bregman divergences satisfy the following cosine law, a generalization of the cosine law for Eu-
clidean distances:
                  D(p ∥ p′′ ) = D(p ∥ p′ ) + D(p′ ∥ p′′ ) + ⟨p − p′ , ∇G(p′′ ) − ∇G(p′ )⟩,                        (C.1)
                                                                            ℓ 15
where ∇G(p) is the gradient of G at p, viewed as a vector in R .
A note on Shannon vs Brier entropy. It is worth noting that in the binary case, the Shannon
entropy GShannon (p) = p log p1 + (1 − p) log 1−p   1
                                                       and the Brier entropy GBrier (p) = 4p(1 − p)
are very similar as functions (where for better comparison we scale GBrier by a factor of 2 so that
GBrier ( 12 ) = GShannon ( 12 ) = 1). They match at p = 0, 12 and 1, follow a very similar shape, and
differ by no more than 0.15 at any point (see Fig. 4). For most practical purposes, we recommend
that practitioners consider using Brier instead of Shannon, as the benefits afforded by its simplicity
largely outweigh the minor differences. In particular, the simple exact quadratic formula for GBrier
means that second-order calibration already suffices to approximate true Brier entropy and with
a much better sample complexity (and simpler estimator) than for Shannon (compare Corollaries
E.9 and E.10). Unless one specifically needs to approximate Shannon entropy with very small
approximation error ϵ and can afford large snapshot size k, Brier will typically be the more pragmatic
choice.

                   G(p)
              1                                                                          GShannon (p)
                                                                                          GBrier (p)

            0.8


            0.6


            0.4


            0.2

                                                                                                         p
                        0.1       0.2     0.3      0.4      0.5       0.6      0.7      0.8      0.9         1

Figure 4: Comparison of Shannon and Brier binary entropy functions. Here we use the scaled
version of Brier entropy, namely GBrier (p) = 4p(1 − p), for a better comparison.

  14
      In the binary case, a further scaling factor of 2 can be used so that GBrier ( 12 ) equals GShannon ( 12 ) = 1, but
this is not an essential part of the definition.
   15
      For the Brier score, ∇G(p) = −2p, and this equation is exactly the result of expanding ∥p − p′′ ∥2 as
∥(p − p′ ) + (p′ − p′′ )∥2 .


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   L OSS - BASED SEMANTICS OF THE MUTUAL UNCERTAINTY DECOMPOSITION

Throughout this section, we fix a proper loss L : ∆Y × ∆Y → R and its associated generalized
entropy function G : ∆Y → R and generalized Bregman divergence D : ∆Y × ∆Y → R. As a
reminder, for p, p∗ ∈ ∆Y, these are defined as follows:
                      G(p∗ ) = L(p∗ ∥ p∗ ), D(p∗ ∥ p) = L(p∗ ∥ p) − G(p∗ )
Lemma C.1. Given a generalized concave entropy function G : ∆Y → R and its associated
proper loss L : ∆Y × ∆Y → R and divergence D : ∆Y × ∆Y → R, the following equalities
hold true for any higher-order predictor f : X → ∆∆Y, and moreover the equalities marked with
HOC
 = hold whenever f is perfectly higher-order calibrated wrt the partition [·]. Let p = Ep∼f (x) [p],
p∗ = Ep∗ ∼f ∗ ([x]) [p∗ ]. Then,
                                                            HOC
                   PUG (f : x) =         E [L(p ∥ p)] =                  E        [L(p∗ ∥ p∗ )]
                                       p∼f (x)                    p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])
                                                            HOC
                   EUG (f : x) =         E [D(p ∥ p)] =                   E       [D(p∗ ∥ p∗ )].
                                       p∼f (x)                    p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])


Note that the characterization of EU implies the second statement of Theorem 1.2 when G is the
Shannon entropy function and thus its associated divergence is the KL-divergence. We give some
intution on these quantities before providing the proof. The restatement of predictive uncertainty
tells us that it can be equivalently thought of as the average loss of the centroid wrt a random mixture
component, Ep∼f (x) [L(p ∥ p)], while epistemic uncertainty is the loss in entropy of y upon learning
the mixture component p, and is precisely the (generalized) mutual information between y and p.
Thus, EUG (f : x) can be directly interpreted as a (one-sided) variance-like quantity, reflecting the
level of disagreement or dispersion among the various mixture components.

Proof. We first prove the predictive uncertainty portion:
          PUG (f : x) = G(p)
                      = L(p ∥ p)
                      = E [L(y ∥ p)]
                           y∼p

                       =     E       E [L(y ∥ p)]                 (since p ∼ π, y ∼ p is the same as y ∼ p)
                           p∼f (x) y∼p

                       =     E [L(p ∥ p)].                                                                 (C.2)
                           p∼f (x)


Under higher-order calibration, we are guaranteed that f (x) is identical to f ∗ ([x]), which also im-
plies p = p∗ . Thus, when f is perfectly higher-order calibrated, we additionally have
                                 E [L(p ∥ p)] =             E          [L(p∗ ∥ p∗ )].
                             p∼f (x)                   p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])


We now move on to epistemic uncertainty. In this case, we have
                  EUG (f : x) = G(p) −             E [G(p)]
                                                 p∼f (x)

                                 =      E [L(p ∥ p)] −            E [G(p)]                         (by Eq. (C.2))
                                     p∼f (x)                  p∼f (x)

                                 =      E [D(p ∥ p)].
                                     p∼f (x)


Once again, if f is perfectly higher-order calibrated, it immediately follows that f (x) = f ∗ ([x]) and
p = p∗ , implying
                                E [D(p ∥ p)] = ∗ E∗          [D(p∗ ∥ p∗ )].
                             p∼f (x)                   p ∼f ([x])


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3       T HE T OTAL M UTUAL I NFORMATION DECOMPOSITION

An alternative natural expression for EU, studied by Malinin & Gales (2021); Schweighofer et al.
(2023), is obtained by replacing the divergence between a random mixture component and the cen-
troid with the divergence between two random mixture components:

                                        EUTMI
                                          G (f : x) :=                   E     [D(p ∥ p′ )]
                                                                   p,p′ ∼f (x)

We refer to this as the “total mutual information” formulation of EU, as it turns out to be the sum of
the mutual information between y and p (i.e. EU(f : x)) and the “reverse mutual information”, a
notion studied by Malinin & Gales (2021) where the roles of p and p are reversed compared to the
usual mutual information form of EU (recall Lemma C.1):
                                         EURMI
                                           G (f : x) :=                  E [D(p ∥ p)].
                                                                     p∼f (x)

The fact that EUTMI = EU + EURMI follows from an application of the cosine law, Eq. (C.1):
                 EUG (f : x) + EURMI
                                 G (f : x) =                        E [D(p ∥ p)] +               E [D(p ∥ p)]
                                                                p∼f (x)                       p∼f (x)

                                                            =       E [D(p ∥ p′ )]
                                                                p,p′ ∼π

                                                            = EUTMI
                                                                G (f : x)


One can use the new notion of EUTMI in place of our original notion of epistemic uncertainty in
the mutual information decomposition to get a new notion of predictive uncertainty and a new “total
mutual information decomposition”:
            E     [L(p ∥ p′ )]          =                  E [G(p)]                     +                  E   [D(p ∥ p′ )]
      p,p′ ∼f (x)                                        p∼f (x)                                  p,p′ ∼f (x)
      |           {z         }                           |   {z   }                               |            {z         }
  Predictive uncertainty PUTMI
                           G   (f :x)       Aleatoric uncertainty estimate AUG (f :x)       Epistemic uncertainty (TMI) EUTMI
                                                                                                                          G   (f :x)
                                                                                               (C.3)
The new PUTMIG (f : x) is the average pairwise loss of the mixture components wrt each other (by
comparison, recall that by Eq. (C.2), our original PUG (f : x), was the average loss of the centroid
wrt a mixture component). The AUG (f : x) term remains the same.

C.4       L OSS DECOMPOSITIONS AND HIGHER - ORDER CALIBRATION

Higher-order calibration also provides information about the loss incurred by a particular prediction.
We consider two potential ways of measuring the loss of a higher-order prediction f (x) with respect
to f ∗ . The first is to predict the centroid of a higher-order prediction, i.e. p = Ep∼f (x) [p]. The
expected loss over a partition [x] incurred when predicting the centroid p is exactly
                         E          [L(p∗ ∥ p)] =           E        [G(p∗ )] +     E         [D(p∗ ∥ p)] .                     (C.4)
                    p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])                     p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])             p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])
                                                      |            {z       } |              {z         }
                                                                avg AU                          avg bias


When f is higher-order calibrated, this loss decomposition becomes exactly the mutual-information
decomposition as by Lemma C.1, we have
                                               E         [L(p∗ ∥ p)] = PUG (f : x),
                                         p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])


                                                   E [G(p∗ )] = AUG (f : x),
                                                 p∗

and
                                               E [D(p∗ ∥ p)] = EUG (f : x).
                                              p∗


Thus, higher-order calibration not only provides meaningful semantics for predictive, epistemic, and
aleatoric uncertainty in the mutual information decomposition, but also ties them to the expected loss
incurred when making predictions using the centroid of f (x).


                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A second, slightly less natural, choice of loss measurement is the loss incurred when we predict at
random according to p ∼ f (x):

                             E [L(p∗ ∥ p)] = E∗ [G(p∗ )] + E ∗ [D(p∗ ∥ p)]
                            p,p∗                  p                p,p


When f is perfectly higher-order calibrated, these terms are exactly recovered by PUTMI   G (f :
x), AUG (f : x), EUTMI
                   G   (f : x), respectively, in the total mutual information decomposition.
We can also break down Eq. (C.4) even further by making use of the notion of the “grouping loss”
from Kull & Flach (2015). Let p∗ = Ep∗ ∼f ∗ ([x]) [p∗ ]. Then our “average bias” term (which they
term “epistemic loss”) can be decomposed further as follows:
                        E      [D(p∗ ∥ p)] =     E         [D(p∗ ∥ p∗ )] + D(p∗ ∥ p) .
                   p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])             p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])                 | {z }
                   |           {z        } |                {z         }    FOC error
                             avg bias                    grouping loss


The FOC error measures how far our mean prediction p over the set [x] is from the Bayes mean
p∗ , and the grouping loss measures the inherent spread in f ∗ (x) over [x]. If we have first-order
calibration, then the FOC error is zero. If we also have higher-order calibration, then the grouping
loss is exactly EUG (f : x).

D     P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 2

D.1    U SEFUL LEMMAS ABOUT WASSERSTEIN DISTANCE

We present two lemmas relating Wasserstein distance and total variation distance that will be useful
in the proofs for this section.
Lemma D.1 (Gibbs & Su (2002), Theorem 4). Let p1 , p2 ∈ ∆Y be any two distributions in ∆Y.
Then, we have
                  W1 (p1 , p2 ) ≤ diam(∆Y)dT V (p1 , p2 ) = 2dT V (p1 , p2 )
where dT V (p1 , p2 ) = 21 ∥p1 − p2 ∥1 is the total variation distance.

The last equality of the lemma follows as a special case due to the standard fact that the maximum
ℓ1 distance between any two points in the simplex ∆Y = ∆ℓ is at most two.
Lemma D.2 (Gibbs & Su (2002), remarks in definition of total variation distance). Let p1 , p2 ∈ ∆Y
be any two distributions and Γ(p1 , p2 ) be the space of couplings between these two distributions.
Then,
                          dT V (p1 , p2 ) =    inf       Pr [y1 ̸= y2 ].
                                               γ∈Γ(p1 ,p2 ) (y1 ,y2 )∼γ


D.2    S ANDWICH BOUNDS FOR k- SNAPSHOT AND HIGHER - ORDER PREDICTORS

The following lemma will lay the foundation for proving sandwich bounds relating k th -order and
higher-order calibration error:
Lemma D.3. Given any mixture
                        √    π ∈ ∆∆Y (and in particular for π = f ∗ ([x])) and k > 0, we have
W1 (π, projk π) ≤ |Y|/(2 k).

Proof. We consider the coupling µ ∈ Γ(π, projk π) defined by first drawing p ∼ π, then drawing a
k-snapshot from p by taking k i.i.d. draws y1 , ..., yk ∼ p, and outputting (p, Unif(y1 , ..., yk )).
By definition of the Wasserstein distance as the infinum over all possible couplings, we have
                  W1 (π, projk π) ≤               E            [∥p − Unif(y1 , ..., yk )∥1 ].
                                        (p,Unif(y1 ,...,yk ))∼µ


Expanding out our definition of µ, we have that


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          W1 (π, projk π) ≤ E                    E            [∥p − Unif(y1 , ..., yk )∥1 ]
                                  p∼π y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d.
                                                                                            
                                                                 |Y|            k
                                                                X            1 X
                                 = E            E                   pj −          1[yi = j] 
                                  p∼π y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d.
                                                                 j=1
                                                                             k i=1
                                                                                             #
                                        |Y|
                                                                   "            k
                                       X                                     1 X
                                 = E                  E              pj −          1[yi = j] 
                                  p∼π
                                        j=1
                                             y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d.            k i=1
                                                                                              #
                                           |Y|
                                                                      "           k
                                        1 X                                     X
                                 = E                      E              kpj −      1[yi = j] 
                                  p∼π k         y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d.
                                          j=1                                   i=1
                                               v                                                     
                                           |Y| u
                                                u                         
                                                                                      k
                                                                                                  !2 
                                      1  X                                          X
                                 ≤ E                                      kpj −        1[yi = j] 
                                                u                                                     
                                                t              E
                                  p∼π k              y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d.
                                          j=1                                        i=1

                                                                                          (Jensen’s Inequality)
                     Pk
Note that for any j, i=1 1[yi = j] is distributed as a Binomial random variable outputting the
number of 1s out of k draws from a Bernoulli random variable with mean pj . This Binomial random
variable has mean kpj , and so we can re-interpret the quantity under the square root as its variance:
                            
                                       k
                                                      !2 
                                       X
             E               kpj −          1[yi = j]    = Var(Bin(k, pj )) = kpj (1 − pj ) ≤ k/4.
     y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d.
                                       i=1


Plugging this upper bound back into the expectation, we get
                                                     
                                            |Y|               |Y|
                                          1 X   p           1 Xp        |Y|
                 W1 (π, projk π) ≤ E             k/4 =          k/4 = √
                                   p∼π k                    k          2  k
                                            j=1               j=1


This gives us the desired upper bound on W1 (π, projk π), completing the proof.

Using the result of Lemma D.3, we get the following corollary:
Corollary D.4 (Corollary to Lemma D.3). Consider any k-snapshot predictor g : X → ∆Y (k) and
higher-order predictor f : X → ∆∆Y. For any x, we have
                                                                              |Y|
                                |W1 (g(x), projk f (x)) − W1 (g(x), f (x))| ≤ √ .
                                                                             2 k

Proof. By the triangle inequality,
                   W1 (g(x), projk f (x)) ≤ W1 (g(x), f (x)) + W1 (f (x), projk f (x))
                                                                |Y|
                                          ≤ W1 (g(x), f (x)) + √                                  (Lemma D.3)
                                                               2 k

The other direction follows similarly:
      W1 (g(x), f (x)) ≤ W1 (g(x), projk f (x)) + W1 (projk f (x), f (x))                  (triangle inequality)
                                                   |Y|
                       ≤ W1 (g(x), projk f (x)) + √                                               (Lemma D.3)
                                                  2 k



                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus far, we’ve considered cases where we have a fixed k-snapshot predictor and compare it to a
higher-order predictor or its projection. Lemma D.3 also allows us to prove Lemma D.5, a sandwich
bound for the distance between two higher-order predictions compared to their k th -order projections:
Lemma D.5. Consider any higher-order predictors f, h : X → ∆∆Y. For any k > 0 and x ∈ X ,
we have

                                                                                         |Y|
        W1 (projk f (x), projk h(x)) ≤ W1 (f (x), h(x)) ≤ W1 (projk f (x), projk h(x)) + √ .
                                                                                           k

Proof. Fix any x ∈ X and k > 0. We begin with the upper bound, as the proof is very short (it
follows almost immediately from Lemma D.3), and then continue to the lower bound.
By Lemma D.3, we are guaranteed
                       √        that W1 (f (x), projk f (x)) and W1 (projk h(x), h(x)) are both
upper-bounded by |Y|/(2 k). Applying the triangle inequality, it follows that
 W1 (f (x), h(x)) ≤ W1 (f (x), projk f (x)) + W1 (projk f (x), projk h(x)) + W1 (projk h(x), h(x))
                                                   |Y|
                  ≤ W1 (projk f (x), projk h(x)) + √                                 (Lemma D.3)
                                                     k

This completes the upper bound.            We proceed to the lower bound, and show that
W1 (projk f (x), projk h(x)) ≤ W1 (f (x), h(x)).
Let µ = arg minµ∈Γ(f (x),h(x)) E(p,p′ )∼µ [∥p − p′ ∥1 ], i.e. the optimal coupling of f (x) and h(x)
in the context of Wasserstein distance. We use µ to construct a coupling µk of projk f (x) and
projk h(x) as follows. We first draw (p, p′ ) ∼ µ, and then sample k pairs of y-values, i.i.d.,
(y1 , y1′ ), ..., (yk , yk′ ) ∼ γ(p, p′ ), where γ(p, p′ ) is the optimal coupling of p and p′ defined as
                                          γ(p, p′ ) = arg min               Pr
                                                                             ′
                                                                                   [y ̸= y ′ ].
                                                            γ∈Γ(p,p′ ) (y,y )∼γ


We then aggregate these k y’s as k-snapshots, and output the pair of distributions q =
Unif(y1 , . . . , yk ) and q ′ = Unif(y1′ , . . . , yk′ ). This defines our coupling µk . Since q ∼ projk f (x)
and q ′ ∼ projk h(x), this is a valid coupling of projk f (x) and projk h(x), so it upper bounds the
Wasserstein distance between these two mixtures:
                                 W1 (projk f (x), projk h(x)) ≤                   E       [∥q − q ′ ∥1 ]
                                                                            (q,q ′ )∼µk



We will now show that
                                           E        [∥q − q ′ ∥1 ] ≤        E       [∥p − p′ ∥1 ]
                                      (q,q ′ )∼µk                      (p,p′ )∼µ

i.e. the expected distance under pairs of distributions drawn from µk is smaller than the expected
distance under pairs drawn from µ and thus lower-bounds W1 (f (x), h(x)) by definition.
Expanding the definition of µk , we have
    E         [∥q − q ′ ∥1 ] =                      E                   [∥ Unif(y1 , ..., yk ) − Unif(y1′ , ...yk′ )∥1 ]
(q,q ′ )∼µk                                      (p,p′ )∼µ
                                 (y1 ,y1′ ),...,(yk ,yk
                                                      ′
                                                        )∼γ(p,p′ ),i.i.d.

                                 =                      E                    [2                     inf                       Pr        [y ̸= y ′ ]]
                                                     (p,p′ )∼µ                    γ∈Γ(Unif(y1 ,...,yk ),Unif(y1′ ,...yk
                                                                                                                      ′ )) (y,y ′ )∼γ

                                     (y1 ,y1′ ),...,(yk ,yk
                                                          ′
                                                            )∼γ(p,p′ ),i.i.d.


Where the second step follows from Lemma D.2 (note that dT V (p1 , p2 ) = ∥p1 − p2 ∥1 /2).
Among the possible couplings of Unif(y1 , ..., yk ) and Unif(y1′ , ...yk′ ), one such coupling is to draw
an index i ∼ [k] uniformly, and then output the two yi and yi′ corresponding to this index. This
gives an upper bound of


                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    E         [∥q − q ′ ∥1 ] =                      E                     [2                       inf                      Pr        [y ̸= y ′ ]]
(q,q ′ )∼µk                                      (p,p′ )∼µ                      γ∈Γ(Unif(y1 ,...,yk ),Unif(y1′ ,...yk
                                                                                                                    ′ )) (y,y ′ )∼γ

                                 (y1 ,y1′ ),...,(yk ,yk
                                                      ′
                                                        )∼γ(p,p′ ),i.i.d.

                           ≤                        E                     [2        Pr        [yi ̸= yi′ ]]
                                                 (p,p′ )∼µ                      i∼Unif([k])
                                 (y1 ,y1′ ),...,(yk ,yk
                                                      ′
                                                        )∼γ(p,p′ ),i.i.d.
                                                                            "      k
                                                                                                   #
                                                                                2X              ′
                           =                        E                                 Pr[yi ̸= yi ]
                                                 (p,p′ )∼µ                      k i=1
                                 (y1 ,y1′ ),...,(yk ,yk
                                                      ′
                                                        )∼γ(p,p′ ),i.i.d.
                                             "      k
                                                                                #
                                                 2X                           ′
                           =         E                        Pr       [y ̸= y ]
                                 (p,p′ )∼µ       k i=1 (y,y′ )∼γ(p,p′ )

where the last step uses the definition of µk as obtaining yi , yi′ as independent draws from the
optimal coupling of p and p′ . Further simplifying, we get

                                                                      "         k
                                                                                                               #
                                           ′                   2X
                            E      [∥q − q   ∥1 ] ≤    E                     Pr       [y ̸= y ′ ]
                       (q,q ′ )∼µk                  (p,p′ )∼µ k      (y,y ′ )∼γ(p,p′ )
                                                                i=1

                                                                                         ′
                                                  =    E′     2    ′
                                                                      Pr      ′
                                                                                [y ̸
                                                                                   =   y   ]
                                                          (p,p )∼µ          (y,y )∼γ(p,p )

                                                      =       E     [∥p − p′ ∥1 ]                                      (Lemma D.2)
                                                          (p,p′ )∼µ

                                                      = W1 (f (x), h(x))
(Recall in the application of Lemma D.2 that γ was defined as the optimal coupling of p and p′ in
terms of the cost d(y, y ′ ) = 1[y ̸= y ′ ]). The last step applies the definition of µ as the optimal cou-
pling for ℓ1 -Wasserstein distance. We conclude that W1 (projk f (x), projk h(x)) ≤ W1 (f (x), h(x)),
completing the lower bound.

D.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2.4

We restate the theorem for readability:
Theorem D.6 (Restatement of Theorem 2.4, Corollary to Lemma D.3: k th -order calibration implies
higher-order calibration.). Let g : X → ∆Y (k) be ϵ-k th -order calibrated with respect to a partition
[·]. Then, we can guarantee that g is also (ϵ + 2|Y|
                                                  √ )-higher-order calibrated with respect to the same
                                                   k
partition [·].

Proof. The theorem follows immediately from Corollary D.4, which tells us that for any x ∈ X ,

                                                                                |Y|
                            W1 (g(x), f ∗ ([x])) ≤ W1 (g(x), projk f ∗ ([x])) + √ .
                                                                               2 k

k th -order calibration tells us that W1 (g(x), projk f ∗ ([x])) ≤ ϵ, and thus the higher-order calibration
error W1 (g(x), f ∗ ([x])) is bounded by ϵ + 2|Y|√ .
                                                   k


D.4     P ROOF OF L EMMA 2.5

We restate the lemma for readability:
Lemma D.7 (Restatement of Lemma 2.5). Let Y = {0, 1}, and let g : X → ∆Y (k) be ϵ-k th -order
calibrated with respect to a partition [·]. Then for each x ∈ X , we can use g(x) to generate a vector


                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of moment estimates (m1 , . . . , mk ) ∈ Rn≥0 such that for each i ∈ [k],

                                      mi − E [f ∗ (x)i ] ≤ iϵ/2.
                                                x∼[x]


The proof will make use of an intermediate lemma, which tells us that the first k-moments of a
mixture π ∈ ∆∆Y can be exactly reconstructed using only its k th -order projection:
Lemma D.8. Consider any mixture π ∈ ∆[0, 1] and its k th -order projection projk π ∈
∆{0, 1/k, ..., 1}. For m ∈ [k], let Mk,m : {0, 1/k, 2/k, ..., 1} → [0, 1] be a function defined as
follows:                                     pk
                                             ( m ) p ≥ m/k
                                                k
                                Mk,m (p) = (m)                   .
                                            0       otherwise

Then,
                                        E       [Mk,m (p)] = E [pm ].
                                    p∼projk π                          p∼π


Proof. Consider the expectation of Mk,m under projk π.

                                                                           "          k
                                                                                                !#
                                                                                      X yi
                           E      [Mk,m (p)]
                                         b =                E
                                                          p∼π
                                                                               Mk,m
                      p∼proj
                      b      kπ                                                             k
                                                  y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d.                i=1


One way to view Mk,m (p) is to view p = i/k as a snapshot with i 1s and k − i 0s. Mk,m (p) gives
the probability that a random permutation of this snapshot starts with m consecutive 1s. Because
the distribution over possible permutations of snapshots is symmetric, we can equivalently express
the above expectation as just the probability that a random k-snapshot starts with m 1s:


                       E        [Mk,m (p)]
                                       b =              E
                                                        p∼π
                                                                       [1[y1 , ..., ym = 1]]
                    p∼proj
                    b      kπ
                                                y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d.
                                                                           m
                                                                           Y
                                            =            E
                                                        p∼π
                                                                       [       yi ]
                                                y1 ,...,yk ∼p,i.i.d. i=1
                                                       Ym
                                            = E [               E [y]]                           (independence of yi s)
                                                p∼π         y∼p
                                                      i=1
                                                      Ym
                                            = E [           p]
                                                p∼π
                                                      i=1
                                                        m
                                            = E [p ].
                                                p∼π


Thus, the expectation of Mk,m over the mixture projk π is guaranteed to be exactly the m-th moment
of the higher-order mixture π.

Additionally, we show that each Mj,k satisfies a Lipschitz condition, which will imply that evalu-
ating the expectation of Mj,k on a distribution close in Wasserstein distance to projk f ∗ ([x]) will
closely approximate the true moment.
Lemma D.9. Let Mk,m be defined as in Lemma D.8. Then, for any p1 , p2 ∈ {0, 1/k, ..., 1}, we are
guaranteed that
                             |Mk,m (p1 ) − Mk,m (p2 )| ≤ m|p1 − p2 |.

Proof. We note that it suffices to show that for any consecutive p1 and p2 = p1 − 1/k, we have
                                    |Mk,m (p1 ) − Mk,m (p2 )| ≤ m/k,


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as then it follows by a telescoping sum that for any p1 , p2 ∈ {0, 1/k, ..., 1}, assuming without loss
of generality that p1 ≥ p2 , we have
                               |Mk,m (p1 ) − Mk,m (p2 )| ≤ m|p1 − p2 |,

giving the desired bound.
There are three potential cases: either (1) Mk,m (p1 ), Mk,m (p2 ) > 0, (2) Mk,m (p1 ) =
0, Mk,m (p2 ) > 0 (wlog), or (3) Mk,m (p1 ) = Mk,m (p2 ) = 0.
In the last case, we trivially have |Mk,m (p1 ) − Mk,m (p2 )| = 0 − 0 = 0. We focus on the other two
cases.
Case 1: Mk,m (p1 ), Mk,m (p2 ) > 0. By assumption, there is some i > m such that p1 k = i,
p2 k = i − 1. We use this to simplify the difference between Mk,m values:


                                                                   i      i−1         i−1

                                                                   m       m          m−1
                        |Mk,m (p1 ) − Mk,m (p2 )| =                k
                                                                      −    k
                                                                                  =    k

                                                                   m       m           m


                               and k, this quantity is increasing in i for i ≥ m because the denom-
We observe that for a fixed m,
                         i−1
inator is constant, and m−1    is increasing in i ≥ m. Thus, we can upper bound the difference by
the difference achieved by the largest possible value of i, which is i = k:
                                                             k−1

                                                            m−1        m
                             |Mk,m (p1 ) − Mk,m (p2 )| ≤      k
                                                                  = .
                                                              m
                                                                       k

Finally, we consider the last case:
Case 2: Mk,m (p1 ) > 0, Mk,m (p2 ) = 0. Because p1 = p2 + 1/k, and Mk,m (p) is always positive
for any p ≥ m/k, this case can only happen when p1 = m/k, and p2 = (m − 1)/k. We calculate
the difference for these values:

                                                  m

                                                  m            1        m!(k − m)!   m 1     m
         |Mk,m (p1 ) − Mk,m (p2 )| =              k
                                                      −0=      k
                                                                    =              =   k−1
                                                                                            ≤ .
                                                  m            m
                                                                            k!       k m−1   k

Thus, all consecutive differences are bounded by m/k, completing the proof.

We are now ready to prove Lemma 2.5 in full.

Proof of Lemma 2.5. At a high-level, to calculate an approximation of Ex∼[x] [f ∗ (x)i ] using g(x),
we will calculate Ep∼g(x) [Mk,i (p)] and show that it is a iϵ/2 approximation of the ith moment,
Ex∼[x] [f ∗ (x)i ].
Consider any x ∈ X and i ∈ [k]. Using the triangle inequality, we upper bound the difference
between our estimate and the true moment value by:


                 b −
        E [Mk,i (p)]          E          [pi∗ ]
     p∼g(x)
     b                   p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])


    ≤              b −
          E [Mk,i (p)]              E              [Mk,i (p)] +           E       [Mk,i (p)] −        E          [pi∗ ]
        p∼g(x)
        b                   p∼projk f ∗ ([x])                       p∼projk f ∗ (x)              p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])


    =              b −
          E [Mk,i (p)]              E              [Mk,i (p)] + 0                                      (Lemma D.8)
        p∼g(x)
        b                   p∼projk f ∗ ([x])


We will now use Lemma D.9 to show that the remaining term is bounded by mϵ/2.


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let Γ(g(x), projk f ∗ ([x])) be the space of couplings of g(x) and projk f ∗ ([x]). We can re-express
the difference in expectations as


                 b −
        E [Mk,i (p)]           E          [pi∗ ] =               b −
                                                        E [Mk,i (p)]                 E          [Mk,i (p)]
      p∼g(x)
      b                   p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])              p∼g(x)
                                                     b                      p∼projk f ∗ ([x])


                                                =               min              E              b − Mk,i (p)]
                                                                                         [Mk,i (p)
                                                     γ∈Γ(g(x),projk f ∗ ([x])) (p,p)∼γ
                                                                                b

                                                ≤               min              E       [i|pb − p|]     (Lemma D.9)
                                                  γ∈Γ(g(x),projk f ∗ ([x])) (p,p)∼γ
                                                                             b

                                                = iW1 (g(x), projk f ∗ ([x]))/2
                                                ≤ iϵ/2                                          (k th -order calibration)

we note that the factor of 1/2 comes in because |pb − p| is 1/2 of the ℓ1 distance when pb and p are
viewed as distributions over {0, 1}.
Thus, we’ve shown an additive error of iϵ/2 for estimating any moment i ∈ [k], and thus can
construct a vector of such moments for each i ∈ [k] satisfying the desired guarantee.

D.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2.6

We restate the theorem for readability:
Theorem D.10 (Restatement of Theorem 2.6, Empirical estimate of k th -order projection guaran-
tee). Consider any x ∈ X , and a sample p1 , · · · , pN ∈ Y (k) where each pi is drawn i.i.d. from
projk f ∗ ([x]). Given ϵ > 0 and 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1, if N ≥ (2(|Y (k) | log(2) + log(1/δ)))/ϵ2 , then we can
guarantee that with probability at least 1 − δ over the randomness of the sample we will have
                              W1 (projk f ∗ ([x]), Unif(p1 , ..., pN )) ≤ ϵ.

As some discussion before the proof, we note that this sample complexity guarantee is obtained via
bounding the total variation distance between projk f ∗ ([x]) and Unif(p1 , ...pN ), which provides
an upper bound on the Wasserstein distance. This approach is reasonable for small values of k,
which we consider to be the most realistic setting where k-snapshots might be obtained. When k
is large compared to ℓ, we can alternatively obtain sample complexity bounds depending only on
the dimensionality ℓ (roughly of the form (1/ϵ)O(ℓ) ) by directly exploiting known results on the
convergence of empirical measures to true measures in Wasserstein distance (Yukich, 1989).

                                            b := Unif(p1 , ..., pN ) and π ∗ := projk f ∗ ([x]).
Proof. For ease of notation, we will denote π
We first observe that by Lemma D.1, we are guaranteed that
                                               π , π ∗ ) ≤ 2dT V (b
                                           W1 (b                  π , π∗ ).

Thus, we conclude that whenever dT V (π ∗ , π
                                            b) ≤ ϵ/2, then we are also guaranteed that
                                                 W1 (π ∗ , π
                                                           b) ≤ ϵ.

This reduces our problem to bounding the total variation distance of the empirical estimate of the
discrete distribution π ∗ = projk f ∗ ([x]), which we observe is supported on |Y (k) | points.
We now use a standard argument for bounding the total variation distance (see Canonne (2020) for
a discussion of various approaches to this argument).
Note that the total variation distance can be alternatively expressed as

                        dT V (π ∗ , π
                                    b) = sup              Pr [p ∈ S] − Pr [p ∈ S] .
                                                          ∗
                                              S⊆Y (k) p∼π                  p∼b
                                                                             π


Thus, dT V (π ∗ , π
                  b) > ϵ/2 iff there exists some S ⊆ Y (k) such that Prp∼bπ [p ∈ S] > Prp∼π∗ [p ∈
S] + ϵ/2.


                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We bound the probability that this happens for any S via a union bound. Select any S ⊆ Y (k) , and
note that Prp∼bπ [p ∈ S] can be written as a sum of N i.i.d. Bernoulli random variables X1 , ..., XN ,
all with mean Prp∼π∗ [p ∈ S]. This allows us to apply Hoeffding’s Inequality to conclude that
                                                       "      N              N
                                                                                          #
                                                          1 X              1 X
         Pr Pr [p ∈ S] > Pr ∗ [p ∈ S] + ϵ/2 = Pr                 Xi > E[        Xi ] + ϵ/2
            p∼bπ            p∼π                           N i=1           N i=1
                                                                  ≤ exp(−N ϵ2 /2)           (Hoeffding’s Inequality)

Thus, for any N ≥ 2(|Y (k) | log(2) + log(1/δ))/ϵ2 , we are guaranteed that

                                                                        (k)
                     Pr Pr [p ∈ S] ≥ Pr ∗ [p ∈ S] + ϵ/2 ≤ δ/2|Y | .
                                       p∼b
                                         π                p∼π
                                       (k)
Union bounding over all 2|Y                  |
                                possible S, we get that

                    ∗                           (k)
                       b) > ϵ/2] = Pr ∃S ⊆ Y s.t. Pr [p ∈ S] > Pr ∗ [p ∈ S] + ϵ/2
          Pr[dT V (π , π
                                                                       p∼b
                                                                         π            p∼π

                    (k)         δ
            ≤ 2|Y         |
                                       = δ.
                              2Y (k)
                                                 (k)
                                                       | log(2)+log(1/δ))
Thus, we have shown thatn N ≥ 2(|Y                          ϵ2            samples are sufficient to guarantee that with
probability at least 1 − δ,
                                        W1 (projk f ∗ ([x]), Unif(p1 , ..., pN )) ≤ ϵ


E     P ROOFS AND DISCUSSION FROM S ECTION 3
E.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3.2

We restate the lemma for readability.
Lemma E.1. (Restatement of Lemma 3.2) If f : X → ∆∆Y is perfectly higher-order calibrated,
then for all x ∈ X ,
                                 AUG (f : x) = E [AU∗G (x)].
                                                                   x∼[x]


Proof. Since f (x) = f ∗ ([x]) as a mixture,
      AUG (f : x) =            E [G(p)] =               E        [G(p∗ )] = E [G(f ∗ (x))] = E [AU∗G (x)].
                          p∼f (x)                p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])               x∼[x]              x∼[x]


E.2    E QUIVALENCE BETWEEN PERFECT HIGHER - ORDER CALIBRATION AND CALIBRATED
       UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATES

At first sight, the ability to produce calibrated estimates of aleatoric uncertainty may appear to be
merely one small consequence of higher-order calibration. But somewhat remarkably, it turns out
that having accurate estimates of AU wrt all concave generalized entropy functions is equivalent to
higher-order calibration.
Such a statement requires a definition of what entails a “concave generalized entropy function.” We
take the most general view possible, building on the work of Gneiting & Raftery (2007), who show
that every proper loss has an associated generalized concave entropy function, and in particular every
concave function G : ∆Y → R is associated with some proper loss (see Section C.1 for a more in-
depth discussion of proper losses and their associated entropy functions). From this point of view,
the class of generalized concave entropy functions is exactly the set of all concave functions. Under
this definition, we get an equivalence between calibrated estimates of concave entropy functions and
higher-order calibration.


                                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem E.2. A higher-order predictor f : X → ∆∆Y is perfectly higher-order calibrated to
f ∗ wrt a partition [·] if and only if AUG (f : x) = Ex∼[x] [AU∗G (x)] wrt all concave functions
G : ∆Y → R.

Proof. The higher-order calibration implies AUG (f : x) = Ex∼[x] [AU∗G (x)] direction is proved in
Lemma 3.2. We focus on the reverse direction.
We will leverage the notion of moment generating functions. The moment generating function of
                                                                                           T
a random variable X ∈ Rℓ is a function MX : Rℓ → R defined by MX (t) = EX [et X ]. An
important property of the moment generating function is that if MX (t) is finite for all t ∈ [−c, c]ℓ
for some c > 0, then its values uniquely determine the distribution of X (DasGupta (2010), Theorem
11.8). In other words, if we have two random variables X and Y such that MX (t) = MY (t) < ∞
for all t ∈ [−c, c]ℓ , then X and Y must be the same distribution.
We will use this line of reasoning to show that the predicted and true mixture for some partition [x]
must be the same if their estimates of all concave functions are identical.
Fix some x ∈ X, and consider the predicted mixture p ∼ f (x) as well as the true mixture p∗ ∼
f ∗ ([x]).
We consider the set of functions G = {Gt }t∈[−1,1]ℓ where each Gt : ∆Y → R is defined as
             T
Gt (p) := −et p .16
Note that by definition, for any t ∈ [−1, 1]ℓ ,
                                                                                   T
                      AUGt (f : x) =       E [Gt (p)] =             E [−et p ] = −Mp (t)                 (E.1)
                                        p∼f (x)                p∼f (x)


and similarly
                                                                                       T   ∗
                E [AU∗Gt (x)] =          E          [Gt (p∗ )] =        E          [−et p ] = −Mp∗ (t)   (E.2)
              x∼[x]                 p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])                  p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])


We make two assumptions which we will prove later:

      1. Every Gt ∈ G is concave.
      2. AUGt (f : x) and Ex∼[x] [AU∗Gt (x)] are finite for all Gt ∈ G.

With these two assumptions, the proof is quickly complete. In particular, if all Gt are concave, then
by the main assumption of our theorem, we have
                                     AUGt (f : x) = E [AU∗Gt (x)]
                                                           x∼[x]

for all Gt ∈ G. The equivalences shown in E.1 and E.2 imply that we also have
                                              Mp (t) = Mp∗ (t)

for all t ∈ [−1, 1]ℓ . Our additional finiteness assumption implies that these moment generating
functions are finite for all t ∈ [−1, 1]ℓ , and thus by the uniqueness of moment generating functions,
we conclude that the distributions f (x) and f ∗ ([x]) are identical. Because this holds for any x ∈ X ,
we conclude that f (x) is perfectly higher-order calibrated.
It remains to prove our assumptions of concavity and finiteness.
We first show finiteness, which follows almost immediately because ∆Y is bounded, and thus for
                                                                       T
any p ∈ ∆Y and t ∈ [−c, c]ℓ , we have tT p ∈ [−c, c] and thus −et p ∈ [e−c , ec ]. Thus the
                 T
expectation of et p for any random variable p over ∆Y is guaranteed to be finite.
   16
      Note that scaling by an additive constant can ensure this function is non-negative on ∆Y if we would like
to require that entropy functions are non-negative, without changing the result of the proof.


                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We finally show concavity. Consider any Gt ∈ G and p1 , p2 ∈ ∆Y, λ ∈ [0, 1]. We have
                                                           T
                            Gt (λp1 + (1 − λ)p2 ) = −et (λp1 +(1−λ)p2 )
                                                               T      T
                                                   = −eλt p1 +(1−λ)t p2

because −eX is a concave function, we have that
                               T          T            T               T
                         −eλt p1 +(1−λ)t p2 ≥ −λet p1 − (1 − λ)et p2
                                            = λGt (p1 ) + (1 − λ)Gt (p2 )

Thus, we conclude that Gt (λp1 + (1 − λ)p2 ) ≥ λGt (p1 ) + (1 − λ)Gt (p2 ), and so each Gt ∈ G is
concave.

We add some additional discussion of more stringent definitions of what qualifies as a generalized
entropy function. Above, our only requirement was concavity, though we note that the nature of
the proof suggests that this class could be further restricted to the set of continuous, concave, non-
negative functions on ∆Y.
Another potential requirement for entropy functions is symmetry—invariance to permutations of
the class probabilities. We highlight that requiring symmetry would break the equivalence between
calibrated entropy estimates and higher-order calibration. To illustrate this, consider a simple coun-
terexample:
Assume f ∗ (x) has no aleatoric uncertainty for each x, and thus assigns probability 1 to some class
i ∈ [ℓ]. Now, consider a higher-order predictor that, for each x, predicts a point mixture concentrated
on a distribution that gives 100% probability to some class j ∈ [ℓ]. Under any symmetric entropy
function, this predictor would appear to have perfect aleatoric uncertainty estimates. Both f ∗ and
the predictor assign 100% probability to a single class for each x. However, this predictor is far from
being higher-order calibrated, as it may consistently predict the wrong class for every x ∈ X .

E.3   P ROOFS ASSOCIATED WITH T HEOREM 3.3

In this section, we present proofs associated with the statement of Theorem 3.3. We first prove the
last statement of the theorem, which follows from a general guarantee in terms of a concave entropy
function’s modulus of continuity.
Definition E.3 (Uniform continuity and modulus of continuity). Consider a function G : ∆Y → R,
where we view ∆Y as a subset of Rℓ equipped with the ℓ1 distance metric. We say that G is
uniformly continuous if there exists a function ωG : R≥0 → R≥0 vanishing at 0 such that for all
p, p′ ∈ ∆Y, we have
                                |G(p) − G(p′ )| ≤ ωG (∥p − p′ ∥1 ).
The function ωG is called the modulus of continuity of G.
Remark E.4. Uniform continuity can be usefully thought of as a relaxation of Lipschitzness. The
latter is the special case where ωG (δ) ≤ O(δ). We will always be concerned with the behavior of
ωG for small values of δ ≪ 1, and in this regime we may assume without loss of generality that
ωG (δ) ≤ O(δ α ) for some α. Moreover, we may assume that α ≤ 1, simply because if α > 1 then
δ α ≤ δ (for small δ). In particular, ωG can be assumed WLOG to be a concave, non-decreasing
function for small δ.
With this notation in hand, we are now ready to present the statement in full. The proof is provided
in the following section (E.3.1).
Theorem E.5 (Informally stated in last point of Theorem 3.3). Consider a k th -order predictor g :
X → ∆Y (k) that satisfies ϵ-k th -order calibration with respect to a partition [·]. Let G be any
concave entropy function that satisfies uniform continuity with modulus of continuity ωG : R≥0 →
R≥0 . Then, g’s estimate of aleatoric uncertainty with respect to G satisfies the following guarantee
for all x ∈ X :
                                                                      |Y|
                         AUG (g : x) − E [AU∗G (x)] ≤ ωG (ϵ + √ ).
                                         x∼[x]                       2 k

                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now move on to the first two statements of Theorem 3.3, both of which follow from an alterna-
tive means of estimating the true aleatoric uncertainty under k th -order calibration using polynomial
approximation.
In the rest of this section we specialize to binary labels Y = {0, 1}, where ∆Y may be identified
with [0, 1], and G : [0, 1] → R becomes a simple real-valued function on the unit interval. We now
state Jackson’s well-known theorem from approximation theory on approximating such functions
using polynomials.
Definition E.6. We say that G : [0, 1] → R admits a (d, α, B)-polynomial approximation if there
                                    Pd
exists a degree d polynomial p(t) = i=0 βi ti such that |βi | ≤ B for all i and
                                       sup |p(t) − G(t)| ≤ α.
                                      t∈[0,1]

Theorem E.7 (Jackson’s theorem; see e.g. (Rivlin, 1981, Thm 1.4)). Let G : [0, 1] → R be a
uniformly continuous function with modulus of continuity ωG . Then for any d > 0, G admits a
(d, O(ωG ( d1 )), exp(Θ(d)))-polynomial approximation.

The bound on the coefficients can be shown using standard bounds on the coefficients of the Cheby-
shev polynomials, but also holds more generally for any polynomial F that is bounded on the interval
(see e.g. (Natanson, 1964, Cor 2, p56)).
We now give an alternative to Theorem E.5 that can provide better error guarantees for particular
choices of G in regimes where k is quite small, and thus the 2|Y|  √ term arising in that theorem
                                                                     k
could dominate the overall error. Recall that we are working with the binary case (Y = {0, 1}) for
simplicity. In this case our mixture gives us a random variable on [0, 1], and we have the following
theorem:
Theorem E.8. Let Y = {0, 1} and let G : [0, 1] → R be a concave generalized entropy function
that has a (d, α, B)-polynomial approximation. Then, if g : X → ∆Y (k) is an ϵ-k th -order calibrated
predictor for any k ≥ d, then for each x ∈ X , we can use g to estimate Ex∼[x] [AU∗G (x)] to within
an additive error δ = α + d2 ϵB/2.

The full proof can be found in Section E.3.2. To apply this theorem, we need to show that commonly
used entropy functions have good polynomial approximations. We show that this is indeed the case
for the examples considered earlier. The Brier entropy or Gini impurity GBrier (p) = 4p(1 − p) is
trivial since it is itself a quadratic. Hence we get the following corollary (informally stated as the
first bullet point in Theorem 3.3):
Corollary E.9 (Corollary to Theorems E.8 and 2.6, Estimating Brier Entropy). Let ϵ > 0. Let
g : X → ∆Y (2) be an (ϵ/8)-second-order calibrated predictor. Let GBrier (p) = 4p(1 − p) denote
the Brier entropy. Then we can use g to obtain an estimate AU
                                                           dBrier such that with high probability

                                 dBrier − E [AU∗G (x)] ≤ ϵ.
                                 AU              Brier
                                                x∼[x]

In particular, we require only N ≥ 128(4 log(2) + log(1/δ))/ϵ2 2-snapshot examples from [x] for
this guarantee to hold with probability at least 1 − δ.

Proof. The Brier entropy presents a particularly easy case of Theorem E.8 because GBrier (p) =
4p(1 − p) is itself a polynomial of degree 2 with coefficients bounded in absolute value by 4.
Theorem E.8 thus guarantees that an (ϵ/8)-second-order calibrated predictor can estimate
Ex∼[x] [AU∗GBrier (f ∗ (x))] to within an additive error of ϵ.
Theorem 2.6 tells us that N ≥ 128(4 log(2) + log(1/δ))/ϵ2 samples from [x] are sufficient to
guarantee an ϵ/8-second-order-calibrated prediction for [x] with probability at least 1 − δ, thus
giving an additive error of ϵ when estimating the aleatoric uncertainty.

In the case of the Shannon entropy, we get the following corollary, captured in the second statement
of Theorem 3.3:


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Corollary E.10 (Corollary to Theorems E.8 and 2.5, Estimating Shannon Entropy). Let ϵ > 0. Let
                                                                           ln 4
g : X → ∆Y (k) be an ϵ′ -k th -order calibrated predictor where k ≥ Θ( 1ϵ       ), and ϵ′ ≤ exp(Θ(k))
                                                                                                ϵ
                                                                                                      .
Let GShannon (p) = −p log p − (1 − p) log(1 − p) denote the Shannon entropy. Then we can use g to
obtain an estimate AU
                   dShannon such that with high probability,

                                dShannon − E [AU∗G
                                AU                         (x)] ≤ ϵ.
                                                   Shannon
                                              x∼[x]

In particular, we require only N ≥ O(log(1/δ) exp(O((1/ϵ)ln 4 ))) k-snapshot examples from [x]
for this guarantee to hold with probability at least 1 − δ.

Proof. The Shannon entropy GShannon (p) = −p log p − (1 − p) log(1 − p) can be dealt with us-
ing Jackson’s theorem (Theorem E.7), which tells us that for any d ≥ 1, there exists a degree-d
polynomial F and constant C1 such that
                              sup |F (x) − GShannon (x)| ≤ C1 ωG (1/d),
                             x∈[0,1]

and the coefficients of F are bounded by exp(C2 d) for some constant C2 . Here ωG is the modulus
of continuity of GShannon (Definition E.3), defined by
             ωG (x) = sup{|GShannon (p) − GShannon (p′ )| | p, p′ ∈ [0, 1], |p − p′ | ≤ x}.

In the case of the binary entropy function, it is easy to see that the supremum is achieved at the
endpoints, e.g. at p = 0, p′ = x, and so ωG (x) = GShannon (x). Now, it turns out that the binary
entropy function satisfies the following useful bound (Topsøe, 2001):
                            GShannon (x) ≤ (4x(1 − x))1/ ln 4 ≤ (4x)1/ ln 4 .

                                                                      2C1 ln 4
Thus, to ensure C1 ωG (1/d) ≤ ϵ/2, it suffices to take k ≥ d ≥ 41

                                                                       ϵ       . We choose the minimal
                                                            ln 4
snapshot size that can achieve this, and take k = 14 2Cϵ 1       .
By Theorem E.8, for this value of k we are guaranteed that an ϵ′ -k th -order calibrated predictor will
give estimates of the aleatoric uncertainty with additive error at most ϵ/2 + k 2 ϵ′ eC2 k /2.
Thus, there exists a constant C3 such that it suffices to have ϵ′ ≤ eCϵ3 k to guarantee an error of at
most ϵ. Plugging this bound into Theorem 2.6 tells us that there exists a constant C4 such that N ≥
exp(C4 (1/ϵ)ln 4 ) log(1/δ) samples from [x] are enough to guarantee that the k th -order calibration
error in that partition is at most eCϵ3 k with probability at least 1 − δ, thus guaranteeing that the
overall additive approximation error of estimating the Shannon entropy on [x] will be at most ϵ with
probability at least 1 − δ.
We complete the proof by noting that exp(C4 (1/ϵ)ln 4 ) log(1/δ) = O(log(1/δ) exp(O((1/ϵ)ln 4 ))).


E.3.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.5
We restate the theorem for readability:
Theorem E.11 (Restatement of Theorem E.5). Consider a k th -order predictor g : X → ∆Y (k) that
satisfies ϵ-k th -order calibration with respect to a partition [·]. Let G be any concave entropy function
that satisfies uniform continuity with modulus of continuity ωG : R≥0 → R≥0 . Then, g’s estimate of
aleatoric uncertainty with respect to G satisfies the following guarantee for all x ∈ X :
                                                               |Y|
                          AUG (g : x) − E [AU∗G (x)] ≤ ωG (ϵ + √ ).
                                       x∼[x]                  2 k

Proof of Theorem E.5. Consider any x ∈ X . Using the definition of aleatoric uncertainty with
respect to G, we can rewrite the distance between the true and estimated AU as

               AUG (g : x) − E [AU∗G (x)] =             E [G(p)] −          E      [G(p∗ )]
                               x∼[x]                  p∼g(x)           p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let µ be the optimal coupling of g(x) and f ∗ ([x]), i.e.,
                                 µ :=        arg min               E
                                                                   ∗    ′
                                                                            [∥p − p∗ ∥1 ].
                                        µ′ ∈Γ(g(x),f ∗ ([x])) (p,p )∼µ


We can rewrite the above expression in terms of µ as



          AUG (g : x) − E [AU∗G (x)]
                               x∼[x]


          =       E       [G(p) − G(p∗ )]
              (p,p∗ )∼µ

          ≤      E     [|G(p) − G(p∗ )|]
              (p,p∗ )∼µ

          ≤      E     [ωG (∥p − p∗ ∥1 )]                       (uniform continuity of G)
              (p,p∗ )∼µ

          ≤ ωG (      E      [∥p − p∗ ∥1 ])                     (Jensen’s Inequality + Concavity of ωG )
                   (p,p∗ )∼µ

See Remark E.4 for a discussion of why we can assume that ωG is concave.
Because g is ϵ-k th -order calibrated, by Theorem 2.4, we can guarantee that it is also (ϵ + 2|Y|
                                                                                               √ )-
                                                                                                k
higher-order calibrated, and thus we are guaranteed that W1 (g(x), f ∗ ([x])) ≤ ϵ + 2|Y|
                                                                                      √ .
                                                                                       k

Expanding out the definition of ℓ1 -Wasserstein distance, because µ was defined as the optimal cou-
pling of g(x) and f ∗ ([x]), we have
                                                                                                               |Y|
 W1 (g(x), f ∗ ([x])) =         arg min             E
                                                    ∗
                                                               [∥p − p∗ ∥1 ] =        E∗   [∥p − p∗ ∥1 ] ≤ ϵ + √ .
                           µ′ ∈Γ(g(x),f ∗ ([x])) (p,p   )∼µ′                       (p,p )∼µ                   2 k

We can use this upper bound to further simplify our above inequality as

                      AUG (g : x) − E [AU∗G (x)] ≤ ωG (                        E     [∥p − p∗ ∥1 ])
                                          x∼[x]                          (p,p∗ )∼µ

                                                                            |Y|
                                                                  ≤ ωG (ϵ + √ ),
                                                                           2 k
giving us the desired upper bound on the error of our aleatoric uncertainty estimate. Note that the
final step assumes ωG is non-decreasing. We refer to Remark E.4 for a discussion of why this is a
reasonable assumption.

E.3.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.8
Theorem E.12 (Restatement of Theorem E.8). Let Y = {0, 1} and let G : [0, 1] → R be a concave
generalized entropy function that has (d, α, B)-polynomial approximations. Then, if g : X →
∆Y (k) is an ϵ-k th -order calibrated predictor for any k ≥ d, then for each x ∈ X , we can use g to
estimate Ex∼[x] [AU∗G (x)] to within an additive error δ = α + d2 ϵB/2.

At a high-level, the proof will leverage Lemma 2.5, which tells us that k th -order calibrated predictors
can be used to obtain good estimates for the first k moments of the true bayes mixture. Because a
degree-d polynomial of a random variable p can be computed using only the first d moments of p,
we can use our moment estimates to compute any degree d ≤ k polynomial, which will provide a
good estimate of aleatoric uncertainty when that polynomial closely approximates G.

Proof of Theorem E.8. Fix some x ∈ X . By assumption of the theorem, G has (d, α, B)-polynomial
                                                                           Pd
approximations. This means that there exists a degree-d polynomial c(t) = i=0 βi ti such that for
all i ∈ {0, ..., d}, |βi | ≤ B, and for all t ∈ [0, 1], |c(t) − G(t)| ≤ α.


                                                           35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The polynomial c can thus be used to approximate Ex∼[x] [AU∗G (x)] to within an additive error of
α:

                   E [c(f ∗ (x))] − E [AU∗G (x)] =                         E [c(f ∗ (x))] − E [G(f ∗ (x))]
               x∼[x]                x∼[x]                               x∼[x]                  x∼[x]
                                                                                       ∗          ∗
                                                                 ≤ E [|c(f (x)) − G(f (x))|]
                                                                     x∼[x]

                                                                 ≤ E [α]
                                                                     x∼[x]

                                                                 =α

We now want to show that we can obtain a good estimate of Ex∼[x] [c(f ∗ (x))] only with access to
g. We expand out the definition of c to have
                                                        Xd
                                    E [c(f ∗ (x))] = E [   βi (f ∗ (x))i ]
                                   x∼[x]                           x∼[x]
                                                                           i=0
                                                                   d
                                                                   X
                                                             =           βi E [f ∗ (x)i ]
                                                                            x∼[x]
                                                                   i=0

Let m1 , ..., md ∈ R≥0 be the moment estimates of Ex∼[x] [f ∗ (x)1 ], ..., Ex∼[x] [f ∗ (x)d ], respectively
that are obtained from g via Lemma 2.5. Because d ≤ k, for each i ∈ [d], the lemma guarantees that
                                    |mi − E [f ∗ (x)i ]| ≤ iϵ/2 ≤ dϵ/2.                                                    (E.3)
                                              x∼[x]


Substituting in each of these moment estimates for Ex∼[x] [f ∗ (x)i ] in the computation of c will give
a d2 ϵB/2-additive approximation of Ex∼[x] [c(f ∗ (x))]:

                                   d
                                                 !           d                                         d
                                                                                                                     !
                                   X                         X                                         X
               ∗                                                                   ∗       i
     E [c(f (x))] −         β0 +         βi mi           =          βi E [f (x) ] −            β0 +          βi mi
   x∼[x]                                                                 x∼[x]
                                   i=1                       i=0                                       i=1
                                                             d
                                                             X
                                                         ≤         |βi |     E [f ∗ (x)i ] − mi
                                                                           x∼[x]
                                                             i=1
                                                               d
                                                               X
                                                         ≤B                E [f ∗ (x)i ] − mi      (|βi | ≤ B for all i ∈ [d])
                                                                         x∼[x]
                                                               i=1
                                                               d
                                                               X
                                                         ≤B             dϵ/2                                               (E.3)
                                                               i=1
                                                                2
                                                         = Bd ϵ/2.
                                                  Pd
Putting all our pieces together, we show that β0 + i=1 βi mi , which is computed only using g,
gives an additive α + d2 Bϵ/2-approximation to Ex∼[x] [AU∗G (x)]. By the triangle inequality,

                                            d
                                                             !
                                            X
               E    [AU∗G (x)] −    β0 +          βi mi
           x∼[x]
                                            i=1
                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                        X
           ≤       E   [AU∗G (x)] −                  ∗
                                         E [c(f (x))] +                                ∗
                                                                           E [c(f (x))] −        β0 +         βi m i
               x∼[x]                  x∼[x]                              x∼[x]
                                                                                                        i=1
           ≤ α + Bd2 ϵ/2

giving the desired additive approximation.



                                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    H IGHER - ORDER PREDICTION SETS
In this section we describe how to obtain prediction intervals, or more generally prediction sets, from
higher-order calibration. These prediction sets have the property that they capture the true f ∗ (x)
with a certain prescribed probability when x is drawn conditionally at random from an equivalence
class. We stress that these are not prediction sets for outcomes at a particular instance, but rather
higher-order prediction sets for entire ground truth probability vectors ranging over a group of in-
stances; they are subsets of the simplex ∆Y and not of Y. In this way they provide an operational
way of expressing and using our epistemic (rather than merely predictive) uncertainty.17
Definition F.1 (Higher-order prediction set). A set S ⊆ ∆Y is said to be a higher-order prediction
set for the Bayes mixture f ∗ ([x]) with coverage 1 − α if the following holds:
                                           P [f ∗ (x) ∈ S] = 1 − α.
                                         x∼[x]


The main idea is simple. If f is perfectly higher-order calibrated for a certain partition [·], then for
every x, f (x) matches f ∗ ([x]) exactly as a mixture. Thus any set S that captures 1 − α mass under
f (x) also captures 1 − α mass under f ∗ ([x]):
                    P [f ∗ (x) ∈ S] =            P        [p∗ ∈ S] =     P   [p ∈ S] = 1 − α.                (F.1)
                  x∼[x]                   p∗ ∼f ∗ ([x])                p∼f (x)

In this way we can take our prediction f (x) (which in principle we have a complete description of),
take any set S that captures 1 − α of its mass (there are many natural ways of doing so), and use it
directly as a 1 − α prediction set for f ∗ (x) when x ∼ [x].
This argument becomes slightly more technically involved when we have only approximate higher-
order or k th -order calibration. Essentially, if we only have Wasserstein closeness between f (x) and
f ∗ ([x]), then we need to enlarge the set S slightly in order to account for the fact that a typical draw
from f (x) is slightly far from a corresponding (coupled) draw from f ∗ ([x]). For intuition, consider
the binary labels setting, where f (x) and f ∗ ([x]) both reduce to distributions on [0, 1]. Suppose that
the density of f (x) is exactly that of f ∗ ([x]) but just shifted by ϵ (this is a particularly simple case
of ϵ-Wasserstein closeness). In this case we simply need to consider an ϵ-neighborhood of a 1 − α
set under f (x) to obtain 1 − α coverage under f ∗ ([x]).
We now formalize this idea. As in the rest of the paper, we specialize to the ℓ1 -Wasserstein distance.
Definition F.2 (Neighborhood of a set). Let S ⊆ ∆Y be a subset of the simplex, regarded as
probability vectors in Rℓ . Then for any δ > 0, the δ-neighborhood of S is all vectors with ℓ1 -
distance at most δ from S:
                               Sδ = {p ∈ ∆Y | ∃p′ ∈ S : ∥p − p′ ∥1 ≤ δ}.
Theorem F.3 (Higher-order prediction sets from higher-order calibration). Let f : X → ∆∆Y be
ϵ-higher-order calibrated wrt a partition [·]. Fix any x ∈ X and let π = f (x), π ∗ = f ∗ ([x]). Then
for any set S ⊆ ∆Y and any δ > 0, we have
                                   ϵ                                         ϵ
                      P [p ∈ S] − ≤ ∗ P ∗ [p∗ ∈ Sδ ] ≤ P [p ∈ S2δ ] + .                          (F.2)
                    p∼π            δ p ∼π                   p∼π              δ
In particular, if S contains 1 − α of the mass under f (x), then Sδ is a prediction set for f ∗ ([x]) with
coverage at least 1 − α − δϵ .

Proof. Since f is ϵ-higher-order calibrated, we know that W1 (π, π ∗ ) ≤ ϵ. Let µ be the correspond-
ing optimal coupling of p, p∗ , with marginals being π, π ∗ respectively, and guaranteeing that
                                              E      [∥p − p∗ ∥1 ] ≤ ϵ.
                                          (p,p∗ )∼µ

Letting η = p − p∗ under this coupling, we see that E[∥η∥1 ] ≤ ϵ. By Markov’s inequality, we have
P[∥η∥1 > δ] ≤ ϵ/δ.
   17
      It is worth noting that this type of coverage guarantee can only be directly evaluated when we have access to
the true f ∗ (x) values, or at least approximately as k-snapshots. Of course, even when we do not, the guarantee
still holds mathematically.


                                                           37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now prove the left-hand inequality. We have
          P[p ∈ S] = P[p∗ + η ∈ S]
                   = P[(p∗ + η ∈ S) ∧ (∥η∥1 ≤ δ)] + P[(p∗ + η ∈ S) ∧ (∥η∥1 > δ)]
                                  ϵ
                   ≤ P[p∗ ∈ Sδ ] + .
                                  δ
Here the second term is bounded by Markov’s inequality, and the first term is bounded because the
event (p∗ + η ∈ S) ∧ (∥η∥1 ≤ δ) is a subset of the event p∗ ∈ S + δ. Rearranging gives the
left-hand inequality.
The right-hand inequality is very similar:
         P[p∗ ∈ Sδ ] = P[p − η ∈ Sδ ]
                     = P[(p − η ∈ Sδ ) ∧ (∥η∥1 ≤ δ)] + P[(p − η ∈ Sδ ) ∧ (∥η∥1 > δ)]
                                     ϵ
                     ≤ P[p ∈ S2δ ] + .
                                     δ



                                          √ ϵ parameter is the one that is fixed first. In this case a
In practical situations, we expect that the
reasonable choice is to√take α = δ = ϵ in the theorem above and obtain prediction sets with
coverage at least 1 − 2 ϵ.
Note that this theorem is also applicable if we only have k th -order calibration, as we can leverage
Theorem 2.4 to obtain approximate higher-order calibration from approximate k th -order calibration.

F.1   M OMENT- BASED PREDICTION SETS FROM k TH - ORDER CALIBRATION

We now describe a slightly different way of obtaining prediction sets directly using k th -order cali-
bration, instead of passing through higher-order calibration and using Theorem F.3 as a black box.
The idea is to use Theorem 2.5 to approximate the moments of the Bayes mixture, and directly apply
a moment-based concentration inequality to the true Bayes mixture. Throughout this subsection we
specialize to the binary case.
We will need to slightly adapt Theorem 2.5 to approximate the central moments E[(p − E[p])k ]
of the Bayes mixture as opposed to the moments about 0. In fact, for the purposes of generating
prediction sets it will be more convenient to directly bound the moments around our estimate m1 of
the mean.
Corollary F.4. Let Y = {0, 1}, and let g : X → ∆Y (k) be ϵ-k th -order calibrated with respect to a
partition [·]. Fix any x ∈ X . Let (m1 , . . . , mk ) ∈ Rn≥0 be a vector of moment estimates obtained
from Theorem 2.5 such that for each i ∈ [k],

                                    mi − E [f ∗ (x)i ] ≤ iϵ/2.
                                             x∼[x]

Then we can obtain a k th central moment estimate ck such that

                          ck − E [(f ∗ (x) − m1 )k ] ≤ kϵ(1 + m1 )k /2.
                                x∼[x]


Proof. For brevity, let p ∼ f ∗ ([x]) denote a random draw from the Bayes mixture. Observe that
                                                   k
                                                  X    k
                                E[(p − m1 )k ] =          E[pi ]mk−i
                                                                 1 .
                                                  i=0
                                                       i

Our estimate ck is naturally formed by replacing each E[pi ] term by mi (taking m0 = 1):
                                             k
                                           X     k
                                     ck :=          mi m1k−i .
                                            i=0
                                                  i


                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The error in this estimate can be bounded as follows:
                                                 k
                                                X     k
                         ck − E[(p − m1 )k ] ≤           mi − E[pi ] mk−i
                                                                      1
                                                i=0
                                                      i
                                                 k
                                                X     k iϵ k−i
                                             ≤            m
                                                i=0
                                                      i 2 1
                                                    k
                                                kϵ X k
                                             ≤            mk−i
                                                            1
                                                 2 i=0 i
                                                           kϵ
                                                     =        (1 + m1 )k .
                                                           2


We can now obtain prediction sets using a simple moment-based concentration inequality.
Theorem F.5. Let Y = {0, 1}, and let g : X → ∆Y (k) be ϵ-k th -order calibrated with respect to a
partition [·]. Fix any x ∈ X . Let ϵ, α > 0 be given. Let (m1 , . . . , mk ) and ck be as in the previous
lemma (Corollary F.4). Let ϵ′ = kϵ(1 + m1 )k /2. Suppose that δ > 0 is chosen such that
                                                         1/k
                                                ck + ϵ′

                                         δ≥                  .
                                                   α
Then the interval [m1 − δ, m1 + δ] is a prediction set for f ∗ ([x]) with coverage at least 1 − α.

Proof. Again for brevity let p ∼ f ∗ ([x]) denote a random draw from the Bayes mixture. Let
ϵ′ = kϵ          k
      2 (1 + m1 ) . Assume for simplicity k is even (otherwise take k − 1). By Markov’s inequality
and the previous lemma, we have
                                                     E[(p − m1 )k ]
                               P[|p − m1 | ≥ δ] ≤
                                                          δk
                                                     ck + ϵ′
                                                  ≤
                                                       δk
                                                  ≤ α,
by our choice of δ.

For context, it is helpful to consider the ideal case when ϵ = 0 and we have exact values for all the
moments up to degree k. In this case ck is exactly E[(p − E[p])k ] and δ can be set to
                                        E[(p − E[p])k ]1/k
                                                           ,
                                               α1/k
which is the best one can hope for using only moment-based concentration.

G         A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
G.1        E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

We configure our wide ResNets on CIFAR-10 using the “Naive NN” formula from Ta-
ble 2 of Johnson et al. (2024) and the Python implementation of the network from the
uncertainty baselines package18 (Nado et al., 2021). We use a learning rate of 3.799e−3
and relatively large weight decay of 3.656e−1. We train the model for 50 epochs with the
AdamW optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014; Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017). For the first epoch, we
warm up the learning rate and apply cosine decay thereafter. All models are trained using Aug-
Mix data augmentation (Hendrycks et al., 2020) with the standard hyperparameters used in the
uncertainty baselines package.
To calibrate the model for each value of k, we create k-snapshots by sampling k labels at random
once for each image in the calibration set. We do not sample multiple snapshots per image.
    18
         https://github.com/google/uncertainty-baselines


                                                           39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            M ETHOD             A LEATORIC ERROR           ACC
                           E NSEMBLE               0.308 ± 0.018       0.932 ± 0.004
                             E PINET               0.307 ± 0.006       0.900 ± 0.008
                      1- SNAPSHOT MODEL            0.501 ± 0.006       0.912 ± 0.004
                      2- SNAPSHOT MODEL            0.307 ± 0.010       0.912 ± 0.004
                      5- SNAPSHOT MODEL            0.158 ± 0.010       0.912 ± 0.006
                     10- SNAPSHOT MODEL            0.088 ± 0.010       0.912 ± 0.004
                     50- SNAPSHOT MODEL           0.026 ± 0.006        0.912 ± 0.004

Table 1: Expected pointwise aleatoric error (Eq. 4.1) of various methods for uncertainty estimation.
95% confidence intervals are computed across 50 random resamplings of the test and calibration
sets, where applicable.

G.2      E VALUATING OTHER UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION METHODS IN TERMS OF
         HIGHER - ORDER CALIBRATION

While the snapshot algorithms we present in Section 2.2 provably tend towards higher-order cali-
bration, they are not a requirement for higher-order calibration. It can in principle be achieved by
any mixture model or higher-order predictor, even one trained without explicit access to snapshots
at all. In this section, we measure how well-calibrated other methods for uncertainty estimation are
on the CIFAR-10 image classification task.
In addition to higher-order calibrated snapshot models from our work, we evaluate the following
methods:
Naive decomposition: As a sanity check, we train a 1-snapshot predictor and treat it as a naive
mixture model (i.e., one that places all of its probability mass on the lone distribution output by the
predictor).
Ensemble: One simple way to obtain a mixture model is to train N independent 1-snapshot predic-
tors (let’s call them f1 , ..., fN : X → ∆Y) and output the uniform mixture over their predicted label
distributions: g(x) = Unif(f1 (x), ..., fN (x)). Concretely, we use the same network architecture we
calibrated in Section 4 and, as in Johnson et al. (2024), we use N = 8.
Epinet: A popular method for uncertainty estimation is the Epinet (Osband et al., 2023). In addition
to regular inputs, Epinets are conditioned on an additional random vector z. By integrating over
possible values of z, it is possible to elicit joint predictions from the network (or, in the terminology
of this paper, snapshot distributions). Epinets are usually instantiated with a pair of MLPs affixed
to the end of a network, trained in tandem with or after the main trunk. One MLP is frozen at
initialization; the other is not. Both are conditioned on z and the penultimate hidden state of the main
network. Loosely speaking, the Epinet learns to mitigate noise introduced by the frozen MLP with
the trainable one, and it learns to do this best in regions of the input space encountered most often
during training (that is to say, regions of the input space where there is least epistemic uncertainty).
We attach such MLPs to a regular 1-snapshot CIFAR-10 model and train both in tandem for about
20 additional epochs, using the default hyperparameters in the enn Python library19 (Osband et al.,
2023) (notably, 50-dimensional hidden layers, 20-dimensional index vectors, and 5 index vectors
per training input) and stopping early based on loss on our validation set. Index vectors are sampled
from N (0, Id ), where d = 20 is the dimension of the index vectors, and then normalized. At
evaluation time, we use 50 index vectors per input and treat the resulting cloud of predictions as
the predicted mixture at that point. If f (x, z) is our finished epinet, then our final model is g(x) =
Unif(f (x, z1 ), ..., f (x, z50 )) for some z1 , . . . , z50 ∼ N (0, Id ).
Results are given in Table 1. We see that calibration with large snapshots is a simple and effective
path to strong higher-order calibration.

G.3      C OMPARING OUR HIGHER - ORDER CALIBRATION ALGORITHMS

In this section we compare our two algorithms for achieving higher-order calibration (namely learn-
ing directly from snapshots and post-hoc calibration; see Section 2.2) on the FER+ (Barsoum et al.,
  19
       https://github.com/google-deepmind/enn


                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 M ETHOD                   N O . SNAPSHOTS      A LEATORIC ERROR         ACC
        L EARNING FROM SNAPSHOTS                    1                 0.615              0.802
                P OST- HOC                          1                 0.615              0.802
        L EARNING FROM SNAPSHOTS                    2                 0.418              0.818
                P OST- HOC                          2                 0.349              0.802
        L EARNING FROM SNAPSHOTS                    3                 0.369              0.823
                P OST- HOC                          3                 0.217              0.802
        L EARNING FROM SNAPSHOTS                    4                 0.355              0.819
                P OST- HOC                          4                 0.139              0.802
                P OST- HOC                         10                 0.041              0.802

Table 2: Expected pointwise aleatoric error (Eq. 4.1) of two higher-order calibration algorithms (see
Section 2.2 for details) evaluated on FER+.

2016) dataset. We use this rather than CIFAR-10H for a fairer comparison since the learning from
snapshots algorithm requires more multi-label data to be effective, and FER+ is a larger dataset than
CIFAR-10H (36,000 vs. 10,000).
FER+ is a facial recognition dataset of approx. 36,000 48 × 48 grayscale images with 10 possible
classes (emotions such as happy, neutral, sad, etc.), and with 10 independent human label annota-
tions per image. Thus Y is the space of 10 possible emotions, and for each image x ∈ X , f ∗ (x) is the
uniform distribution over its 10 independent annotations. There is substantial disagreement among
annotators; the annotations (when converted to a distribution over Y) have a mean entropy of 0.6
natural units (STD 0.5). In this paper’s terminology, this means that the mean aleatoric uncertainty
E[AU∗H (x)] = E[H(f ∗ (x))] = 0.6, where H is the Shannon entropy. Note that for training and
evaluation we use a further 80/10/10 train/val/test split of the dataset. For the post-hoc calibration
algorithm, the calibration set is composed of half of the test set.
Results are given in Table 2. At least at this model scale, it appears that the post-hoc algorithm
achieves strictly better calibration on FER+ for a given number of snapshots than learning from
snapshots directly. While the latter has shown promise in Johnson et al. (2024) and achieves non-
trivial calibration, it has disadvantages compared to the former: unlike the post-hoc calibration
scheme, it requires modifying the parameters of the predictor and also training an output layer of
size that grows exponentially with the number of snapshots. However, note that this is not a perfect
apples-to-apples comparison as the partitions induced by the two methods are not necessarily the
same.

G.4   B INARY REGRESSION

As a sanity check, we verify that it is possible to create higher-order calibrated models on the syn-
thetic 1D binary regression task from Johnson et al. (2024), which fixes a specific distribution of
coins p(x) and a bias distribution p(y|x) with both high- and low-frequency variation. Specifically,
we train the neural network defined in their Algorithm 2 to predict 1-snapshots from a training set
sampled from the synthetic distribution. We then sample a separate calibration set of 5000 snap-
shots, apply the algorithm from Section 2.2 to the predictor, and finally measure ϵ (as specified in
Definition 2.3) on a third test set.
We find that, indeed, a predictor calibrated in this fashion achieves calibration error ϵ lower than
naive predictors that output uniform distributions over snapshots or the snapshot distribution that
results from fair coins. A 1-snapshot predictor pretrained for 10,000 batches and calibrated with
5,000 10-snapshots reaches ϵ = 0.400 ± 0.23; both naive baselines achieve 0.959 ± 0.014, close
to the maximum value of 1. If we relax the condition in Definition 2.3 somewhat and exclude
the noisiest 5% of the equivalence classes, the 95% percentile of error, the same model reaches
0.212 ± 0.089. All 95% confidence intervals are taken over 50 resamplings of the calibration and
test sets.
For a more easily interpretable measure of higher-order calibration, we also compute the mean
aleatoric estimation error, as defined in Equation 4.1. See Figure 6 for results. As previously,
increasing the size of the snapshots used for calibration does indeed improve estimates of aleatoric
uncertainty.



                                                  41
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       0.8                                                                                                                              1.0                                                                        Ground truth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Predicted
                       0.7
                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                       0.6

                       0.5                                                                                                                              0.6

                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                       0.3

                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                       0.1

                       0.0                                                                                                                              0.0
                                            0.0             0.5         1.0              1.5          2.0         2.5              3.0                          0.0         0.5    1.0             1.5                 2.0          2.5          3.0
      Figure 5: The simple binary regression task from Johnson et al. (2024). (Positive) inputs are drawn from a
      normal distribution (left), and outputs are determined by a fixed function p(y|x) (right) with low- and high-
      frequency components, the latter of which our simple predictor (k = 1) fails to learn completely.
Mean absolute error (aleatoric)


                                  0.5

                                  0.4

                                  0.3

                                  0.2

                                  0.1

                                  0.0
                                            0                                       10                                      20                                      30                              40                                      50
                                                                                                                                           Snapshot size
                                        Predicted AU = 0.54                                                       Predicted AU = 0.56                                                   Predicted AU = 0.52
                                        Ground truth AU = 0.53                                                    Ground truth AU = 0.57                                                Ground truth AU = 0.53


                         0.0                0.1       0.2        0.3   0.4    0.5         0.6   0.7         0.0       0.1        0.2       0.3        0.4     0.5     0.6   0.7   0.0       0.1       0.2        0.3         0.4    0.5   0.6      0.7
                                                                                                                         Entropy of mixture components
      Figure 6: Top: Average aleatoric uncertainty estimation error (Eq. (4.1)) of binary regression models calibrated
      using snapshots of increasing size. Bottom: For three of the highest-entropy equivalence classes, we depict
      the distribution of entropies ranging over components of the predicted mixture (gray) and the Bayes mixture
      (green). We see that the distributions and in particular the means are similar.


                                                                                                                                                 42
