Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ETALIC : M ETA -L EARNING I N -C ONTEXT
WITH P ROTEIN L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Jacob Beck∗, Shikha Surana, Manus McAuliffe, Oliver Bent, Thomas D. Barrett,
 Juan Jose Garau Luis, & Paul Duckworth
 InstaDeep | https://github.com/instadeepai/metalic
 Boston, MA, USA & London, UK
                                               A BSTRACT
            Predicting the biophysical and functional properties of proteins is essential for in
            silico protein design. Machine learning has emerged as a promising technique for
            such prediction tasks. However, the relative scarcity of in vitro annotations means
            that these models often have little, or no, specific data on the desired fitness pre-
            diction task. As a result of limited data, protein language models (PLMs) are
            typically trained on general protein sequence modeling tasks, and then fine-tuned,
            or applied zero-shot, to protein fitness prediction. When no task data is available,
            the models make strong assumptions about the correlation between the protein se-
            quence likelihood and fitness scores. In contrast, we propose meta-learning over a
            distribution of standard fitness prediction tasks, and demonstrate positive transfer
            to unseen fitness prediction tasks. Our method, called Metalic (Meta-Learning
            In-Context), uses in-context learning and fine-tuning, when data is available, to
            adapt to new tasks. Crucially, fine-tuning enables considerable generalization,
            even though it is not accounted for during meta-training. Our fine-tuned models
            achieve strong results with 18 times fewer parameters than state-of-the-art mod-
            els. Moreover, our method sets a new state-of-the-art in low-data settings on Pro-
            teinGym, an established fitness-prediction benchmark. Due to data scarcity, we
            believe meta-learning will play a pivotal role in advancing protein engineering.

1       I NTRODUCTION
The accurate prediction of functional and biophysical properties of proteins, collectively referred
to here as fitness, is a critical challenge in the physical sciences with far-reaching implications for
medical research, agriculture, and drug discovery. For example, fitness prediction can be used to
optimize properties such as the binding affinity of a monoclonal antibody therapy to its target or the
thermostability of enzymes functioning at high temperatures. While protein fitness can be measured
in vitro, the process is laborious and time-consuming. Consequently, machine learning models have
emerged as a powerful tool to predict fitness directly from amino acid sequences in silico. However,
due to the complex, high-dimensional relationship between protein sequences and fitness, and the
limited availability of high-quality data, accurate fitness prediction is a challenge.
Proteins can be encoded as sequences of characters representing amino acids, making protein lan-
guage models (PLMs) effective for modeling them (Madani et al., 2020; Rives et al., 2021; Rao
et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022; Notin et al., 2023; Truong Jr & Bepler, 2024). By predicting masked
amino acids, or subsequent amino acids, over known proteins at scale, PLMs can capture much of
the structure and resultant properties deriving from the amino acid sequence. While PLMs are not
directly trained to predict fitness, they are trained to model the likelihood of naturally occurring pro-
teins, which has been found to correlate strongly with their fitness (Truong Jr & Bepler, 2024). In
practice, large PLMs are fine-tuned on downstream protein fitness data for regression. While highly
effective, PLMs provide limited utility given severely limited data, or no data. With limited data,
learning the correct regression is difficult, even with informative pre-trained representations. With
no data, it must be assumed that protein fitness is solely a function of protein likelihood (Truong Jr
& Bepler, 2024; Hawkins-Hooker et al., 2024), and for masked language models, it is also assumed
that each amino acid contributes independently to fitness (Meier et al., 2021; Notin et al., 2024).
While limited or no data may be available for specific protein fitness prediction tasks, there are
often other tasks that can serve as a valuable source of guidance. For example, rather than assuming
    ∗
        Jacob Beck@alumni.brown.edu


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Pre-training                Meta-training                 Fine-tuning
                       Protein language modeling        Fitness prediction           Fitness prediction
                              MVLSPADKTNVKA                                           MVLSPADKTNVKA   1.0
Conventional protein          AWGKVGAHAGEY                                            AWGKVGAHAGEY    2.1
                              GAEALERMFLSFP                                           GAEALERMFLSFP   0.0
 fitness prediction                 …                                                       …         …
     approaches               TTKTYFPHFDLSH                                           TTKTYFPHFDLSH   1.4
                              GSAQVKGHGKKV                                            GSAQVKGHGKKV    0.0


                                                        QLAKEDLISYEAIS 0.0
                              MVLSPADKTNVKA              MKIILFLIATTVAFG 0.00.6
                                                        GNTKDTAASNNAL
                                                            ADALTNAVAHVDD 0.1         MVLSPADKTNVKA   1.0
                              AWGKVGAHAGEY               AKGIVQVDNKFSD 1.21.7
                                                        LQEVDSWLDSTLI
                                                            MPNALSALSDLHA 0.4         AWGKVGAHAGEY    2.1
                              GAEALERMFLSFP              TVKSLIEKFLENAG  …3.4
    Our approach                                               …
                                                            HKLRVDPVNFKLL 1.0
                                                                …
                                                                                      GAEALERMFLSFP   0.0
                                    …                   PVTAYILTGAGLPS   9.3…
                                                                   …            …           …         …
                              TTKTYFPHFDLSH             SRTGGYSQFTNW 3.50.0
                                                         KHFKFLGGSNDRV
                                                           SHCLLVTLAAHLPA 0.3         TTKTYFPHFDLSH   1.4
                              GSAQVKGHGKKV               PAGKGVIVAVNLTR 5.4
                                                           EFTPAVHASLDKFL 0.7         GSAQVKGHGKKV    0.0
                                                           Multiple tasks

                 Amount of
                data needed

Figure 1: An overview of meta-learning for protein fitness prediction. PLMs are trained over
massive quantities of unlabeled data. Using meta-learning, we also train over a smaller quantity of
labelled fitness data. Using this extra data is critical given limited data for fine-tuning at test time.

that fitness is solely a function of protein likelihood, when no data is available for a given task, we
can use data from other tasks to learn the relationship between PLM embeddings and fitness. Due
to advances in high-throughput assays, such as deep mutational scanning Fowler & Fields (2014),
data from other tasks is available to learn this relationship. One example is ProteinGym (Notin
et al., 2024), which compiles over one hundred distinct fitness prediction tasks. Training over such
a distribution of related tasks, to reason about new tasks, is referred to as meta-learning (Huisman
et al., 2021; Hospedales et al., 2021; Beck et al., 2023a).
To address the challenge of limited data in protein fitness prediction, we propose Metalic, integrat-
ing in-context meta-learning, protein language models, and fine-tuning. Metalic builds on top of
PLM embeddings and fine-tuning methods, but additionally, unlike baseline methods, adds a meta-
learning phase over other protein prediction tasks. While some PLMs use in-context data (Rao et al.,
2021; Notin et al., 2022; 2023; Truong Jr & Bepler, 2024), these methods do not meta-learn how to
use their limited context for protein fitness prediction. The meta-learning phase is depicted in Fig. 1,
and is critical to learning the relationship between PLM embeddings and fitness, given the limited fit-
ness data available in each task at test time. While some meta-learning methods combine in-context
learning and fine-tuning (Rusu et al., 2018; Vuorio et al., 2019), they do so by using computationally
expensive higher-order gradients to account for fine-tuning during meta-learning. Crucially, Metalic
leverages in-context meta-learning, and then subsequent fine-tuning, without accounting for fine-
tuning during meta-learning. This novel combination is particularly computationally efficient, and
enables Metalic to outperform more complicated methods for meta-learning.
We present Metalic, an in-context meta-learning approach to tackle the problem of protein fitness
prediction in low-data settings, and make the following contributions:
 • We introduce a method that efficiently combines in-context meta-learning with PLMs and fine-
   tuning for protein fitness prediction.
 • We advance state-of-the-art (SOTA) for zero-shot protein fitness prediction on the ProteinGym
   benchmark (Notin et al., 2024).
 • We attain strong performance for few-shot fitness prediction with 18 times fewer parameters.
 • We ablate each component of our method to demonstrate the contributions of each part and
   underscore their necessity.
 • We empirically validate the superiority of our method to alternative forms of meta-learning.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Meta-Learning Meta-learning aims to create a sample-efficient learning algorithm by training
over a distribution of tasks. The goal is to learn algorithms such that they can rapidly adapt to
new tasks during inference. This inference-time adaptation is often called the inner loop, for which
there are two primary forms found in the literature: gradient-based meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017;
Zintgraf et al., 2019) and in-context meta-learning (Mishra et al., 2017; Nguyen & Grover, 2022).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gradient-based and in-context algorithms differ both in their computational efficiency and capacity
for out-of-distribution generalization. Gradient-based approaches explicitly adapt model parameters
within in the inner loop using standard gradient-based learning. Commonly, a parameter initializa-
tion is learned that can be adapted to new tasks with only a few gradient steps (Finn et al., 2017;
Zintgraf et al., 2019; Vuorio et al., 2019). However, this comes with considerable computational
overhead – due to meta-gradients when differentiating the inner loop – which makes gradient-based
meta-learning less suitable for large models. Alternatively, in-context meta-learning adapts by con-
ditioning a sequence model on a task-specific dataset in context. These methods condition on the
data points over which gradient-based approaches would train (Santoro et al., 2016; Mishra et al.,
2017; Beck et al., 2024; 2023b). Such methods are typically more sample- and compute-efficient
than gradient-based methods, but perform worse on out-of-distribution tasks given the lack of ex-
plicit gradient-based learning in the inner loop (Beck et al., 2023a). Rather than training for in-
context learning, the in-context learning of pre-trained large language models can also be used to
perform meta-learning (Coda-Forno et al., 2023); however, this lacks generalization guarantees and
requires fitting all tasks in context simultaneously, which is not possible given our data (Section 4.1).
In Metalic, we only train for in-context meta-learning, but find this is still compatible with task-
specific fine-tuning. In the meta-reinforcement learning setting, this combination has been shown to
be possible by increasing task-specific data for fine-tuning (Xiong et al., 2021). In contrast, we eval-
uate in the supervised setting and do not give increased data at inference time. While prior work has
combined gradient-based and in-context meta-learning (Rusu et al., 2018; Vuorio et al., 2019), these
works compute expensive meta-gradients to learn how to account for fine-tuning. Despite not ex-
plicitly meta-learning gradient-based adaptation, we find in-context meta-learning alone provides a
strong foundation for subsequent fine-tuning and that both aspects are critical for high performance.
Likelihood-Based Fitness Prediction with PLMs Leveraging pre-trained PLMs is standard prac-
tice in protein fitness prediction (Rives et al., 2021; Notin et al., 2023; Rao et al., 2021; Truong Jr
& Bepler, 2024). In the few-shot setting, PLMs intended for sequence generation are repurposed by
fine-tuning for protein fitness prediction (Rives et al., 2021). In the zero-shot setting, it is assumed
that the fitness correlates with the likelihood of the proteins associated sequence of amino acids, as
predicted by a PLM (Meier et al., 2021; Truong Jr & Bepler, 2024). Furthermore, if using a masked
PLM, it is often assumed that each amino acid contributes independently to the fitness (Meier et al.,
2021). In this work, we likewise leverage PLMs for protein fitness prediction. However, in contrast,
we make use of additional data in the form of additional fitness prediction tasks on other proteins.
Specifically, we meta-learn how to use a PLM for protein fitness prediction, rather than relying on
assumptions. Only after meta-learning, do we fine-tune our model, as depicted in Fig. 1. Meta-
learning across tasks lets us avoid restrictive model constraints and achieve SOTA performance. We
will show that in-context meta-learning is necessary to achieve strong results in low-data settings.
In-Context PLMs We build upon existing PLMs that make use of in-context data for protein
fitness prediction (Notin et al., 2022; Truong Jr & Bepler, 2024; Notin et al., 2023; Rao et al., 2021).
However, these methods do not meta-learn how to make use of their context. These methods either
learn to use the context only for protein language modelling, and then assume that the likelihood
from the generative model correlates with fitness (Truong Jr & Bepler, 2024; Notin et al., 2022; Rao
et al., 2021), or they use the context for protein fitness prediction, but not by meta-learning over
protein tasks (Notin et al., 2023). Of these ProteinNPT (Notin et al., 2023) is the most related to
our method, since we use the same attention architecture to condition on fitness information about
related proteins in-context, and it uses gradient steps to fine-tune to the target task. In comparison,
our method meta-learns over many tasks how to make use of the fitness information, which we find
to be critical (Section 4). Additionally, our method is the first to use the aforementioned procedure
to allow fine-tuning and in-context conditioning on the very same context at inference time.


3     M ETHODS
3.1   P ROBLEM S ETTING

We consider a fitness prediction task, T , to be defined by a dataset of the form
DT = {(xi , yi ≡fT (xi ))}N
                          i=1 , where xi is a sequence of amino acids, and yi ∈ R is the associ-
ated scalar fitness value assigned by the (unknown) underlying fitness function fT . In the few-
shot setting, the task-specific data is typically split into non-overlapping support and query sets:


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                    Fitness predictions for
                                                                         the query set
                                                                                   Fitness predictions for
                                                                                                                                         MVLSPADKTNVKA     0.0
                                                                                                                                              …            …
                                                                       ARVHGKKERLSTY 1.7the query set                                                                                        ARVHGKKERLSTY    1.7
                                                                                                                                         TTKTYFPHFDLSH     1.4
                                                                      GSAQVKGHGKKV 0.0                                                                                 Axial attention       GSAQVKGHGKKV     0.0
                                                                                   ARVHGKKERLSTY          1.7
                                                                      GAEALERMFLSFP 0.0                                                                                                      GAEALERMFLSFP    0.0
                                                                                   GSAQVKGHGKKV           0.0                            ARVHGKKERLSTY     ?
                                                                            …        …
                                                                                   GAEALERMFLSFP          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                            PLM                    …          …
                                                                                                                                         GSAQVKGHGKKV      ?
                                                                      TTKTYFPHFDLSH 1.5                                                                                                       TTKTYFPHFDLSH   1.5
                                                                                               …           …                             GAEALERMFLSFP     ?
                                                                                     TTKTYFPHFDLSH        1.5                                 …            …                                Predictions over the
                                                                                                                                         TTKTYFPHFDLSH     ?
                                                                                                                                                                                             original query set
                                                                       Axial attention
                                                                                     Axial attention

                                                                                           PLM
                                                                                           embeddings PLM
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                             The fine-tuning
                               Self-attention is                                                      embeddings                                         Axial attention                 support and query sets
                            computed over rows  Self-attention is                                                                                                PLM                     are used to do several
                            followed by columns
                                             computed over rows                                                                                                                            gradient updates
                                             followed by columns            PLM
                                                                                               PLM
                   QLAKEDLISYEAIS 0.0                                   MVLSPADKTNVKA    0.0
                    MKIILFLIATTVAFG 0.00.6            Support                                      In the zero-
                   GNTKDTAASNNAL   QLAKEDLISYEAIS     0.0                     …        …                                                                 MVLSPADKTNVKA     0.0
                       ADALTNAVAHVDD      0.1                                               shot setting,
                                                                                      MVLSPADKTNVKA   0.0           In the zero-          Support
                    AKGIVQVDNKFSD
                   LQEVDSWLDSTLI    1.2
                         MVLSPADKTNVKA 1.7 1.0
                                     MKIILFLIATTVAFG
                                   GNTKDTAASNNAL          set
                                                      0.00.6              Support
                                                                        TTKTYFPHFDLSH  1.4                                                                        …        …                         …
                       MPNALSALSDLHA      0.4                                               …         …                                     set
                    TVKSLIEKFLENAG
                          …         …
                         AWGKVGAHAGEY
                                         ADALTNAVAHVDD
                                       3.4
                                     AKGIVQVDNKFSD
                                             2.1
                                   LQEVDSWLDSTLI
                                                            0.1
                                                      1.21.7 1.0
                                            MVLSPADKTNVKA                    set                   no support       shot setting,                        TTKTYFPHFDLSH     1.4
                       HKLRVDPVNFKLL MPNALSALSDLHA
                                          1.0               0.4                       TTKTYFPHFDLSH 1.4
                           …
                   PVTAYILTGAGLPS   9.3
                         GAEALERMFLSFP
                              …
                                       … …
                                     TVKSLIEKFLENAG
                                             0.0      …3.41.02.1
                                           …AWGKVGAHAGEY                ARVHGKKERLSTY   ?      set is                no support
                    KHFKFLGGSNDRV        HKLRVDPVNFKLL
                                       0.0
                   SRTGGYSQFTNW
                      SHCLLVTLAAHLPA
                                    3.5
                                          0.3
                                              …
                                … PVTAYILTGAGLPS
                                              …       9.3
                                            GAEALERMFLSFP…
                                                             …0.0
                                                                                             passed to?
                                                                        GSAQVKGHGKKV ARVHGKKERLSTY
                                                                                        ?                               set is                           ARVHGKKERLSTY     ?        Multiple fine-tuning support
                    PAGKGVIVAVNLTR     5.4 1.4   …     Query
                                     KHFKFLGGSNDRV
                         TTKTYFPHFDLSH
                                   SRTGGYSQFTNW
                      EFTPAVHASLDKFL      0.7      … 3.50.00.3…
                                        SHCLLVTLAAHLPA                                       the model?
                                                                        GAEALERMFLSFP GSAQVKGHGKKV
                                                                                        ?                            passed to            Query          GSAQVKGHGKKV      ?
                                                                                                                                                                                    and query sets are derived
                         GSAQVKGHGKKVPAGKGVIVAVNLTR
                                             0.0
                                            TTKTYFPHFDLSH set 1.4
                                                         5.4               Query
                                                                             …           …
                                                                                        GAEALERMFLSFP           ?    the model                           GAEALERMFLSFP     ?
  Multiple protein
                                        EFTPAVHASLDKFL      0.7
                                                                             set                                                           set                    …        …
                                                                                                                                                                                        from the support set
                                            GSAQVKGHGKKV 0.0            TTKTYFPHFDLSH     ?   …             …
  prediction tasksMultiple protein                                                      TTKTYFPHFDLSH           ?                                        TTKTYFPHFDLSH     ?
                   landscapes


                                  (a) Meta-training                                                                                                            (b) Fine-tuning
Figure 2: An overview of Metalic. Meta-training our model over many protein prediction tasks
enables in-context learning (a). Fine-tuning the in-context learning on the support set requires sub-
sampling smaller support and query sets, and enables generalization at test time (b).
  (S)                 (S)         (S)            (S)                     (Q)                       (Q)          (Q)            (Q)                               (S)             (Q)
DT = {(xi , yi )}N     i=1 and DT      = {(xi , yi )}N     i=1 such that DT ∩ DT         = ∅, with sup-
port and query set sizes, N (S) and N (Q) , respectively. The support set provides data for task-specific
adaptation, and the query set provides data for evaluating the adapted performance. The size of the
support set is called the shot. Note, even with an empty support set (zero-shot), the model can still
adapt to the task using information from the query set, i.e., related sequences without fitness scores.
Meta-learning for protein fitness prediction requires not just a single task, but multiple tasks, D =
D1 , . . . DT over which to learn. The full dataset of tasks, D, can be seen as defining a distribution of
tasks which can be split into training and test tasks in the usual way. Concretely, for meta-learning
in-context, the goal is to learn a function with parameters θ conditioned on the full support set and
                                           (Q)    (Q)   (S)
unlabelled inputs from query set, fθ ({xi }N    i=1 , DT ). In our case, rather than directly predicting
fitness values, we instead follow prior works that use a preference-based objective to rank the query
set in order of fitness (Krause et al., 2022; Brookes et al., 2023; Hawkins-Hooker et al., 2024).

3.2      M ETALIC
Architecture Our work leverages the ProteinNPT architecture proposed by Notin et al. (2023) as
an in-context PLM for fitness prediction. Here we briefly summarize the key elements, but defer the
reader to Appendix A.2 and the original paper for full details. The architecture, along with the data
we use for meta-leaning, are illustrated in Fig. 2a. A detailed illustration is give in Appendix A.6.
Protein sequences in both the support and query set are converted to per-residue embeddings us-
ing a pre-trained PLM; in our case we take the third layer of ESM2-8M (Lin et al., 2022). Fitness
scores in the support set are projected to match the dimensionality of the residue embeddings using
a linear layer, while the query set fitness embeddings share a single learned embedding. The protein
sequence embeddings and fitness embeddings are then concatenated along the sequence dimension.
Optionally, zero-shot fitness predictions from an auxiliary PLM can be embedded and concatenated
in the same way, which we explore in Section 4.3. This tensor is then processed via axial attention
blocks (Ho et al., 2019), each of which applies self-attention separately along and across the se-
quences. Axial attention reduces the computational complexity of self-attention from O(K 2 L2 ) to
O(K 2 + L2 ), where K is the shot and L is the length of a protein. Finally, a multi-layer perceptron
conditions on the fitness embedding and mean-pooled sequence embedding to predict each query
              (Q)   (Q)          (Q) N (Q)    (S)
value, i.e. {vi }Ni=1 = fθ ({xi }i=1 , DT ), which is then used to rank the proteins by fitness.

Meta-Training Following prior works that use a preference-based objective (Krause et al., 2022;
Brookes et al., 2023; Hawkins-Hooker et al., 2024), we reframe the relative score prediction of two
                                                                 (Q)                            (Q)
sequences as binary classification, predicting whether sequence xi has a higher fitness than xj :

                                    (Q)     (Q)         (Q)    (Q)
                               p yi > yj          = σ v i − vj       ,                           (1)


                                                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where σ is a sigmoid function and the dependency of the query values on θ has been dropped for
brevity. This classifier is optimized with respect to every pairwise comparison between sequences
in the query set corresponding to the loss function:
                                        (Q) (Q)
                                      N
                                      X NX
                    (Q)  (S)                         (Q)  (Q)          (Q)  (Q)
              L(θ, DT , DT ) = −                  I yi > yj     log σ vi − vj     ,                (2)
                                      i=1 j=1
                                          j̸=i

where I is an indicator function. Intuitively, this is optimising N (Q) × (N (Q) − 1) binary clas-
sification problems. Note that we only compute the loss over the query set to avoid encouraging
memorization of the support set. Adapting this to meta-learning (Fig. 2a), the objective becomes to
find the parameterization that minimizes the loss across the task distribution,
                                                                      (Q)      (S)
                      J (θ, D) = −EDT ∈D E(D(S) ,D(Q) )∈DT L(θ, DT , DT ).                         (3)
                                                  T       T

Fine-Tuning Metalic uses fine-tuning, during inference, in order to enable generalization, without
having to account for fine-tuning during meta-training. This process is depicted in Fig. 2b.
The combination of in-context learning and fine-tuning creates a unique problem. Since fine-tuning
                                                        (Q)   (Q)
occurs at inference time, labels for the query set, {yi }N  i=1 , are not available for training. While
                              (S)   (S)
labels for the support set, {yi }Ni=1 , are available, propagating gradients from the support set would
encourage memorization of the support set, since the labels are also passed as input in-context.
While prior methods that combine in-context and gradient-based meta-learning (Rusu et al., 2018;
Vuorio et al., 2019) would encounter this issue, this problem is exacerbated for Metalic. Whereas
prior methods compress inputs to a representation with a constant number of dimensions, Metalic
uses self-attention, which scales with the number of inputs, allowing them to be stored without
compression. Moreover, whereas prior methods use meta-gradients that could adjust the gradient
update procedure so as to be useful for generalization and not memorization, Metalic does not take
into account the fine-tuning process during meta-training.
We address the issue of memorization by sub-sampling from the support set. The fine-tuning pro-
cedure is the same as during meta-training, with the exception that the support set is sub-sampled.
In order to compute updates on a single support set, the support set is sub-sampled into multiple
                                  (S′ )     (S)      (Q′ )     (S)
smaller support and query sets, DT ⊆ DT and DT             ⊆ DT . Concretely, this corresponds to
fine-tuning on unseen data using the objective:
                              (S)                                  (Q′ )     (S′ )
                      J (θ, DT ) = −E(D(S′ ) ,D(Q′ ) )∈D(S) L(θ, DT        , DT ).                 (4)
                                            T         T       T

After fine-tuning, Metalic conditions on the complete support set, allowing no data to go to waste.
Using Metalic’s unique combination of in-context meta-learning followed by fine-tuning, we enable
the generalization of extensive fine-tuning, while also precluding expensive computation. If a typical
gradient-based meta-learning method requires O(m) meta-gradients and O(mn) regular gradients
for meta-training, Metalic requires no meta-gradients and O(m) regular gradients, constituting a
linear reduction with superior performance to efficient alternatives, as demonstrated in Section 4.6.

4   E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate Metalic on fitness prediction tasks from the ProteinGym benchmark
(Notin et al., 2024). We evaluate in the zero-shot setting with no support data, and the few-shot
setting with limited support data. To establish SOTA results in the zero-shot setting, we first compare
to the predictions provided by ProteinGym for the baseline models. To establish strong performance
in the few-shot setting, since predictions are not provided, we train baselines from Hawkins-Hooker
et al. (2024). While Metalic does not achieve SOTA results in evaluations on proteins that have
multiple mutations (multi-mutant proteins), we demonstrate that the performance grows as we add
more meta-training tasks, providing a path forward for Metalic in the multi-mutant setting in the
future. We perform ablations of Metalic, to show the benefits of meta-learning, in-context learning,
and fine-tuning. Finally, we compare to the gradient-based method, Reptile (Nichol et al., 2018), to
show that taking account of gradients during training is an unnecessary computational burden.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

In our experiments, we focus on ProteinGym deep mutational scans. Each task in ProteinGym each
measures one property on a set of proteins that all differ by one amino acid, or multiple amino acids,
from a reference wild-type protein. We have 121 single-mutant tasks and 68 multi-mutant tasks
from ProteinGym. From these, we evaluate over eight held-out single-mutant tasks, and five held-
out multi-mutant tasks, following Notin et al. (2023); Hawkins-Hooker et al. (2024). This leaves 113
single-mutant and 68 multi-mutant tasks for training when evaluating single mutants (Sections 4.2
and 4.3), and 121 single-mutant and 63 multi-mutant tasks for training when evaluating multiple
mutants (Section 4.4). All fitness values are standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing
by the standard deviation by task. Note that there are additional tasks in ProteinGym we do not
consider. Specifically, we do not consider multi-mutant tasks that have overlapping proteins with
single-mutant tasks, to make evaluation more difficult. We also ignore additional tasks in which the
maximum protein length is > 750, to fit the backward pass on an Nvidia A100-80Gb device.
We use a query set size of N (Q) = 100, and the size of the support set is determined by our
evaluation setting and is one of three sizes: N (S) = 0, 16, or 128. We also use an additional
set of 128 points just for early stopping of the fine-tuning process, for all models, following the
implementation of Hawkins-Hooker et al. (2024). We then evaluate remaining points in the task,
with a maximum of 2,000 points total, by dividing the data into multiple query sets. If the model
can fit a larger query size, as in non-meta-learning baselines, then we pass the remaining data as
a single query set. If the data is not divisible by the query set size, it is left out from evaluation.
However, we sample the support data over three independent samples, avoiding systemic exclusion.
All evaluation uses the Spearman rank correlation, in line with prior work (Notin et al., 2023;
Truong Jr & Bepler, 2024; Hawkins-Hooker et al., 2024). We compute the Spearman correlation
per task, and then average over tasks. For all evaluations of our models, we compare over three
seeds for training and report the mean and standard deviation. Each context, consisting of a support
and query set, consists of ≤ 171,000 tokens. We meta-train for 50,000 updates and fine-tune for
100. Fine-tuning uses the same procedure, including an Adam optimizer and cosine learning rate
scheduler, but fine-tuning skips the learning rate warm-up, so the scheduling has little effect. Using
a single Nvidia A100-80Gb, training our model takes roughly 2 to 8 days per seed, depending on
support size and frequency of fine-tuned evaluation.

4.2   Z ERO -S HOT

The first setting we evaluate is the zero-shot performance of our model, with no support set for
fine-tuning. In Table 1 we compare against predictions provided by ProteinGym for each baseline to
compute the zero-shot Spearman correlation (ρ). We compare to provided predictions, on our data
splits, to enable a fair comparison to the strongest models available without retraining each baseline
from scratch ourselves. We include the best performing model, and notable models, as baselines.
We find that Metalic outperforms every reported baseline and is SOTA at zero-shot prediction.
Table 1: Spearman correlation in the zero-shot setting. Results are computed using predictions
provided by ProteinGym. Using a single PLM, in the zero-shot setting, renders the baselines de-
terministic. For comparison, we report our best model, and the mean and standard deviation, for
quantifying the variation in meta-training. Metalic achieves SOTA performance in either case.

             Model Name         Spearman Correlation
             Metalic (max)                                       .484
             Metalic (mean)                                      .482 ± .002
             VESPA                                             .464
             TranceptEVE-Medium                               .457
             ESM1-v-650M                                    .437
             Tranception-Medium                            .427
             Progen2-Medium                               .419
             ESM2-650M                                  .399
             MSA Transformer                            .398
             ESM-IF1                                 .365
             ESM2-8M              .121

                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our method significantly outperforms strong baselines with many more parameters, such as ESM1-
v-650M. The 8 million parameter PLM used by our method, ESM2-8M, without Metalic, achieves a
score of only .121 ρ, demonstrating the large contribution of our meta-learning procedure. The next
strongest method after ours is VESPA (Marquet et al., 2022). VESPA optimizes PLM embeddings
to predict a distinct set of binary annotations from 9,594 proteins, and uses these features to predict
protein fitness by comparing to a reference wild-type embedding. Note, unlike our method, VESPA
relies on strong assumptions to generalize and is specific to the zero-shot setting.
The strong performance of our method in the zero-shot setting can be attributed to meta-learning.
Since there is no data for fine-tuning, the zero-shot performance increase over ESM2-8M derives
entirely from our meta-training procedure. In this case, other methods generally assume that the
PLM likelihood of a mutation correlates with fitness, whereas our model learns to make use of the
information contained in PLM embeddings to make predictions zero-shot. Moreover, our method
still conditions on an unlabeled query set, and the protein embeddings in that query set, which allow
for meta-learning a form of in-context unsupervised adaptation.


4.3   F INE -T UNING R ESULTS

In Table 2 we report Spearman correlation with a support set of size N (S) = 0, 16, and 128, and
we compare to baselines that we train and evaluate ourselves over three random seeds. We re-train
these methods using the models, following Hawkins-Hooker et al. (2024), to provide a comparison
over multiple seeds between these methods in a range of practical low-data settings. All models use
the same preference-based loss function as Metalic, for a fair comparison, and none use ensembling.
We also train Metalic-AuxIF, which allows Metalic to condition on zero-shot predictions from an
additional PLM, as introduced in Section 3.2. We choose ESM-IF1 (Hsu et al., 2022) as the auxiliary
input, since it contains embeddings derived from inverse folding that summarize protein structure.
Note that Metalic-IF1 uses 170 million parameters, whereas Metalic uses 36 million (including the
ESM2-8M embedding), so the auxiliary predictions significantly increases the total parameters.
Again, we find that Metalic has the strongest performance in the 0-shot and 16-shot settings, and has
comparably strong performance in the 128-shot setting, with 18 times fewer parameters. Moreover,
Metalic also outperforms contemporary models, such as PoET (Truong Jr & Bepler, 2024), that
make use of additional evolutionary information, in the form of multi-sequence alignment, and in-
context learning. Note that ESM2-8M and ProteinNPT are the worst performing methods in the
few-shot setting. This results suggests that the effectiveness of Metalic does not come from the
ESM2-8M embedding, nor the ProteinNPT architecture, but rather from the meta-learning itself.
Additionally, we see that Metalic-AuxIF, improves results. This result is significant because ESM2-
8M and ESM-IF1, the two PLMs used by Metalic-AuxIF, are the worst performing methods in the
zero-shot setting (Table 1), with ESM2-8M also weak in the few-shot setting. Thus, the effectiveness
of Metalic-AuxIF comes entirely from meta-learning: We can learn how and when to rely on features
from each of these weak predictors of protein fitness, to combine them into a strong predictor.
Consistent with the motivation of meta-learning, results are strongest when the data is most lim-
ited. Meta-learning adds an additional training stage to learn prior beliefs and inductive biases from
related data. The more limited, the more relying on prior data is useful.


Table 2: Spearman correlation for the 0, 16, and 128-shot setting. Baseline results are re-
computed. Standard deviation is provided over three seeds. Metalic matches or exceeds all baselines.

                    Model Name           n=0            n = 16         n = 128
                    Metalic           .482 ± .002     .484 ± .001    .552 ± .009
                    Metalic-AuxIF     .498 ± .008     .500 ± .002    .556 ± .005
                    ESM1-v-650M       .384 ± .000     .452 ± .000    .553 ± .000
                    ESM2-8M           .105 ± .000     .226 ± .000    .406 ± .000
                    PoET              .416 ± .003     .475 ± .026    .588 ± .006
                    ProteinNPT            N/A         .192 ± .003    .443 ± .003


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3a: Multi-mutant Spearman correla-              Figure 3b: Multi-mutant Spearman Correlation by
tion in the zero-shot setting. Results are com-       Shot. Spearman correlation for the 0, 16, and 128-shot,
puted using predictions provided by ProteinGym        over three seeds, sorted by zero-shot performance. For
on tasks with multiple mutations. Metalic is com-     complete results, including for Metalic-AuxIF, see Ap-
petitive, but not better than all baselines, due to   pendix A.5.
lack of sufficient datasets with multiple mutants.
                                  Multiples                            1
                                                                                               0-Shot              16-Shot      128-Shot
Model Name                         0-Shot                      .8
Metalic (max)                       .450
Metalic (mean)                      .436 ± .011
Metalic-AuxIF (max)                 .548                       .6
Metalic-AuxIF (mean)                .533 ± .012
ESM-IF1                             .590                       .4
TranceptEVE-Medium                  .529
Tranception-Medium                  .513                       .2
MSA Transformer                     .503
VESPA                               .408
                                                                       0
ESM2-650M                           .345


                                                                                          ET


                                                                                                                    M


                                                                                                                                 8M


                                                                                                                                  PT
                                                                                                       ic
Progen2-Medium                      .305


                                                                                                     al


                                                                                                                 50


                                                                                                                               nN
                                                                                         Po


                                                                                                                               2-
                                                                                                   et


                                                                                                              -6
ESM2-8M                             .289


                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                  M


                                                                                                                            ei
                                                                                                               v

                                                                                                                         ES


                                                                                                                          ot
                                                                                                            1-
ESM1-v-650M                         .279


                                                                                                                        Pr
                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                      ES
4.4   M ULTIPLE M UTANTS

In this section we evaluate Metalic on tasks where proteins have multiple mutations. In Table 3a, we
see that Metalic has strong performance, but does not outperform all baselines. However, with aux-
iliary inverse folding predictions (Metalic-AuxIF), Metalic is only outperformed by ESM-IF1 itself.
These results indicate that ESM-IF1 is particularly strong on the eight held-out evaluation tasks, and
that we can recover most of its performance by incorporating its predictions into our model. Note
that while ESM-IF1 is strong in the multi-mutant setting, it is among the worst performing models
in the single-mutant setting. In contrast, our method is strong in both settings, since it can learn to
leverage ESM-IF1 predictions when they are helpful, and ignore them when they are not.
By comparing across all shot settings, we can see that Metalic is competitive in the multi-mutant
setting (Fig. 3b), but no longer SOTA, which we hypothesize is due to limited multi-mutant training
data. In Table 4a and Fig. 4b, we explore this hypothesis. Specifically, we see the performance
of Metalic increases as the amount of training data, measured in tasks, increases. This trend holds
true even when adding single mutant tasks, which are significantly different from the testing data.
Providing more data is a path forward for strengthening the multi-mutant results.

Table 4a: Multi-mutant Spearman correla-              Figure 4b: Multi-mutant spearman correlation by
tion by training data. Results are computed on        number of tasks. Metalic with and without 121 addi-
eight tasks with multiple mutations with differ-      tional single-mutant training tasks. (With 121 single-
ent amounts of single- and multi-mutant training      mutant is the default.) The performance of Metalic in-
tasks. We see performance of Metalic increases        creases with more data, giving a path to improve results.
with more data, giving a path to improve results
with future data collection. This trends holds even
                                                          Spearman Correlation (n = 0)


when we add single-mutant data, which is signifi-
cantly different from the multi-mutant test data.                                        .4
                                     Multiples
 Single-Mutant Multi-Mutant    n=0
      121           63      .436 ± .011                                                  .2
      121           30      .417 ± .021
      121            1      .383 ± .010
       0            63      .376 ± .018                                                                            Metalic (+121 Single)
       0            30      .307 ± .022                                                  .0
                                                                                                                   Metalic (+0 Single)
       0             1      .047 ± .056
                                                                                                              30              63
                                                                                              Number of Multi-Mutant Training Tasks
                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.5   A BLATIONS

Here we report ablations of Metalic, evaluating on single-mutants (Table 5). Spearman correlation
is reported in the zero-shot and 128-shot settings. The results justify all components of our method.
Most detrimental to performance is removing meta-training from Metalic (NoMetaTrain). This
ablation is identical to Metalic, with the exception that there is no additional meta-learning stage
over multiple protein landscapes. We see that without meta-learning, the initial zero-shot predictions
have near zero correlation with the fitness and that the 128-shot predictions are critically impaired.
We also ablate the ability to attend to the rest Table 5: Ablations in the 0 and 128-shot set-
of the proteins in context by turning off the ting. Results show the importance of fine-tuning,
column attention in the axial attention layers in-context learning, meta-training, and additional
(NoICL), we ablate the fine-tuning stage of training tasks as an augmentation.
training (NoFT), and we ablate the preference Model Name                       n=0         n = 128
loss by using mean squared error instead (No-
                                                  Metalic                   .482 ± .002 .552 ± .009
Pref). Note that when we remove the fine-
                                                  Metalic-NoFT              .482 ± .002 .488 ± .012
tuning, and have a non-zero support size, we
                                                  Metalic-NoPref            .465 ± .011 .520 ± .006
allow the early stopping data to be passed in-
                                                  Metalic-NoICL             .441 ± .002 .529 ± .002
context, to not unfairly advantage fine-tuning
                                                  Metalic-NoMetaTrain -.046 ± .018 .346 ± .003
with additional data. Ablating in-context learn-
ing decreases performance in both settings, indicating an ability to adapt in an unsupervised fashion
even from the query set alone. Ablating fine-tuning decreased performance in the 128-shot setting,
indicating the need for fine-tuning for generalization to held-out data. Ablating the preference-
based loss decreased performance in both settings, in line with recent literature (Krause et al., 2022;
Brookes et al., 2023; Hawkins-Hooker et al., 2024). An additional ablation is given in Appendix A.3.
4.6   G RADIENT-BASED M ETA -L EARNING
In this section, we compare Metalic to the same architecture but trained with Reptile (Nichol et al.,
2018), an efficient method for gradient-based meta-learning. Unlike Metalic, Reptile does not use
in-context learning and modifies the outer-loop during meta-training to take into account the subse-
quent fine-tuning. While accounting for the fine-tuning during meta-training comes with increased
computational costs and can increase bias and variance (Vuorio et al., 2021), Reptile provides a sim-
plified algorithm that can be run more efficiently. The primary differences between Reptile and Met-
alic are that Reptile adjusts the meta-learning loss to account for fine-tuning during meta-training,
while Metalic performs in-context learning. Reptile details are provided in Appendix A.1.
Although Reptile is more compute-efficient than other gradient-based methods, it still performs
gradient updates in the inner loop during meta-training, making it computationally expensive relative
to Metalic. Our method uses 100 updates on the support data for fine-tuning. Reptile uses inner-
loop gradient updates during both meta-training and fine-tuning. Due to compute limitations, we
cannot use 100 steps for each forward pass of meta-training. Thus, we evaluate Reptile with 3
inner-loop gradient steps during meta-training and 3 during fine-tuning, so that train and test match
(Reptile-3-3), and we evaluate Reptile with 3 inner-loop gradient steps during meta-training and 100
during fine-tuning, so that test time matches our method (Reptile-3-100). Note that even Reptile-3-3
uses three times more compute than Metalic. Finally, we evaluate Reptile-3-100 with Metalic, to see
whether they can be used in conjunction (Metalic-Reptile). We train for 50,000 steps, and also report
Metalic after 150,000 steps, to match the number of gradient computations as the Reptile models.

Table 6: Comparison to Reptile. Reptile (Nichol et al., 2018) is a gradient-based meta-learning
method. Results are reported after 50,000 steps, with Metalic additionally reported after 150,000
steps, to allow for an equal number of gradient computations as the methods using Reptile. Results
show that accounting for fine-tuning during meta-training using Reptile is unnecessary.

      Model Name         Meta-Training Steps      Total Gradient Computations        n = 128
      Metalic (150k)          150,000                       150,000                .562 ± .004
      Metalic-Reptile          50,000                       150,000                .562 ± .004
      Metalic (50k)            50,000                        50,000                .552 ± .009
      Reptile-3-100            50,000                       150,000                .539 ± .001
      Reptile-3-3              50,000                       150,000                .499 ± .008


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Results are reported in Table 6. We evaluate in the 128-shot setting. Note that Reptile is not ap-
plicable in the zero-shot setting, as it requires some data for fine-tuning. We observe that without
controlling for the amount of computation, Metalic (50k) outperforms both Reptile variants. We
also observe that Metalic, in conjunction with Reptile (Metalic-Reptile), outperforms Reptile and
Metalic independently. However, the improvement over Metalic is marginal, and the increased
computation (by a factor of 3) is large. Controlling for the total number of gradient computations,
Metalic (150k) achieves a Spearman correlation comparable to the combined Metalic-Reptile. Thus,
Reptile performs poorly in isolation, and, while Reptile can be used with Metalic, the combination
increases implementation complexity with no clear advantage. This result is in line with previous
work showing that accounting for gradient updates during meta-training (in their case, without in-
context learning) can be detrimental when there are a limited number of tasks for meta-training or
a limited amount of data for the inner-loop (Gao & Sener, 2020; Triantafillou et al., 2020). Collec-
tively, this evidence further justifies fine-tuning only after meta-training.

5   A NALYSIS


     (a) Untrained Attention           (b) Half-Trained Attention           (c) Trained Attention
Figure 5: Attention maps. We present axial attention maps over the query set in the zero-shot
setting. Each row shows attention to other proteins in context, normalized to one by row, averaged
over layers and mutation location. Attention at step 1 (a) 25,0000 (b) and 50,000 (c). Each protein
learns to pay attention to itself, while still attending to other significant proteins in context.

Here, we briefly investigate the in-context learning abilities of Metalic via attention maps. In Sec-
tion 4, we show that in-context learning is vital to Metalic by ablating the attention between proteins
and showing decreased performance. Notably, the in-context learning was beneficial not only in
the few-shot setting, but also in the zero-shot setting. This suggests an interesting phenomenon:
The emergence of unsupervised in-context learning from the query set alone. To confirm this phe-
nomenon, in Fig. 5 we show the attention maps in the axial attention layers between proteins in the
query set. Over the course of training, we observe the emergence of bright vertical lines, indicating
some significantly informative proteins to which all others proteins attend. Moreover, we observe no
rows that are entirely dark off the diagonal entries. Thus, no protein attends only to itself. Together,
these results further corroborate the necessity of in-context meta-learning.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have demonstrated state-of-the-art results on a standard protein fitness predic-
tion benchmark in low-data settings. To do so, we proposed Metalic, which makes use of both
in-context meta-learning and subsequent fine-tuning. Critically, we have demonstrated the ability of
meta-learning to take advantage of additional data from other proteins fitness prediction tasks, while
remaining computationally tractable by deferring fine-tuning to test time alone. Unique within the
meta-learning literature, we show that in-context meta-learning provides a useful initialization for
further fine-tuning, and can make use of test time data for both fine-tuning and in-context learn-
ing. Metalic additionally demonstrates the ability to learn from the query set alone (zero-shot),
performing unsupervised in-context learning. Future work could investigate leveraging Metalic’s
unique in-context learning ability to act as an auto-regressive fitness model (i.e., a world model in
the meta-reinforcement learning setting (Beck et al., 2023a)), for optimally trading off exploration
and exploitation when designing novel proteins. Given its efficacy at leveraging additional data, we
believe that meta-learning in-context will play a crucial role in advancing protein fitness prediction,
with Metalic being a foundational step in that direction.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Jacob Beck, Risto Vuorio, Evan Zheran Liu, Zheng Xiong, Luisa Zintgraf, Chelsea Finn, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. A survey of meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv, 2023a.
Jacob Beck, Risto Vuorio, Zheng Xiong, and Shimon Whiteson. Recurrent hypernetworks are sur-
  prisingly strong in meta-rl. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.
Jacob Beck, Matthew Jackson, Risto Vuorio, Zheng Xiong, and Shimon Whiteson. Splagger: Split
  aggregation for meta-reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning conference, 2024.
David H Brookes, Jakub Otwinowski, and Sam Sinai. Contrastive losses as generalized models of
  global epistasis. arXiv, 2023.
Julian Coda-Forno, Marcel Binz, Zeynep Akata, Matt Botvinick, Jane Wang, and Eric Schulz. Meta-
  in-context learning in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 2023.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. International conference on machine learning, 2017.
Douglas M Fowler and Stanley Fields. Deep mutational scanning: a new style of protein science. In
  Nature Methods, 2014.
Katelyn Gao and Ozan Sener. Modeling and optimization trade-off in meta-learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2020.
Alex Hawkins-Hooker, Jakub Kmec, Oliver Bent, and Paul Duckworth. Likelihood-based fine-
  tuning of protein language models for few-shot fitness prediction and design. In ICML 2024
  Workshop on Efficient and Accessible Foundation Models for Biological Discovery, 2024.
Jonathan Ho, Nal Kalchbrenner, Dirk Weissenborn, and Tim Salimans. Axial attention in multidi-
  mensional transformers. arXiv, 2019.
Timothy Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos Storkey. Meta-learning in neural
  networks: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2021.
Chloe Hsu, Robert Verkuil, Jason Liu, Zeming Lin, Brian Hie, Tom Sercu, Adam Lerer, and Alexan-
  der Rives. Learning inverse folding from millions of predicted structures. In International con-
  ference on machine learning, 2022.
Mike Huisman, Jan N Van Rijn, and Aske Plaat. A survey of deep meta-learning. Artificial Intelli-
 gence Review, 2021.
Ben Krause, Nikhil Naik, Wenhao Liu, and Ali Madani. Don’t throw away that linear head: Few-
  shot protein fitness prediction with generative models, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=hHmtmT58pSL.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Allan dos San-
  tos Costa, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom Sercu, Sal Candido, and Alexander Rives. Language
  models of protein sequences at the scale of evolution enable accurate structure prediction. bioRxiv,
  2022.
Ali Madani, Bryan McCann, Nikhil Naik, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Namrata Anand, Raphael R Eguchi,
  Po-Ssu Huang, and Richard Socher. Progen: Language modeling for protein generation. arXiv,
  2020.
Céline Marquet, Michael Heinzinger, Tobias Olenyi, Christian Dallago, Kyra Erckert, Michael Bern-
   hofer, Dmitrii Nechaev, and Burkhard Rost. Embeddings from protein language models predict
   conservation and variant effects. Human genetics, 2022.
Joshua Meier, Roshan Rao, Robert Verkuil, Jason Liu, Tom Sercu, and Alex Rives. Language
  models enable zero-shot prediction of the effects of mutations on protein function. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-
  learner. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.03141, 2017.

Tung Nguyen and Aditya Grover. Transformer neural processes: Uncertainty-aware meta learning
  via sequence modeling. In International conference on machine learning, 2022.

Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. On first-order meta-learning algorithms. arXiv,
  2018.

Pascal Notin, Mafalda Dias, Jonathan Frazer, Javier Marchena-Hurtado, Aidan N Gomez, Debora
  Marks, and Yarin Gal. Tranception: protein fitness prediction with autoregressive transform-
  ers and inference-time retrieval. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16990–
  17017. PMLR, 2022.

Pascal Notin, Ruben Weitzman, Debora Marks, and Yarin Gal. Proteinnpt: Improving protein prop-
  erty prediction and design with non-parametric transformers. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.

Pascal Notin, Aaron Kollasch, Daniel Ritter, Lood Van Niekerk, Steffanie Paul, Han Spinner, Nathan
  Rollins, Ada Shaw, Rose Orenbuch, Ruben Weitzman, et al. Proteingym: Large-scale benchmarks
  for protein fitness prediction and design. Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Roshan M Rao, Jason Liu, Robert Verkuil, Joshua Meier, John Canny, Pieter Abbeel, Tom Sercu, and
  Alexander Rives. Msa transformer. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
  2021.

Alexander Rives, Joshua Meier, Tom Sercu, Siddharth Goyal, Zeming Lin, Jason Liu, Demi Guo,
  Myle Ott, C Lawrence Zitnick, Jerry Ma, et al. Biological structure and function emerge from
  scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 2021.

Andrei A Rusu, Dushyant Rao, Jakub Sygnowski, Oriol Vinyals, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero,
  and Raia Hadsell. Meta-learning with latent embedding optimization. In International conference
  on learning representations, 2018.

Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-
  learning with memory-augmented neural networks. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, 2016.

Eleni Triantafillou, Tyler Zhu, Vincent Dumoulin, Pascal Lamblin, Utku Evci, Kelvin Xu, Ross
  Goroshin, Carles Gelada, Kevin Swersky, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, et al. Meta-dataset: A dataset
  of datasets for learning to learn from few examples. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.

Timothy Truong Jr and Tristan Bepler. Poet: A generative model of protein families as sequences-
  of-sequences. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Risto Vuorio, Shao-Hua Sun, Hexiang Hu, and Joseph J Lim. Multimodal model-agnostic meta-
  learning via task-aware modulation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.

Risto Vuorio, Jacob Austin Beck, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, and Shimon White-
  son. No dice: An investigation of the bias-variance tradeoff in meta-gradients. In Deep RL
  Workshop NeurIPS 2021, 2021.

Zheng Xiong, Luisa M Zintgraf, Jacob Austin Beck, Risto Vuorio, and Shimon Whiteson. On the
  practical consistency of meta-reinforcement learning algorithms. In Fifth Workshop on Meta-
  Learning at the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarli, Vitaly Kurin, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Fast context
  adaptation via meta-learning. In International conference on machine learning, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   R EPTILE D ETAILS

This section provides additional details on how Reptile (Nichol et al., 2018) works. In order to
account for fine-tuning during meta-training, gradient-based methods generally compute a meta-
gradient that requires the computation of higher order derivatives, which can be computationally
intractable for a large model. The costs can be especially burdensome when many gradient steps are
needed for out of distribution adaptation. For this reason, Reptile avoids meta-gradients by changing
optimization during meta-training. Here, the new parameters are updated, not by gradient descent,
but rather by moving toward the mean, after each theta is adapted to a task, θT , by fine-tuning on
that task. From time-step t to t + 1 of this outer-loop optimization process, Reptile can be written:

                                  θt+1 = θt + βEDT ∈D [θTt − θt ].                                  (5)

We had to choose several implementation details for Reptile. First, note that Reptile sub-samples
the support set during fine-tuning and has no distinct query set. In our implementation, we sub-
sample mini-batches of size 50 to match the query size of Metalic for sub-sampling in the 128-shot
setting. Reptile also has several options for the outer loop optimization. We choose to use the
batched version with a batch size of 4 to match Metalic. Rather than using the direct update given
in Equation (5), we take the difference over the learning rate, (θTt − θt )/α as an approximation of a
gradient to be used with the Adam optimizer, as suggested by Nichol et al. (2018) and validated in
Appendix A.2.

A.2   H YPER -PARAMETERS

Since we build upon the axial attention of ProteinNPT (Notin et al., 2023), we follow their choice for
most hyper-parameters, with a few exceptions. Most notably, in our experiments, we use the third
layer of ESM2 as an embedding for each protein, given the strong performance and reduced number
of parameters. Additionally, we use a ranking loss from Hawkins-Hooker et al. (2024), and do not
use the CNN or additional inputs (such as zero-shot predictions) from ProteinNPT. We likewise
found conditioning on the wild-type unhelpful. The same set of hyper-parameters are used for each
setting: 0-shot, 16-shot, and 128-shot, and for multi-mutant results. We used the same learning rate
for fine-tuning Metalic as for meta-training. We found the default ProteinNPT learning rate to be
too large, and decreasing by a factor of 5 to be sufficient. Consistent with our baselines, we select
hyper-parameters using the single-mutant results and then use the same hyper-parameters for the
multi-mutant setting, following Hawkins-Hooker et al. (2024); Notin et al. (2023). Complete details
on hyper-parameters used are available in Table 7. We tuned relatively few of the hyper-parameters
of our method, and mostly tuned over a single seed. There is likely room for improvement in the
hyper-parameter selection of Metalic.
For the majority of baselines no tuning was required, other than Reptile. For the baselines, we
used reference predictions for Table 1 and reference implementations for Table 2, neither of which
required tuning. For Reptile, the update in the outer-loop can be uses as written in Equation (5), or
(θTt − θt )/α can be interpreted as a gradient for use with the Adam optimizer Nichol et al. (2018).
We experiment with both and find the use of the Adam optimizer to be superior in performance.
All results in the main body use the Adam optimizer for Reptile. In order to evaluate the method
without the Adam optimizer, we re-tune β in Equation (5), which is the outer-loop learning rate.
We leave the inner-loop learning rate, α, fixed at the learning rate for Metalic, 3e−5 , which uses the
same learning rate for the inner- and outer-loop. Given the increased computational cost of Reptile,
we use a single seed over three learning rates for 10,000 steps. We tune over the following learning
rates (β): the learning rate for Metalic, which is 3e−5 ; a learning rate of 1, which corresponds to
the learning rate of Metalic if you interpret (θTt − θt )/α as the gradient in a gradient-based update
(Nichol et al., 2018); and a learning rate of n1 , where n is the number of inner-loop updates (3 in
this case), which corresponds to the learning rate of Metalic if you interpret (θTt − θt )/(αn) as the
gradient in a gradient-based update1 . We found a learning rate of 1 to perform best, in line with the
    1
      The standard gradient update, θt+1 = θt + α∇, with ∇ = (θTt − θt )/(αn), gives θt+1 = θt + α(θTt −
θt )/(αn), which is the same update as Equation (5) with β = n1 , omitting the expectation for brevity.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Hyper-Parameters for Metalic. Where different, an earlier set of hyper-parameters used for
ablations and Reptile comparisons are given in parentheses.

   Hyper-Parameter          Description                                                    Value
   Training Steps           The total number of training steps in meta-training            50,000
   Warm-Up Steps            The number of training steps spent linearly warm-               5,000
                            ing up, preceding cosine decay
   Batch Size               The number of contexts evaluated per training step.              4
                            Note that gradient accumulation is used for each
                            context in the batch, so this scales training time lin-
                            early.
   Weight Decay             Weight decay applied to non-bias parameters only                5e-3
   Learning Rate            The learning rate for meta-training and fine-tuning             6e-5
   Min LR Fraction          The minimum fraction of the LR maintained during                1e-5
                            the cosine decay in learning rate scheduling
   Adam Eps                 The epsilon value for the Adam optimizer                         1e-8
   Adam Beta1               The beta1 value for the Adam optimizer                            0.9
   Adam Beta2               The beta2 value for the Adam optimizer                          0.999
   Gradient Clip Value      The maximum norm allowed for the gradient                         1.0
   ESM embed model          The full name for the ESM2 model used                     esm t6 8M UR50D
   ESM embed layer          The layer from the ESM2 model used as an embed-                    3
                            ding
   Number      Fine-tune    The number of gradient updates for fine-tuning after            100
   Steps                    meta-training
   Num ProteinNPT Lay-      The number of layers using axial attention, as in                5
   ers                      ProteinNPT
   Condition on Pooled      Whether each sequence is pooled or ignored after                True
   Sequence                 axial attention
   MLP Layer Sizes          The number and size of fully connected layers after       [768,768,768,768]
                            axial attention
   Embed Dim                The embedding dimension for all inputs including                768
                            the protein sequences and fitness values
   Axial Forward Embed      The hidden size of the feed-forward layer within the            400
   Dim                      ProteinNPT layer
   Attention Heads          The number of heads in self-attention                             4
   Dropout Prob             The probability of dropout during training and fine-             0.0
                            tuning for layers other than axial attention
   Attention Dropout        The probability of dropout during training and fine-             0.1
                            tuning for axial attention layers
   Num Single Tasks         The total number of single-mutant tasks available.              121
                            These tasks are included for meta-training even
                            when testing on multi-mutants. Eight are held-out
                            for evaluation when evaluating single-mutant per-
                            formance.
   Num Multiple Tasks       The total number of multi-mutant tasks available.                68
                            These tasks are included for meta-training even
                            when testing on single-mutants. Five are held-out
                            for evaluation when evaluating multi-mutant perfor-
                            mance.
   Warm-up During Fine-     Whether or not to use the linear warm-up from the               False
   tuning                   learning rate scheduler during fine-tuning.



outer loop learning rate of Metalic and the interpretation of the gradient from Nichol et al. (2018).
For Adam, there is no β, and we do not re-tune Adam’s outer-loop learning rate. When using Adam,
the gradient is interpreted as (θTt − θt )/α. The results of tuning the learning rate without Adam,
suggests a learning rate of 3e−5 with this gradient interpretation. Indeed, we confirm that when
using Adam with this learning rate, and this gradient interpretation, it works better than using the
alternative Reptile update rule with any learning rate. Results of the optimizer and learning rate
tuning are presented in table Table 8. Note that these results used an earlier set of hyper-parameters.



                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Reptile tuning results for the 128-shot setting. Results are trained over 10,000 steps for
one seed each. The Adam optimizer performs the best. Both Adam, with an outer-loop learning rate
of 3e−5 , and Equation (5), with β = 1, correspond to the same scale in the outer loop.

               Model Name          Adam (3e−5 )     β = 1.    β = .333     β = 3e−5
               Reptile-3-3            .452           .420       .350         .091
               Reptile-3-100          .472           .444       .396         .181
               Metalic-Reptile        .483           .476       .411         .190


A.3   AUGMENTATION A BLATION

In this section we provide an additional ablation. Specifically, we ablate the augmentation of single-
mutant training data with multi-mutant data (NoAug). The result is reported in Table 9. Ablating the
multi-mutant augmentation decreased performance in the zero-shot setting, with comparable 128-
shot performance, indicating the benefit of additional meta-training data when fine-tuning data is
most limited.
Table 9: Augmentation Ablation in the 0 and 128-shot setting. Results show the importance of
augmenting with multi-mutant data in the zero-shot setting.

                            Model Name       n=0        n = 128
                            Metalic       .482 ± .002 .552 ± .009
                            Metalic-NoAug .464 ± .011 .558 ± .002


A.4   F INE -T UNING WARM -U P

Metalic does not use a warm-up period for fine-tuning as it does for meta-training. This decision
was made since the warm-up normally occurs for 5,000 steps, but fine-tuning only occurs for 100
steps. As a compromise, we evaluate a warm-up period for fine-tuning, after taking a single gradient
step with the full learning rate (Metalic-FTWarmUp). We still see that not using a warm-up for
fine-tuning is superior. Results can be see in Table 10.

                    Table 10: Spearman correlation with and without warm-up.

                                 Model Name               n = 128
                                 Metalic                .552 ± .009
                                 Metalic-FTWarmUp       .539 ± .007


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5    M ORE M ULTI -M UTANT R ESULTS

In this section we present a table of additional results for tasks with multiple mutants, including the
Metalic-AuxIF models.
In Table 12, we see the performance of Metalic increases as the amount of training data, measured
in tasks, increases, providing more data is a path forward for strengthening the multi-mutant results.
Here, we also see that the trend changes for Metalic-AuxIF, since it performs better with more data,
but only if that data is multi-mutant data. This makes sense, since the auxiliary ESM-If1 predictions
are most effective for multi-mutants, and training on single-mutants could discourage relying on
them.
      Table 11: Spearman correlation for the 0, 16, and 128-shot setting for multi-mutant tasks.

              Model Name                        n=0            n = 16         n = 128
              Metalic (Both)                 .436 ± .011     .484 ± .001    .670 ± .003
              Metalic-AuxIF (Both)           .480 ± .007     .500 ± .002    .693 ± .006
              Metalic-AuxIF (MultiTrain)     .533 ± .012     .577 ± .008    .692 ± .003
              ESM1-v-650M                    .426 ± .000     .557 ± .000    .644 ± .000
              ESM2-8M                        .368 ± .000     .484 ± .000    .596 ± .000
              PoET                           .588 ± .014     .638 ± .001    .734 ± .006
              ProteinNPT                         N/A         .367 ± .003    .624 ± .003


Table 12: Multi-mutant Spearman correlation by training data. Results are computed using
predictions provided by ProteinGym on five tasks with multiple mutations with different amounts of
single- and multi-mutant training tasks. We see performance of Metalic increases with more data,
giving a path for future data collection. We also see here that Metalic-AuxIF performs better when
trained with only multi-mutant data. This makes sense, since the augmented predictions are most
effective for multi-mutants, and training on single-mutants could discourage relying on them. An
asterisk (∗ ) represents the default training data regime for that method.

                                                                                        Multiples
  Model Name                           Single-Mutant Tasks     Multi-Mutant Tasks         n=0
  Metalic (Both)∗                              121                    63               .436 ± .011
  Metalic (MultiTrain)                          0                     63               .376 ± .018
  Metalic (MultiTrainHalf)                      0                     30               .307 ± .022
  Metalic-AuxIF (Both)                         121                    63               .480 ± .007
  Metalic-AuxIF (MultiTrain)∗                   0                     63               .533 ± .012
  Metalic-AuxIF (MultiTrainHalf)                0                     30               .517 ± .021


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.6   D ETAILED A RCHITECTURE

Here, we present Fig. 6, which gives a more detailed version of the architecture diagram.

                                                         ARVHGKKERLSTY     1.7
                                                         GSAQVKGHGKKV      0.0
                                                         GAEALERMFLSFP     0.0
                                                                …          …
                                                         TTKTYFPHFDLSH     1.5


                                                              Concat

                                                                1.7
                                                                0.0
                                                                0.0
                                                                …
                                                                1.5


                                                                MLP
                                                              Flatten

                                                                        Sequence dimension
                                                                        reduced to 2           ARVHGKKERLSTY   1.7
                                                                                               GSAQVKGHGKKV    0.0
                                                          Mean pooling                         GAEALERMFLSFP   0.0
                                                                                                     …         …
                                                                                 Only query    TTKTYFPHFDLSH   1.5
                                                                                 embeddings
                                                                                 are taken


                                                                +
                                        Axial              Feedforward
                                    attention                LayerNorm

                                                                +
                                                         Column attention
                                                             LayerNorm

                                                                +
                                                          Row attention
                                                             LayerNorm



                                                                                 PLM
                                                                                 embeddings


                                                              Concat


                                                    PLM                   Linear

                                                MVLSPADKTNVKA               0.0
                               Support set           …                      …
                                                TTKTYFPHFDLSH               1.4

                                                ARVHGKKERLSTY                ?
                                                GSAQVKGHGKKV                 ?
                                Query set       GAEALERMFLSFP                ?
                                                     …                      …
                                                TTKTYFPHFDLSH                ?

                                                  Proteins               Fitnesses


Figure 6: Detailed diagram of architecture. Note that fitness embeddings are computed using a
learned linear projection for the support set and a shared learned embedding vector for the query set.


                                                           17
