Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


COF LOW N ET: C ONSERVATIVE C ONSTRAINTS
ON F LOWS E NABLE H IGH -Q UALITY C ANDIDATE
G ENERATION
 Yudong Zhang1 , Xuan Yu1 , Xu Wang1,2,∗ ,
 Zhaoyang Sun1 , Chen Zhang1 , Pengkun Wang1,2 , Yang Wang1,2,3 ∗
 1. University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China
 2. Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, Suzhou, China
 3. State Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, USTC, Hefei, China
 {zyd2020@mail., yx2024@mail., wx309@}ustc.edu.cn
 {sunzhaoyang@mail., zhangchenzc@mail., pengkun@, angyan@}ustc.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT

            Generative flow networks (GFlowNet) have been considered as powerful tools for
            generating candidates with desired properties. Given that evaluating the property
            of candidates can be complex and time-consuming, existing GFlowNets train proxy
            models for efficient online evaluation. However, the performance of proxy models
            is heavily dependent on the amount of data and is of considerable uncertainty.
            Therefore, it is of great interest that how to develop an offline GFlowNet that
            does not rely on online evaluation. Under the offline setting, the limited data
            results in an insufficient exploration of state space. The insufficient exploration
            means that offline GFlowNets can hardly generate satisfying candidates out of
            the distribution of training data. Therefore, it is critical to restrict the offline
            model to act in the distribution of training data. The distinctive training goal
            of GFlownets poses a unique challenge for making such restrictions. Tackling
            the challenge, we propose Conservative Offline GFlowNet (COFlowNet) in this
            paper. We define unsupported flow, edges containing unseen states in training data.
            Models can learn extremely little knowledge about unsupported flow from training
            data. By constraining the model from exploring unsupported flows, we restrict
            COFlowNet to explore as optimal trajectories on the training set as possible, thus
            generating better candidates. In order to improve the diversity of candidates, we
            further introduce a quantile version of unsupported flow restriction. Experimental
            results on several widely-used datasets validate the effectiveness of COFlowNet in
            generating high-scored and diverse candidates. All implementations are available
            at https://github.com/yuxuan9982/COflownet.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) is typically about finding an optimal solution to a given target (Mnih
et al., 2015; Sutton, 2018). RL models are required to generate the single highest-reward sequence
of actions. However, it has become increasingly apparent that the ability to produce a variety of
candidate solutions, not just the optimal one, is highly valuable for numerous real-world applications,
including molecule design (Huang et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2021; Bengio et al., 2021) and exploration
in RL (Hazan et al., 2019). For example, in the scenario of molecule design, rather than generating a
high-scoring molecule that cannot be synthesized, the model should generate a series of molecules
with suboptimal scores, so that chemists can pick molecules that are easier to synthesize.
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) (Bengio et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2022; Bengio et al., 2023;
Gao et al., 2022) have emerged as a potent tool for generating diverse candidates. The key insight of
GFlowNets is to ensure that the probability of generating a candidate is proportional to the positive
reward associated with that candidate. Therefore, GFlowNets is able to sample a series of possible
    ∗
        Dr. Xu Wang and Prof. Yang Wang are the corresponding authors. Email: wx309@ustc.edu.cn


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


candidates with the reward distribution. Taking advantage of such ability, GFlowNets have expressed
promising potential in many object generation application areas. Jain et al. (2022) embeds GFlowNet
into an active learning framework for biological sequence design, which iteratively generates diverse
candidates and screens the candidates to enhance the training of GFlowNet. Deleu et al. (2022);
Nishikawa-Toomey et al. (2022) leverage GFlowNets as a general framework for generative modeling
of discrete and composite objects, which approximates the posterior distribution over the structure
of Bayesian networks. Liu et al. (2023a) leverages GFlowNets for sampling structured sub-network
modules, thereby enhancing predictive robustness. Zhang et al. (2023a;c) apply GFlowNets to
address combinatorial optimization challenges. Additionally, Zhou et al. (2023) explores the use of
GFlowNets for phylogenetic inference, demonstrating the model’s versatility in diverse applications.
In many scenarios, evaluating generated candidates could be expensive and time-consuming, making
it impractical to calculate the accurate score of candidates. For example, in the realm of drug design,
evaluating a potential molecule often requires conducting biological experiments or performing
complex chemical calculations. Given that these assessment procedures can span from several
minutes to multiple days, they are impractical to integrate directly into the training phase of an RL
model. To this point, existing GFlowNets follow the method proposed in Angermueller et al. (2019),
which suggests training a proxy model based on evaluated candidates to approximate the accurate
scores (rewards) of candidates. Specifically, we have a set of candidates X = {xi } and a set of
corresponding scores Y = {yi |yi = oracal(xi )}, where oracal denotes the expensive but accurate
evaluation of candidates. Based on the dataset (X, Y ), a proxy model f : x → y can be trained to
approximate oracal. The proxy model is then employed to calculate the rewards of online sampled
candidates, with which the GFlowNets can be trained.
While GFlowNets have achieved notable success across various domains of object generation, their
effectiveness is significantly contingent upon the quality of the proxy models they rely on. Typically,
GFlowNets are trained to align with the candidate-reward distribution as estimated by a proxy model.
However, the scarcity of data can introduce considerable variability in the proxy model’s accuracy. If
the proxy model fails to accurately mirror the true quality of the candidates, the resulting performance
of the GFlowNets will be suboptimal. Given that proxy model training requires a comprehensive
dataset of candidates along with their actual scores, an alternative approach involves the development
of offline reinforcement learning methods. These methods could potentially sidestep the pitfalls
associated with proxy model dependency, offering a more reliable framework for GFlowNets training.
Unlike conventional RL models, GFlowNets are trained with the specific objective of generating
candidates with probabilities that are directly proportional to the positive rewards linked to those
candidates. This distinctive training goal presents unique challenges for the development of offline
GFlowNets, making existing offline RL techniques can not be directly applied. Specifically, the
policy in GFlowNet frameworks is determined by inflows and outflows of states, which complicates
the application of actor-critic methods (Nair et al., 2020; Tarasov et al., 2024). In Q-learning
frameworks (Kostrikov et al., 2021), Q-values are maximized iteratively by the Bellman operation,
which is actually against the flow match constraint in GFlowNet. Policy constraint or matching
methods (Wang et al., 2023) may assimilate less desirable state space, such as some low-reward areas,
making them unsuitable for offline GFlowNets. In essence, the distinctive training goal of GFlowNets
calls for the development of new offline techniques not found in traditional RL approaches.
In this paper, we propose a novel offline training strategy for GFlowNets to make full utilization
of collected data, called Conservative Offline GFlowNet (COFlowNet). To avoid the generation of
highly uncertain candidates, we define unsupported flows and propose to regularize the unsupported
flows, so that the model can learn informative knowledge from training data. To enhance the diversity
of generated candidates, we introduce a quantile matching algorithm, and modify the regularization
of unsupported flows into quantile style. We evaluate the proposed offline training strategy following
the experimental setting of Bengio et al. (2021). By applying the proposed training objective, the
offline version of GFlowNet shows great potential for generating diverse and high-score candidates.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

       • Our research endeavors to adapt GFlowNets for offline scenarios. A pioneering offline
         training strategy named Conservative Offline GFlowNet (COFlowNet) is introduced. Central
         to our approach is the concept of unsupported flows. By regularizing unsupported flows, the
         model learns informative knowledge from training data and generates high-score candidates.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • To enhance the diversity of generated candidates, we introduce a quantile matching algorithm.
         By modifying the regularization of unsupported flows into quantile style, we achieve the
         final training objective of COFlowNet, termed conservative quantile matching (CQM).
       • We evaluate the proposed offline training strategy in alignment with the experimental
         setting in Bengio et al. (2021). The proposed COFlowNet, equipped with the novel offline
         training objective, exhibits significant promise in producing a spectrum of diverse and
         high-performing candidates.

2     R ELATED W ORK
GFlowNet. Since the introduction of GFlowNets by Bengio et al. (2021), there has been a surge
of research in this domain, covering various aspects of the technology. Malkin et al. (2022);
Zimmermann et al. (2022) have explored the relationship with variational methods, demonstrating
that GFlowNets surpass variational inference when utilizing off-policy training data. Pan et al.
(2022; 2023b) has established frameworks to enhance credit assignment efficiency by incorporating
intermediate signals within GFlowNets. Jain et al. (2022) has delved into multi-objective generation
capabilities, while Pan et al. (2023c) integrated world modeling. An unsupervised learning approach
for GFlowNets was suggested by Pan et al. (2023a), and Ma et al. (2024) examined the use of
isomorphism tests to mitigate flow bias in training. From a probabilistic modeling perspective, Zhang
et al. (2022b) has concurrently trained an energy-based model alongside a GFlowNet, validating its
effectiveness on discrete data modeling tasks and proposing a bidirectional proposal mechanism later
adopted by Kim et al. (2023) for local search algorithms. Zhang et al. (2022a); Lahlou et al. (2023);
Zhang et al. (2023b) provided a theoretical analysis and bridged the gap between diffusion modeling
and GFlowNets. GFlowNets have also shown promise in numerous object generation applications,
including biological sequence design by Jain et al. (2022) and causal structure learning by Deleu
et al. (2022). Considering the complexity and time intensity associated with candidate property
evaluation, current GFlowNets utilize proxy models to facilitate efficient online assessments. Yet,
these proxy models’ effectiveness is highly contingent upon data volume, introducing a significant
margin of uncertainty. Hence, there is considerable interest in developing an offline GFlowNet that is
independent of real-time evaluation mechanisms. However, GFlowNets train to generate candidates
with probabilities proportional to their rewards, presenting challenges for offline adaptation that don’t
align with standard offline RL techniques. In the following, we analyze why existing offline RL
methods are not applicable.
Offline RL. Most existing offline RL methods are based on an actor-critic framework or Q-learning
framework. In a flow-based framework, a policy π is directly given by π(a|s) = F (s, a)/F (s),
where s denotes a state with actions a ∈ A(s) and F (s, a) denotes the flow of state s taking action
a. The policy is too fixed, making it difficult to apply techniques of actors from actor-critic-based
methods of offline reinforcement learning, such as AWAC (Nair et al., 2020) and ReBRAC (Tarasov
et al., 2024). However, Q-learning-based frameworks are also not applicable. The concept of flows
is analogous to Q-values in Q-learning and the critic in the actor-critic method. However, there are
still some significant differences between them. Q-values are iterated by the Bellman operation,
estimating how good an action is. But they focus on the maximum value, while the values of flows
denote the total sum of rewards passing the state, making it impractical to apply methods such
as Kostrikov et al. (2021) to our flow matching objective. For the flow matching objective to learn the
behavior policy of offline datasets better, an intuitive way is to use policy constraint methods (Wang
et al., 2023). Policy constraint methods will force the behavior strategy to learn the bad parts of the
dataset, such as some low-reward areas, thus it is not ideal for offline GFlowNets. Our proposed
method avoids this problem by not directly forcing trained policy to stay close to behavior policy.

3     M ETHOD
3.1   P ROBLEM FORMULATION

We describe the problem of interest here. We aim at training a policy to generate candidate objects x ∈
X with probability proportional to a reward function R(x) : x → R+ . We generate a candidate object
x from an initial state s0 , and make a series of actions to transfer the state finally into x. The procedure
can be described by a trajectory of state transformation, denoted as τ = (s0 , s1 , s2 , · · · , sn = x).


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We denote the set of states as S, and the set of actions as A = {(s → s′ )|s, s′ ∈ S}. Note that we
here assume the relationship between action and future state is a one-to-one correspondence, i.e.,
there is only one action (s → s′ ) that transfers s to s′ . We say s is a parent of s′ and s′ is a child of s
when we have (s → s′ ) ∈ A. Specially, we have A(s) denoting the set of actions between s and all
its children, and we thus have A(x) = ∅ for any terminal states x.
Generative Flow Networks (Bengio et al., 2021)
(GFlowNets) are developed for the target that                        𝑠!          𝑠"          𝑠$     𝑠%
generates candidate objects x with probabil-                                                                      𝑠)
ity proportional to R(x). Such an objective is             𝑠'
                                                                                       𝑠!*    𝑠!&   𝑠(
achieved in GFlowNets by casting the set of ac-                                 𝑠*
                                                                                                                       𝑠!"
tion trajectories as a flow and converting the flow                  𝑠#                                   𝑠!#
                                                                                 𝑠&          𝑠!'                       𝑠!%
consistency equations into a learning objective.
                                                                                                    𝑠!!
                                                                                                                𝑠!$
As in Fig. 1, the state transformation can be
illustrated as a directed acyclic graph (DAG). In Figure 1: Illustration of the flow network. The
the flow network, each node represents a state, triangle means initial state, the circles denote in-
and each edge represents a flow (action and its terior states, and the squares denote the terminal
corresponding probability). The source (or root) states. At each interior state, we have its inflow and
node only generates outflows. Interior nodes outflow matched. For a terminal state, the inflow
have both inflows and outflows, with inflows of it is equal to the reward at it.
equal to outflows. Leaf nodes (or terminal states)
only receive inflows and store them as sinks. At
a specific state si , we have several input flows from its prior states and output flows to its successive
states. The flow consistency equations require the inflow and outflow of an interior state (node) to be
matched, and the inflow of a terminal state is the reward of the state. We define F (s, s′ ) : (s, s′ ) → R+
as flow between state s and s′ . By setting R(s) = 0 for interior states and A(s) = ∅ for terminal
states, the flow match constraint of state s is given as,
                                   X                                  X
                   LF M (s) =              F (s, s′ ) − R(s′ ) −               F (s′ , s′′ )              (1)
                               s:(s→s′ )∈A                             s′′ :(s′ →s′′ )∈A

The above equation constrains that the inflows of a state are equal to the outflows of the state plus the
reward of the state. Considering a whole trajectory τ , we have,
                                                   X
                                    LF M (τ ) =          L2F M (s)                                    (2)
                                                      s∈τ ̸=s0

Note that we square LF M (s) to ensure the value is positive. The training objective of GFlowNets
is to learn F (s, s′ ) to minimize LF M (τ ). Bengio et al. (2021) proves that a global optimum of the
expected loss provides the correct flows. And the training objective can be achieved by setting the
probability of action (s → s′ ) as,
                                                                 F (s, s′ )
                             P ((s → s′ )|s) = P                                ′′
                                                                                                                       (3)
                                                      s′′ :(s→s′′ )∈A(s) F (s, s )


This equation suggests that the probability of taking action (s → s′ ) is the ratio of the flow of this
action to the outflow of s.

3.2   C ONSERVATIVE GF LOW N ET FOR OFFLINE RL

Due to the innovative design of GFlowNets, i.e., the flow matching, existing offline RL frameworks
are not applicable. To this end, this paper proposes a conservative offline GFlowNet (COFlowNet),
which learns informative knowledge from training data and shows the ability to generate diverse
candidates.
In the offline setting, the model is constrained from extensively exploring the state space and must
rely solely on the provided training data. This limitation can lead to inadequate coverage of the state
space within the data. Consequently, the performance of candidates whose trajectories include many
states not present in the training data may be highly uncertain, as limited clues of their performance
can be learned from training data.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To avoid the generation of highly uncertain candi-                      States and Actions      States and Actions
dates, COFlowNet makes constraints on the flows.                        present in dataset      not present in dataset

The offline dataset D we used is composed by a list
of transitions (st , at , st+1 , rt , dt )i , where i indexes                  𝑠!          𝑠"    𝑠$               𝑠'
a transition sampled from a trajectory τ . Specifically,
                                                                   𝑠(
we call a flow (s → s′ ) supported if there exists a                                             𝑠)               𝑠*
trajectory (s0 → s1 → s2 → · · · → sn ) in the
dataset D such that st = s and st+1 = s′ . Otherwise,                          𝑠#          𝑠%    𝑠&              𝑠!(
it is unsupported. These supported flows compose
our action set AD of training data and serve as the Figure 2: Illustration of supported and un-
basis for imposing node-specific constraints within supported flows. Edges not present in the
the proposed COFlowNet framework.                                dataset are defined as unsupported flows. For
                                                                 instance, (s2 → s3 ) is unsupported.
For inflows in state s, we constrain the unsupported
inflows in the dataset by adding a regularization term
to constrain them into small values. The unseen actions are thus constrained to help COFlowNet
better learn the behavior policy of training data. The regularization term of unsupported inflows of
state s can be formulated as,
                                             X                        X
                         Rin (s) =                  F (s′ , s) −                    F (s′D , s)                     (4)
                                       s′ :(s′ →s)∈A                 s′D :(s′D →s)∈AD

For outflows in node s ∈ S, our strategy is similar, and the regularization term of outflows is defined
as,                                 X                           X
                   Rout (s) =                F (s, s′′ ) −                F (s, s′′D )               (5)
                                       s′′ :(s→s′′ )∈A                 s′′     ′′
                                                                        D :(s→sD )∈AD



Let us define two trade-off factors α1 ≥ 0 and α2 ≥ 0 for Rin (s) and Rout (s). We can turn our
Equation into our constrained flow matching (CFM) objective for interior and terminal states to
optimize the parameter θ.
                               LCF M (s) = L2F M (s) + α1 R2in (s) + α2 R2out (s)                                         (6)
We here square Rin and Rout for the same reason as Eq. 2. We next prove that applying the
regularization will exactly decrease the unsupported flow and will not hurt the supported flow.
Theorem 1. Given two flow estimation function, F̂ trained with regularization and F trained without
regularization, we have F̂ (s, s′ ) ≤ F (s, s′ ) obtains for unsupported flow (s, s′ ), i.e., (s, s′ ) ∈ A
and (s, s′ ) ∈
             / AD .
Proof. With trainable parameters in F denoted as θ, the derivative of constrained flow matching
objective to θ is,
                                                                                                            
                                                             ′                                          ′′
        ∂ L̂CF M (s)                        X        ∂ F̂ (s   ,  s)              X         ∂ F̂ (s,  s    )
                     = 2LF M (s) ·                                   −                                      
             ∂θ                                           ∂θ                                     ∂θ
                                      s′ :(s′ →s)∈A                        s′′ :(s→s′′ )∈A
                                                                                                                 
                                                                ′
                                              X       ∂ F̂  (s    , s)               X           ∂ F̂ (s  D  , s)
                     + 2α1 Rin (s) ·                                   −                                                (7)
                                                           ∂θ                                          ∂θ
                                       s′ :(s′ →s)∈A                        sD :(sD →s)∈AD
                                                                                                                     
                                                                       ′′                                        ′′
                                               X          ∂ F̂  (s,  s    )             X           ∂  F̂  (s,  sD )
                     + 2α2 Rout (s) ·                                       −
                                           ′′     ′′
                                                                ∂θ                ′′     ′′
                                                                                                            ∂θ
                                                s :(s→s )∈A                       sD :(s→sD )∈AD

And we have the derivative of flow matching objective without regularization as,
                                                                                        
                                                      ′                             ′′
         ∂LF M (s)                       X       ∂F (s  , s)      X        ∂F  (s, s   )
                     = 2LF M (s) ·                          −                                                           (8)
             ∂θ                       ′  ′
                                                    ∂θ         ′′    ′′
                                                                               ∂θ
                                                s :(s →s)∈A                     s :(s→s )∈A


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The second and third terms of the derivative in Eq. 7 only minimize
                                                    ˆ s′ ) = F (s, s′ )                     all children of 𝑠!
flows not appear in the offline dataset. We get F (s,
only when α1 = 0 and α2 = 0.                                                                           𝑆%
Theorem 2. Given any state, minimizing its inflow from unsupported
states will enlarge the inflow from supported states.
                                                                                                       𝑠"
Proof. For any state s, for example, s4 in Figure 3, we have that the
total inflows equal the total outflows:
          F (s1 , s4 ) + F (s2 , s4 ) + F (s3 , s4 ) = F (s4 , Sc )
                                                                                       𝑠!              𝑠#        𝑠$
where Sc denotes all the children of s4 and F (s4 , Sc ) is the sum
of outflows from s4 to its children. The total reward (flow) in the Figure 3: Illustration of The-
training data is determined, as all terminal states are given by the data, orem 2. Due to the balance
and the reward can only be obtained at terminal states. Therefore, of inflows and outflows, re-
the outflow F (s4 , Sc ) is constant and denoted as Fo . Furthermore, ducing the flow between s
the inflow from supported states F (s1 , s4 ) + F (s2 , s4 ) is equal to and s will increase the other3
                                                                               4
Fo − F (s3 , s4 ). Since Fo is constant, minimizing the inflow from two inflows.
unsupported states F (s3 , s4 ) will lead to an increase in the inflow
from supported states F (s1 , s4 ) + F (s2 , s4 ). This reasoning process
can be easily extended to general conditions (with more supported and unsupported states).
Directly using Eq. 6 will result in large flow at states near to s0 . To solve the numerical issue, we
proposed the log sum exp form of our objective similar to Bengio et al. (2021),
                          X                                                   X
LCF M (s) = (log[ϵ +               exp(Fθlog (s′ , s))] − log[ϵ + R(s) +              exp(Fθlog (s, s′′ ))])2
                         s′ :(s′ →s)∈A                                               s′′ :(s→s′′ )∈A
                    X                                                  X
+ α1 (log[ϵ +                   exp(Fθlog (s′ , s))] − log[ϵ +                      exp(Fθlog (s′D , s))])2
                s′ :(s′ →s)∈A                                    s′D :(s′D →s)∈AD
                     X                                                   X
+ α2 (log[ϵ +                     exp(Fθlog (s, s′′ ))] − log[ϵ +                    exp(Fθlog (s, s′′D ))])2
                s′′ :(s→s′′ )∈A                                     s′′     ′′
                                                                     D :(s→sD )∈AD
                                                                                                                      (9)

3.3   B ETTER DIVERSITY WITH QUANTILE MATCHING FLOWS

We here introduce and modify the quantile matching algorithm to consider the uncertainty of reward
and thus enhance the diversity of generated candidates of our framework. Quantile matching algorithm
is originally used to handle situations where the reward function is stochastic and outperforms
deterministic flow matching algorithms even on deterministic datasets (Zhang et al., 2023d).
Follow the definition in Zhang et al. (2023d), we use Zβ (s, s′ ) to represent the quantile flow between
s and s′ . And the equality of inflows and outflows is expanded to the distribution between two random
variables, i.e., the quantile flow,
                                 X                                 X
             δ β,β̂ (s) = log          exp(Zβlog (s′ , s)) − log          exp(Zβ̂log (s, s′′ ))      (10)
                                (s′ →s)∈A                              (s→s′′ )∈A

We thus have the regularization term of unsupported inflows in Eq. 4 as,
              β
                              X                              X
             δin (s) = log          exp Zβlog (s′ , s) − log         exp Zβlog (s′D , s)                          (11)
                                (s′ →s)∈A                            (s′D →s)∈AD

Similarly, the regularization term of unsupported outflows of s is formed as this,
              β̂
                               X                                 X
             δout (s) = log           exp Zβ̂log (s, s′′ ) − log        exp Zβ̂log (s, s′′D )                     (12)
                                (s→s′′ )∈A                            (s→s′′
                                                                          D )∈AD


                                                                   β       β̂
We deploy the pinball error ρβ (δ) = |β − 1{δ < 0}|ℓ1 (δ) to both δin and δout , where ℓ1 (·) is a
smooth ℓ1 loss:                            1 2
                                             δ      if |δ| < 1
                                  ℓ1 (δ) = 2                                                 (13)
                                           |δ| − 12 otherwise

                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, we propose the conservative quantile matching (CQM) objective for COFlowNet,
                     N   N̂                                N                         N̂
                 1 XX                  ˆ                1 X         βi            1 X          βˆi
 LCQM (s) =                   ρβi (δ βi ,βj (s)) + α1    (    ρβi (δin (s))) + α2 (     ρβˆi (δout (s))) (14)
                N̂ i=1 j=1                              N i=1                    N̂ i=1

4     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we evaluate the proposed COFlowNet on two tasks, Hypergrid and molecule design.
During the evaluation, we mainly focus on two research questions: 1) How is the performance
of candidates generated by COFlowNet? 2) How is the diversity of the generated candidates? To
facilitate a more comprehensive evaluation, we select various metrics tailored to different tasks. These
metrics are chosen to better evaluate the performance and diversity. Besides the two questions, we
will also investigate the impact of different components of COFlowNet. Additionally, we deploy the
proposed COFlowNet to additional tasks in B. All the experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA
Tesla A100 80GB. The offline dataset is formatted as D = {s, s′ , r|(s, s′ ) ∈ AD , r = R(s′ )}. When
training the model, we sample batched data from D and calculate the loss function. We can thus
align the samples used for training in our offline model with states visited in online models for fair
comparison. We detail the experimental settings and results on specific tasks in the following.

4.1     H YPERGRID

4.1.1    TASK DEFINITION
We first evaluate the proposed COFlowNet on the hypergrid task from Bengio et al. (2021). The
state space is a D-dimensional hypercube grid of size H D , where H represents the dimension of the
grid. The agent is tasked with formulating long-term plans and learning from sparse reward signals.
It begins at the origin of the grid, i.e., at coordinate (0, 0, · · · , 0), and must navigate by incrementing
one of the coordinates by 1 with each move. Additionally, the agent has the option to execute a
special termination action from any state. Upon deciding to stop, the agent is awarded a reward as
specified by the following reward function,
                      D                                                 D
                      Y        xd                                 Y       xd
    R(x) = R0 + R1        I(|       − 0.5| ∈ (0.25, 0.5])) + R2      I(|        − 0.5| ∈ (0.3, 0.4]))
                             H −1                                        H −1
                     d=1                                         d=1
                                                                                                   (15)
Where I is the indicator function, which returns 1 when the input condition is true otherwise 0, we set
R0 = 0.00001, R1 = 0.5, R2 = 2, H = 8 and D = 4. The formula reveals that there are 2D = 16
distinct modes for this task, where a mode is defined as a local region (potentially encompassing one
or more states) that yields the highest reward value.

4.1.2    O FFLINE DATA CONSTRUCTION
Three strategies are applied to construct the offline dataset for training COFlowNet on Hypergrid:
1) Expert: employ an online GFlowNet to generate an offline dataset with 2 × 104 trajectories.
2) Random: randomly generate an offline dataset with 2 × 104 trajectories. 3) Mixed: take 104
trajectories from Expert and 104 trajectories from Random.

4.1.3    R ESULT
We report two metrics of COFlowNet, number of modes and ℓ1 error. Number of modes denotes how
many modes the model finds, which reflects the diversity of the model. As mentioned, the goal of
GFlowNets is to generate candidates with probabilities proportional to their rewards. In this case,
we can enumerate all states and
                             P accurately give the ground truth the probability that a candidate is
generated as p(x) = R(x)/ x∈X R(x). And we can approximate the probability of generating
x, denoted as π(x), by repeated sampling and counting frequencies for x. ℓ1 error is defined
as E[|p(x) − π(x)|], which estimates whether the model generates candidates with probabilities
proportional to their rewards.
This task is rather simple, we employ vanilla GFlowNet (Bengio et al., 2021) for comparison. Since
the optimal diversity of candidates is rather small, we apply CFM loss in Eq. 9 on this task rather


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       6.0E-04
                                                                                           16                                       Expert
                       5.0E-04                                                             14                                       Expert w/o
  distribution error                                                                       12


                                                                            num of modes
                       4.0E-04                                                                                                      Mixed
                                                                                           10
                       3.0E-04                                                              8                                       Mixed w/o

                       2.0E-04                                                              6                                       Random
                                                                                            4                                       Random w/o
                       1.0E-04
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                    GFlowNet
                       0.0E+00                                                              0
                                 0   150000    300000 450000   600000                           0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                              states visited                                               states visited

                                        (a) ℓ1 error                                                     (b) number of modes
Figure 4: Experimental result on Hypergrid. Expert, Random and Mixed correspond to different
settings of constructing offline datasets as described in Sec. 4.1.2. w/o means removing the regular-
ization term from the training loss.


than CQM loss in Eq. 14. The result on Hypergrid is reported in Fig. 4, where w/o means removing
regularization term from the training loss, i.e., using only flow matching loss and setting αi to 0.
As reported in Fig. 4b, most models find all of the 16 modes within 40000 times state visiting. When
trained on Mixed data, COFlowNet can generate all the modes with the least visit of states. Applying
the proposed regularization method will reduce the number of state visits by 10%. It is worth noting
that the model performs badly on the Random dataset no matter regularization is applied or not. Such
a result indicates that the performance of offline models relies on the quality of training data.
Fig. 4a reports the ℓ1 error of different models. We can find that vanilla GFlowNet achieves the goal
of generating candidates with probabilities proportional to their rewards with the least times of state
visiting. It can be found that when trained on Expert and Mixed, COFlowNet can also get close to the
goal of GFlowNets, but takes more times of state visiting. Actually, due to the limited coverage of
state space of training data, COFlowNet can hardly really achieve the goal. It is also worth noting that
the ℓ1 error is high when the regularization is removed. The reason can be found in Eq. 7. When the
regularization is removed, the model can not find any clue to reduce the unsupported flow, resulting
in randomly exploring those flows, which is against the goal. For example, suppose that we have a
supported flow (s1 , x) and an unsupported flow (s2 , x) flow into the same terminal state x. Then, the
reward of x is divided randomly into the two flows (only related to the initialization of F ). Without
the regularization, the model will never know whether the flow should be divided into (s2 , x). Worse
still, the model even needs to allocate inflow for the state s2 to balance the inflow and outflow of s2 .
Overall, through the result of this simple task, we find the potential of COFlowNet and the effective-
ness of the proposed conservative regularization strategy. Next, we introduce a more complex and
realistic task: molecule design.

4.2                     M OLECULE DESIGN

4.2.1                      TASK DEFINITION
In recent years, artificial intelligence methods have flourished in the field of chemistry, especially for
molecular-related tasks (Du et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023e). Among those tasks,
molecule design is a typical application scenario for GFlowNets, where both the diversity and quality
of candidates are required. In this task, the objective is to design a variety of molecules that exhibit
specific chemical properties. The emphasis on diversity in this task is crucial, as it allows chemists to
discover molecules that are not only characterized by their desired chemical properties but are also
easy to synthesize. In this section, we are interested in designing molecules with large binding energy
to a particular protein target.
In this task, we have states as molecule graphs or SMILES 1 , and actions as adding new components
to a molecule. Therefore, the molecule design task becomes a decision process. We have a vocabulary
  1
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simplified_Molecular_Input_Line_Entry_
System


                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Data scarcity                                                               Fully trained
                            Models            avg top 10      avg top 100      avg top 1000                               avg top 10      avg top 100        avg top 1000
    MARS                                          /                  /                /                                    8.0778             7.833               7.5992
     PPO                                          /                  /                /                                    8.4249            8.3387               8.2555
   GFlowNet                                    8.4381             8.2909           8.0580                                  8.5283            8.3539               8.1440
 QM-GFlowNet                                   8.4979             8.3272           8.1014                                  8.5552            8.4019               8.1886
 COFlowNet w/o                                 8.3400             8.2046           8.0996                                  8.4859            8.3278               8.1083
  COFlowNet                                    8.4638             8.3034           8.1088                                  8.5029            8.3730               8.1693

Table 1: The average reward of the top k candidates. Darker blue denotes the best result and
lighter blue denotes the second best.


of building blocks specified by junction tree modeling (Jin et al., 2018), which we inherit from vanilla
GFlowNet (Bengio et al., 2021). At each step, the action space is determined by two factors: selecting
an atom to which a building block will be attached, and deciding which block to attach. In our case,
the size of the vocabulary of building blocks is 105. Given a molecule, a building block can be added
to the molecule at different positions. And the number of applicable actions of a state is greater than
105, leading to a larger state space.

4.2.2                          DATASET
As computing binding energy is computationally expensive, existing online RL models train proxy
models to approximate it. Interestingly, the proxy models are also employed to evaluate their molecule
models for computational convenience. If the target of an RL model is to fit the distribution of reward
function, there is nothing wrong with evaluating the model with proxy, in which case the model is to
fit the proxy. But for molecule design, we should not ignore the gap between the proxy model and
oracle, i.e., the expensive computation. To this end, we propose two kinds of evaluation. Specifically,
we first construct a dataset DL with 300k molecules as in Bengio et al. (2021). A proxy model PD is
trained on DL to serve as oracle, since we are unable to access the real oracle due to the expensive
computation. We design two settings for evaluation: 1) Fully trained: In this case, we have DL as
an offline dataset and train our model on it. Online models are trained with PD . PD is also employed
to evaluate all molecule design models. 2) Data scarcity: In this case, a small dataset DS containing
about 14k molecules is generated by a well-trained generative model. COFlowNet is trained on the
small dataset DS . Also, we have a weak proxy model PW trained on DS , and online models are
trained with PW . Similarly, PD is employed to evaluate all molecule design models.


                      20000                                                                                    1800
                                        GFlowNet                                                                            GFlowNet
  number of modes (R>7.5)


                                                                                                               1600
                                                                                       number of modes (R>8)


                                        FM-COFlowNet                                                                        FM-COFlowNet
                      15000             QM-GFlowNet                                                            1400         QM-GFlowNet
                                        COFlownet                                                              1200         COFlownet
                                        PPO                                                                    1000         PPO
                      10000             MARS                                                                                MARS
                                                                                                                800
                                                                                                                600
                            5000                                                                                400
                                                                                                                200
                              0                                                                                   0
                                   0      1     2        3       4     5       6                                      0       1        2        3       4     5       6
                                                state visited (105)                                                                    state visited (105)
                              (a) number of modes with reward > 7.5                                               (b) number of modes with reward > 8

                                       Figure 5: Experimental result on Molecule Design with a large dataset.


4.2.3                          R ESULT
We compare COFlowNet with two popular flow-based baselines, vanilla GFlowNet (Bengio et al.,
2021) and QM-GFlowNet (Zhang et al., 2023d). Two more baselines, MARS (Xie et al., 2021) and
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), are involved here to compare COFlowNet with non-flow-based methods.


                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Noting that MARS and PPO require a fully-trained proxy model to provide accurate reward, we only
report their performance under the setting of Fully trained. Additionally, we introduce COFlowNet
w/o as an offline baseline, which removes the proposed conservative regularization term and is
employed to substantiate our assertion that the regularization term enhances our model’s performance.
For the effectiveness comparison, we consider the average reward of the top k = {10, 100, 1000}
candidates. Such a metric indicates the ability of models to generate high-score candidates.
As reported in Table. 1, MARS performs significantly worse than flow-based models, including our
COFlowNet. While PPO generates candidates with scores comparable to those of flow-based models,
its performance in terms of diversity is markedly inferior, which will be shown in the following.
The performance gap between COFlowNet and COFlowNet w/o validates the effectiveness of the
proposed conservative regularization term on unsupported flows. QM-GFlowNet achieves the best
performance in generating high-score candidates. Online models, QM-GFlowNet and GFlowNet,
possess better exploration capabilities through interaction with proxy models, while Offline models
can solely learn from collected data, where the state space is limited. Consequently, given a good
proxy model, offline models can hardly outperform online models. The performance gap between
GFlowNet and COFlowNet w/o also supports the analysis. Surprisingly, COFlowNet can beat vanilla
GFlowNet on most of the metrics, especially when data is scarce to train a strong proxy model.
Considering the above analysis between online and offline models, such results further validate the
effectiveness of the proposed method. Meanwhile, as demonstrated in Table. 1, when the proxy
model is suboptimal, with limited available data, the performance of QM-GFlowNet deteriorates
more rapidly compared to COFlowNet.

                        18000                                                                             1600
                                       GFlowNet                                                                      GFlowNet
                        16000
    number of modes (R>7.5)


                                                                                                          1400
                                                                                  number of modes (R>8)


                                       FM-COFlowNet                                                                  FM-COFlowNet
                        14000          QM-GFlowNet                                                        1200       QM-GFlowNet
                                       COFlownet                                                                     COFlownet
                        12000
                                                                                                          1000
                        10000
                                                                                                           800
                         8000
                         6000                                                                              600
                         4000                                                                              400
                         2000                                                                              200
                            0                                                                                0
                                 0      1      2        3       4    5   6                                       0    1      2        3       4    5   6
                                               state visited (105)                                                           state visited (105)
                               (a) number of modes with reward > 7.5                                         (b) number of modes with reward > 8

                                     Figure 6: Experimental result on Molecule Design with a small dataset.

We further compare the diversity of candidates generated by different models. Considering that
we introduce quantile matching loss for improving diversity, we here replace COFlowNet w/o with
FM-COFlowNet, which utilizes flow matching loss rather than quantile matching loss. As shown
in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, COFlowNet achieves the best diversity. MARS and PPO show poor diversity
performance. Notably, COFlowNet generates nearly 20 times as many candidate modes as MARS,
demonstrating its superior ability to explore diverse candidates. The inferior diversity performance of
MARS and PPO denotes that they are generating similar candidates and overfit the proxy model. The
diversity gaps between FM-COFlowNet and COFlowNet, GFlowNet and QM-GFlowNet indicate
the effectiveness of quantile matching loss in improving the diversity of candidates. Specifically,
applying quantile matching loss leads to 10% to 20% improvement in diversity.

5                             C ONCLUSION

This paper extends GFlowNets to offline scenarios, especially for applications where evaluating a
candidate is quite expensive and historical data has been collected. To take full utilization of the
offline data, we define unsupported flows. By regularizing the unsupported flows, we prevent the
model from making uncertain exploration of state space, thus generating candidates with higher
scores. Additionally, to improve the character of GFlowNet in generating diverse candidates, we
introduce a quantile matching algorithm. By modifying the regularization of unsupported flows into
a quantile version, we finally propose the conservative offline GFlowNet, called COFlowNet.


                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This paper is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.12227901),
the Natural Science Foundation of China Youth Project (No.62402472), and the Natural Science
Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China Youth Project (No.BK20240461, No.BK20240460).

R EFERENCES
Christof Angermueller, David Dohan, David Belanger, Ramya Deshpande, Kevin Murphy, and Lucy
  Colwell. Model-based reinforcement learning for biological sequence design. In International
  conference on learning representations, 2019.
Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow
 network based generative models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27381–27394, 2021.
Yoshua Bengio, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Edward J Hu, Mo Tiwari, and Emmanuel Bengio.
  Gflownet foundations. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(1):10006–10060, 2023.
Tristan Deleu, António Góis, Chris Emezue, Mansi Rankawat, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Stefan Bauer,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Bayesian structure learning with generative flow networks. In Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 518–528. PMLR, 2022.
Wenjie Du, Shuai Zhang, Jun Xia Di Wu, Ziyuan Zhao, Junfeng Fang, and Yang Wang. Mmgnn:
 A molecular merged graph neural network for explainable solvation free energy prediction. In
 Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
 5808–5816, 2024.
Wenhao Gao, Tianfan Fu, Jimeng Sun, and Connor Coley. Sample efficiency matters: A
 benchmark for practical molecular optimization. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agar-
 wal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems, volume 35, pp. 21342–21357. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. URL
 https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
 8644353f7d307baaf29bc1e56fe8e0ec-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.
 pdf.
Elad Hazan, Sham Kakade, Karan Singh, and Abby Van Soest. Provably efficient maximum entropy
  exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2681–2691. PMLR, 2019.
Po-Ssu Huang, Scott E Boyken, and David Baker. The coming of age of de novo protein design.
  Nature, 537(7620):320–327, 2016.
Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Bonaventure FP
 Dossou, Chanakya Ajit Ekbote, Jie Fu, Tianyu Zhang, Michael Kilgour, Dinghuai Zhang, et al.
 Biological sequence design with gflownets. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 9786–9801. PMLR, 2022.
Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction tree variational autoencoder for
 molecular graph generation. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2323–2332.
 PMLR, 2018.
Minsu Kim, Taeyoung Yun, Emmanuel Bengio, Dinghuai Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, Sungsoo Ahn, and
 Jinkyoo Park. Local search gflownets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02710, 2023.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit
   q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169, 2021.
Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Pablo Lemos, Dinghuai Zhang, Alexandra Volokhova, Alex Hernández-
  Garcıa, Léna Néhale Ezzine, Yoshua Bengio, and Nikolay Malkin. A theory of continuous
  generative flow networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18269–18300.
  PMLR, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiahe Li, Wenjie Du, and Yang Wang. Molclw: Molecular contrastive learning with learnable weighted
   substructures. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM),
   pp. 828–831. IEEE, 2024.
Dianbo Liu, Moksh Jain, Bonaventure FP Dossou, Qianli Shen, Salem Lahlou, Anirudh Goyal,
  Nikolay Malkin, Chris Chinenye Emezue, Dinghuai Zhang, Nadhir Hassen, et al. Gflowout:
  Dropout with generative flow networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  21715–21729. PMLR, 2023a.
Shuchang Liu, Qingpeng Cai, Zhankui He, Bowen Sun, Julian McAuley, Dong Zheng, Peng Jiang,
  and Kun Gai. Generative flow network for listwise recommendation. In Proceedings of the 29th
  ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1524–1534, 2023b.
George Ma, Emmanuel Bengio, Yoshua Bengio, and Dinghuai Zhang. Baking symmetry into
  gflownets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05426, 2024.
Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Chen Sun, and Yoshua Bengio. Trajectory balance:
  Improved credit assignment in gflownets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  5955–5967, 2022.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Ashvin Nair, Abhishek Gupta, Murtaza Dalal, and Sergey Levine. Awac: Accelerating online
  reinforcement learning with offline datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09359, 2020.
Mizu Nishikawa-Toomey, Tristan Deleu, Jithendaraa Subramanian, Yoshua Bengio, and Laurent
 Charlin. Bayesian learning of causal structure and mechanisms with gflownets and variational
 bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.02763, 2022.
Ling Pan, Dinghuai Zhang, Aaron Courville, Longbo Huang, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative
  augmented flow networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03308, 2022.
Ling Pan, Moksh Jain, Kanika Madan, and Yoshua Bengio. Pre-training and fine-tuning generative
  flow networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03419, 2023a.
Ling Pan, Nikolay Malkin, Dinghuai Zhang, and Yoshua Bengio. Better training of gflownets with
  local credit and incomplete trajectories. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  26878–26890. PMLR, 2023b.
Ling Pan, Dinghuai Zhang, Moksh Jain, Longbo Huang, and Yoshua Bengio. Stochastic generative
  flow networks. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1628–1638. PMLR, 2023c.
Malak Pirtskhalava, Anthony A Amstrong, Maia Grigolava, Mindia Chubinidze, Evgenia Alim-
 barashvili, Boris Vishnepolsky, Andrei Gabrielian, Alex Rosenthal, Darrell E Hurt, and Michael
 Tartakovsky. Dbaasp v3: database of antimicrobial/cytotoxic activity and structure of peptides as a
 resource for development of new therapeutics. Nucleic acids research, 49(D1):D288–D297, 2021.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Richard S Sutton. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. A Bradford Book, 2018.
Denis Tarasov, Vladislav Kurenkov, Alexander Nikulin, and Sergey Kolesnikov. Revisiting the
  minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Haozhi Wang, HAO Jianye, Yinchuan Li, et al. Regularized offline gflownets. 2023.
Yutong Xie, Chence Shi, Hao Zhou, Yuwei Yang, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li. Mars: Markov
  molecular sampling for multi-objective drug discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10432, 2021.
David W Zhang, Corrado Rainone, Markus Peschl, and Roberto Bondesan. Robust scheduling with
  gflownets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05446, 2023a.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dinghuai Zhang, Jie Fu, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Unifying likelihood-free inference
  with black-box optimization and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03372, 2021.
Dinghuai Zhang, Ricky TQ Chen, Nikolay Malkin, and Yoshua Bengio. Unifying generative models
  with gflownets and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02606, 2022a.
Dinghuai Zhang, Nikolay Malkin, Zhen Liu, Alexandra Volokhova, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Generative flow networks for discrete probabilistic modeling. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 26412–26428. PMLR, 2022b.
Dinghuai Zhang, Ricky Tian Qi Chen, Cheng-Hao Liu, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Diffu-
  sion generative flow samplers: Improving learning signals through partial trajectory optimization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02679, 2023b.
Dinghuai Zhang, Hanjun Dai, Nikolay Malkin, Aaron C Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and Ling Pan.
  Let the flows tell: Solving graph combinatorial problems with gflownets. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 36:11952–11969, 2023c.
Dinghuai Zhang, Ling Pan, Ricky TQ Chen, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Distributional
  gflownets with quantile flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05793, 2023d.
Jiahui Zhang, Wenjie Du, Di Wu, Jiahe Li, Shuai Zhang, and Yang Wang. Improving efficiency in
   rationale discovery for out-of-distribution molecular representations. In 2023 IEEE International
   Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp. 401–407. IEEE, 2023e.
Mingyang Zhou, Zichao Yan, Elliot Layne, Nikolay Malkin, Dinghuai Zhang, Moksh Jain, Mathieu
 Blanchette, and Yoshua Bengio. Phylogfn: Phylogenetic inference with generative flow networks.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08774, 2023.
Heiko Zimmermann, Fredrik Lindsten, Jan-Willem van de Meent, and Christian A Naesseth. A
  variational perspective on generative flow networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07992, 2022.


A     T IME C ONSUMPTION
In this part, we compare the training cost between the proposed method with online baselines.
Compared to online models, COFlowNet is sampling-free during training, resulting in a reduction
in training time. In Table. 2, we report the average training time per epoch for both COFlowNet
and the baseline models. Since online models sample batches during training while offline models
are trained on batched states, we report the time of online and offline models training on the same
number of states ( i.e., the number of states in the offline dataset), which we term as an epoch. The
reported times reflect the average duration for 100 epochs. It is worth noting that we exclude the
online evaluation time consumption of the online model (called oracle or proxy model) and the time
consumption of training proxy models. As shown in Table. 2, the offline version of vanilla GFlowNet,
i.e., FM-COFlowNet, takes approximately 1/3 less time to train than GFlowNet. Even with a more
complex matching method, COFlowNet remains faster than GFlowNet and is approximately twice as
fast as QM-GFlowNet. This demonstrates that COFlowNet offers significant efficiency advantages in
terms of time cost.

            Model             GFlowNet     QM-GFlowNet         FM-COFlowNet        COFlowNet
    Training time (s/epoch)     1.594            2.904               1.055             1.521

Table 2: Comparison of training time consumption. Darker blue denotes the best result and lighter
blue denotes the second best.


B     E XPERIMENTS ON M ORE TASKS
In Sec. 4, we have evaluated COFlowNet on two distinct tasks: the Hypergrid task and the Molecule
Design task. Furthermore, our method is inherently generalizable to any domain where GFlowNets
are applicable. To further validate the efficiency of COFlowNet beyond these tasks, we have extended
our experiments to other tasks.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1      A NTI -M ICROBIAL P EPTIDE D ESIGN

To further validate the efficiency of COFlowNet beyond these tasks, we have extended our experiments
to include the Anti-Microbial Peptide Design task (Pirtskhalava et al., 2021). In this task, the
objective is to generate peptides (short protein sequences) with anti-microbial properties, where
actions involve selecting amino acids from a predefined set with 20 elements and the longest sequence
is with 50 elements. For a given model, we have D denoting the set of generated candidates with top
100 scores, and evaluate the methods using the following three metrics,
Performance: The average score/reward of the top 100 generated candidates.
                                                P
                                                       reward(x)
                           Performance(D) = x∈D                                                   (16)
                                                       |D|

Diversity: The average pairwise distance among the top 100 candidates.
                                              P
                                                 xi ,xj ∈D d(xi , xj )
                             Diversity(D) =                                                       (17)
                                                  |D|(|D| − 1)
where d(·, ·) is the Levenshtein distance between two sequences.
Novelty: The average distance between the top 100 candidates and known peptides, indicating the
ability to generate new peptides.
                                             P
                                                    minsj ∈D0 d(xi , sj )
                            Novelty(D) = xi ∈D                                             (18)
                                                        |D|
where D0 is the dataset used for training the proxy model.

                          Model          Performance       Novelty    Diversity
                     QM-GFlowNet              0.895          29.12      12.14
                       GFlowNet               0.868          15.72      11.32
                     COFlowNet w/o            0.788          25.68      10.43
                     FM-COFlowNet             0.853          28.53      13.44
                      COFlowNet               0.878          28.88      12.45

Table 3: The average reward of the top k candidates. Darker blue denotes the best result and
lighter blue denotes the second best.

The experimental results are summarized in Table. 3, showing that COFlowNet achieves superior
performance across all three metrics, comparable to advanced online models despite being trained
offline. These results further substantiate COFlowNet’s capability to generate high-quality and diverse
candidates across various tasks.
In summary, our COFlowNet demonstrates consistent and significant improvements over other
methods across a diverse range of tasks, highlighting its broad applicability and efficiency.

B.2      I TEM R ECOMMENDATION

To further demonstrate the effectiveness of COFlowNet in diverse domains, we have extended
our experiments to another classic and practical task in the domain of online businesses, item
recommendation, inspired by the literature Liu et al. (2023b). In this task, for a given user u, models
are required to sample trajectories, where each state corresponds to an item. Notably, instead of
calculating rewards on the terminal states, we calculate rewards based on the whole trajectories in
this task, which correspond to lists of items. This task aims to provide diverse recommendations with
high quality, which is exactly a good application of the problem studied in this paper.
Experimental setting. The experiment is conducted on ML1M dataset, a subset of the MovieLens
dataset2 . We report three key metrics for evaluation: average reward (Avg.R), max reward (Max.R),
and Coverage. We employ the online user environment proposed in Liu et al. (2023b) to calculate
   2
       The dataset is available at https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/1m/


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the preference of users to items, denoted as s(u, a), which returns the user u’s response score of item
a. Given a list of items A and a user u, the reward of A is calculated as
                                                   1 X
                                     R(u, A) =            s(u, a).
                                                  |A|
                                                        a∈A

In order to evaluate the diversity of candidates generated by the model, we employ the Coverage
metric, which describes the number of distinct items exposed in a batch of generated lists of items.
Experimental results and analysis. The results are summarized in Table 4. According to the results,
COFlowNet achieves similar performance to QM-GFlowNet in generating high-score candidates.
Considering the inherent distinctions between online and offline models, the small performance gap
between COFlowNet and QM-GFlowNet is predictable and acceptable. However, COFlowNet is
able to generate candidates with more diversity than QM-GFlowNet, as evidenced by the Coverage
metric. The Avg.R and Max.R gaps between COFlowNet w/o and COFlowNet further demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed conservative constraint. The poor performance of COFlowNet w/o
indicates that it is difficult to develop an effective offline model. Our proposed conservative constraint
enables effective offline training. Additionally, COFlowNet, equipped with the quantile matching
mechanism, outperforms FM-COFlowNet across all three metrics, validating the effectiveness of the
proposed conservative quantile matching (CQM) objective introduced in Eq. 15.

                               Model           Avg.R     Max.R     Coverage
                            GFlowNet           1.996      2.832      47.95
                          QM-GFlowNet          2.016      2.865      65.61
                          COFlowNet w/o        1.280      2.692      115.1
                          FM-COFlowNet         1.664      2.800      62.15
                           COFlowNet           1.998      2.850      109.35

                    Table 4: Experimental results of item recommendation task.

Therefore, these results collectively demonstrate that COFlowNet exhibits excellent offline learning
capabilities and consistent effectiveness across various tasks, and contributes to the research
community in diverse valuable and practical domains.


                                                   15
