Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P OISSON -D IRAC N EURAL N ETWORKS FOR M ODELING
C OUPLED DYNAMICAL S YSTEMS ACROSS D OMAINS
    Razmik Arman Khosrovian ∗1 Takaharu Yaguchi2 Hiroaki Yoshimura3 Takashi Matsubara∗4
 1
    Osaka University 2 Kobe University 3 Waseda University 4 Hokkaido University



                                              A BSTRACT

             Deep learning has achieved great success in modeling dynamical systems, provid-
             ing data-driven simulators to predict complex phenomena, even without known
             governing equations. However, existing models have two major limitations: their
             narrow focus on mechanical systems and their tendency to treat systems as mono-
             lithic. These limitations reduce their applicability to dynamical systems in other
             domains, such as electrical and hydraulic systems, and to coupled systems. To ad-
             dress these limitations, we propose Poisson-Dirac Neural Networks (PoDiNNs),
             a novel framework based on the Dirac structure that unifies the port-Hamiltonian
             and Poisson formulations from geometric mechanics. This framework enables a
             unified representation of various dynamical systems across multiple domains as
             well as their interactions and degeneracies arising from couplings. Our experi-
             ments demonstrate that PoDiNNs offer improved accuracy and interpretability in
             modeling unknown coupled dynamical systems from data.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Deep learning has achieved great success in modeling dynamical systems (Chen et al., 2018; Anand-
kumar et al., 2020), following its successes in image processing and natural language processing (He
et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017). It provides a data-driven approach for predicting the behavior
of complex dynamical systems, even when governing equations are unknown (Kasim & Lim, 2022;
Matsubara & Yaguchi, 2023). These models function as computational simulators and show promise
in applications across diverse fields, including weather forecasting, mechanical design, and system
control (Lam et al., 2023; Pfaff et al., 2020; Horie et al., 2021).
However, Greydanus et al. (2019) identified a key limitation of data-driven models: they accumulate
modeling errors in long-term predictions, leading to rapid failure. Hamiltonian Neural Networks
(HNNs) were proposed to overcome this limitation by incorporating Hamiltonian mechanics. In-
spired by this approach, many studies have developed neural network models that not only learn
the superficial dynamics from data, but also adhere to fundamental laws of physics. Examples
include Lagrangian Neural Networks (LNNs) (Cranmer et al., 2020), Neural Symplectic Forms
(NSFs) (Chen et al., 2021), Poisson Neural Networks (PNNs) (Jin et al., 2022),Constrained HNNs
(CHNNs) (Finzi et al., 2020), and Dissipative SymODENs (Zhong et al., 2020), as shown in Table 1.
Despite recent progress, two key limitations remain in modeling dynamical systems, especially those
described by ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The first limitation is the narrow focus on me-
chanical systems. Models applied to other domains, such as electric circuits or magnetic fields, often
fail to leverage the governing principles of those systems, such as Kirchhoff’s current and voltage
laws (Jin et al., 2022; Matsubara & Yaguchi, 2023). The second limitation is that most methods treat
the system as a single, monolithic entity. In reality, many systems consist of interacting components,
such as robot arms with multiple joints or electric circuits with various elements (Yoshimura & Mars-
den, 2006a). Although the port-Hamiltonian formulation theoretically addresses these interactions,
no prior work has fully leveraged its potential. These limitations prevent current methods from ef-
fectively handling multiphysics scenarios, where systems from different domains interact, such as
those involving DC motors (van der Schaft & Jeltsema, 2014; Gay-Balmaz & Yoshimura, 2023).

     ∗
         Correspondence to u113287d@ecs.osaka-u.ac.jp and matsubara@ist.hokudai.ac.jp.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Table 1: Comparison of Methods for Modeling Dynamical Systems


                                                                                                              s


                                                                                                           ree
                                                                                         ult ab rn


                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                          ut
                                                                                                 ys t o
                                                                                       M lic atte


                                                                                                        -F
                                                                                                       np
                                                                                              lin g



                                                                                                        s
                                                                                             iph le


                                                                                                     cy


                                                                                                    ate
                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                      c
                                                                                          up fyin
                                                                                         Ap g P


                                                                                                   lI
                                                                                                     i



                                                                                                  tio
                                                                                                  ra


                                                                                               din
                                                                                                na
                                                                                              pa
                                                                                               ne
                                                                                       Co enti


                                                                                           ter
                                                                                            p


                                                                                           or
                                                                                           ge


                                                                                          ssi
                                                                                         Id


                                                                                        Co
                                                                                        De


                                                                                        Ex
                                                                                        Di
    Model                                Formulation
    HNN (Greydanus et al., 2019)         canonical Hamiltonian                           7        7    7     7      7      7
    LNN (Cranmer et al., 2020)           Lagrangian                                      7        7    7     7      7      7
    NSF (Chen et al., 2021)              general Hamiltonian                             7        7    7     7      7      3
    CHNN (Finzi et al., 2020)            constrained canonical Hamiltonian               7        7    [     7      7      7
    CLNN (Finzi et al., 2020)            constrained Lagrangian                          7        7    [     7      7      7
    PNN (Jin et al., 2022)               Poisson                                         7        7    3     7      7      3
    Dis. SymODEN (Zhong et al., 2020)    port-Hamiltonian on Darboux coordinates         7        7    7     3      †      7
    PoDiNN (proposed)                    Poisson-Dirac with ports                        3        3    3     3     3       3
[Available only for known holonomic constraints.   † Available only for external force on mass.

                                                                                                  Coupled system

To address these limitations, we propose             energy-storing     𝑒𝑒 𝑆𝑆                          𝑒𝑒 𝐼𝐼 external inputs
                                                       components                 Dirac structure               𝐹𝐹   𝐸𝐸
Poisson-Dirac Neural Networks (PoDiNNs),             𝑚𝑚      𝐿𝐿                       𝑓𝑓, 𝑒𝑒 ∈ 𝐷𝐷𝒖𝒖
which leverage the Dirac structure to unify                             𝑓𝑓 𝑆𝑆                         𝑓𝑓 𝐼𝐼            𝐽𝐽
the port-Hamiltonian and Poisson formula-                           𝑒𝑒 𝑆𝑆      𝑓𝑓 𝑆𝑆 𝑒𝑒 𝑅𝑅      𝑓𝑓 𝑅𝑅

tions (Courant, 1990; Duindam et al., 2009; van      energy-storing           energy-dissipating flow 𝑓𝑓 = (𝑓𝑓 𝑆𝑆 𝑓𝑓 𝑅𝑅 𝑓𝑓 𝐼𝐼 )
                                                        components                  components        effort 𝑒𝑒 = (𝑒𝑒 𝑆𝑆 𝑒𝑒 𝑅𝑅 𝑒𝑒 𝐼𝐼 )
der Schaft, 1998; van der Schaft & Jeltsema,         𝑘𝑘       𝐶𝐶                   𝑑𝑑        𝑅𝑅
2014; Yoshimura & Marsden, 2006a). The Dirac
structure explicitly represents the coupling be-      Figure 1: Conceptual diagram of PoDiNNs.
tween internal and external components. A con-
ceptual diagram is shown in Fig. 1. The advantages of PoDiNNs are summarized below and in
Table 1, and are validated through experiments on seven simulation datasets spanning mechanical,
rotational, electro-magnetic, and hydraulic domains.
Identifying Coupling Patterns Many real-world systems are coupled systems, consisting of in-
teracting components (Yoshimura & Marsden, 2006a). While existing methods represent these as
single vector fields or energy functions, PoDiNNs explicitly learn internal couplings as bivectors
on vector bundles, separate from component-wise characteristics modeled by neural networks. This
approach improves both interpretability and modeling accuracy.
Applicable to Various Domains of Systems The Dirac structure allows PoDiNNs to describe
various dynamical systems across multiple domains. While most neural network models of ODEs
focus on mechanical systems, PoDiNNs can model interactions of mechanical, rotational, electrical,
and hydraulic systems, addressing real-world multiphysics scenarios.
Unifying Various Aspects of Dynamical Systems Previous models have addressed specific as-
pects of dynamical systems, such as degenerate dynamics (Finzi et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2022), energy
dissipation, external inputs (Zhong et al., 2020), and coordinate transformations (Chen et al., 2021;
Jin et al., 2022). PoDiNNs offer a unified framework to address all these aspects together by lever-
aging the Dirac structure.


2      BACKGROUND T HEORY AND R ELATED W ORK

Attempts to learn ODEs have a long history (Nelles, 2001); see also Appendix A for a broader
review. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural ODEs) transformed this field (Chen et al.,
2018), which train networks to approximate the vector field (the right-hand side of the ODE), which
is then integrated numerically. However, they are often overly general and fail to capture dynamical
systems governed by principles such as energy conservation (Greydanus et al., 2019). To address
this, many refinements have been proposed by integrating insights from analytical mechanics.

2.1     H AMILTONIAN S YSTEMS

Canonical Hamiltonian Systems The Hamiltonian formulation of mechanics defines Hamilton’s
equations of motion, using a pair of n-dimensional generalized coordinates q = (q1 , . . . , qn ) and


                                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


momenta p = (p1 , . . . , pn ) as the state. Given an energy function H, the system evolves as:

                     ∂H                 ∂H                      q̇    O I

             q̇i = ∂p    i
                           ,   ṗ i = − ∂qi , or equivalently,  ṗ = −I O ∇H(q, p),               (1)

where ˙ denotes the time derivative, I and O are the n-dimensional identity and zero matrices,
respectively, and ∇H denotes the gradient of H. Systems describable by Hamilton’s equations are
Hamiltonian systems. See Appendix B.1 for an example.
HNNs were introduced to learn such systems, with a neural network HNN serving as the energy
function H (Greydanus et al., 2019). HNNs have shown greater long-term robustness than Neural
ODEs (Chen et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2022).
Hamiltonian Systems of Coordinate-Free Form From the differential geometry perspective, the
                                                                            ∗
                                                        P bundle M = T Q of the configuration
equations of motion in Eq. (1) are defined on the cotangent
space Q = R with the standard symplectic form Ω = i dqi ∧ dpi , where q ∈ Q and p ∈ Tq∗ Q,
               n

respectively. Here, Tq∗ Q denotes the cotangent space to Q at q, and ∧ denotes the exterior product.
The symplectic form Ω leads to a skew-symmetric linear bundle map Ω[u : Tu M → Tu∗ M at each
point u ∈ M, which satisfies hΩ[u (v), wi = Ωu (v, w) for any u ∈ M and v, w ∈ Tu M, where
h·, ·i denotes the natural pairing. We will denote by the subscript u an assignment at point u and
omit the subscripts if an equation holds independently of the point u. Given a smooth function
H : M → R, its differential is denoted by dH. A vector field X on M assigns a tangent vector
Xu ∈ Tu M to each point u ∈ M. Then, Hamilton’s equations in the coordinate-free form defines
a vector field XH called the Hamiltonian vector field by

                                          Ω[ (XH ) = dH.                                          (2)
XH defines the time evolution of the state u as u̇(t) = (XH )u(t) at time t, and u(t) over a certain
period is a solution of the system. Then, the tuple (H, Ω, XH ) is called a Hamiltonian system. A
Hamiltonian system with the standard symplectic form Ω is said to be canonical, and its coordinate
system is known as Darboux coordinates.
Hamilton’s equations also describe the same dynamics using generalized velocities v ∈ Tq Q instead
of generalized momenta p ∈ Tq∗ Q, i.e., on the tangent bundle T Q rather than the cotangent bundle
T ∗ Q. In this case, the symplectic form Ω is replaced by a Lagrangian 2-form (Marsden & Ratiu,
1999). From another viewpoint, the symplectic form Ω defines the coordinate system. Lagrangian
Neural Networks (LNNs) learn the dynamics on the tangent bundle T Q (Cranmer et al., 2020).
Neural Symplectic Forms (NSFs) learn the symplectic form directly from data, generalizing HNNs
and LNNs for arbitrary coordinate systems (Chen et al., 2021). In general, Hamiltonian systems
preserve the energy H, as LXH H = hdH, XH i = Ω(XH , XH ) = 0, where LXH denotes the Lie
derivative along XH , and the last equality follows from the skew-symmetry of Ω.
Poisson Systems Because the symplectic form Ω is non-degenerate in the sense that the bun-
dle map Ω[u is non-degenerate, it leads to a 2-tensor B called a Poisson bivector satisfying
B(dH, dG) = Ω(XH , XG ) for any smooth functions H, G on M. B leads to a skew-symmetric
linear bundle map Bu   ]
                          : Tu∗ M → Tu M at each point u ∈ M, which satisfies Bu (α, β) =
hα, Bu (β)i for any u ∈ M and α, β ∈ Tu∗ M. Then, it holds that B ] = (Ω[ )−1 . Hamilton’s
      ]

equations, Eq. (2), are rewritten as
                                         XH = B ] (dH).                                        (3)
The tuple (H, B, XH ) is called a Poisson system. On the Darboux coordinates, B = i ∂pi ∧ ∂q∂ i .
                                                                                  P ∂

Lie-Poisson neural networks were proposed to learn this system with known B (Eldred et al., 2024).

2.2   D EGENERACY, D ISSIPATION , AND E XTERNAL I NPUTS

Degenerate Systems If the state u is constrained to a submanifold M̃ ⊂ M, Hamilton’s equations
do not directly describe the dynamics. For example, consider a pair of mass-spring systems, indexed
by i ∈ {1, 2}, with a constraint q1 = q2 such that the two masses are coupled and always have the
same displacement and velocity. While the Hamiltonian is the sum of those of coupled systems,
Hamilton’s equations Ω[ (XH ) = dH with the standard symplectic form Ω do not describe the
dynamics. There are two primary methods for handling such degenerate Hamiltonian systems.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first approach uses coordinate transformations to reduce the system’s degrees of freedom and
define a submanifold M̃ ⊂ M, where Hamilton’s equations describe the dynamics using the stan-
dard symplectic form Ω or Poisson bivector B. The Darboux-Lie theorem ensures the local existence
of such transformations. The standard Poisson bivector B on M̃ can also be expressed on M while
its bundle map is degenerate, and it represents the coordinate transformation. Hence, degenerate
Hamiltonian systems are included into Poisson systems. See Appendix B.2 for an example. Jin
et al. (2022) introduced Poisson neural networks (PNNs) that combine neural network-based coor-
dinate transformations with SympNets for degenerate systems (Dinh et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2020).
However, this approach lacks interpretability due to non-unique, nonlinear transformations, and ex-
tending it to systems with external inputs or dissipation is challenging.
The other approach introduces constraint forces from the coupling, defining constrained Hamiltonian
systems. Finzi et al. (2020) proposed constrained HNNs (CHNNs) for such systems. However, this
method is limited to holonomic constraints (e.g., constraints on configurations). Furthermore, as the
constraints are predetermined, it remains unclear how to learn these constraints directly from data.
Port-Hamiltonian Systems To incorporate dissipation and external inputs, some studies have ex-
plored the port-Hamiltonian formulation with neural networks (Zhong et al., 2020). Although some
have mentioned the underlying Dirac structure (Neary & Topcu, 2023; Di Persio et al., 2024), they
rely on the following canonical form without fully leveraging its flexibility:

                        q̇        O I      O O                          0

                        ṗ =     −I O − O D(q)         ∇H(q, p) + G(q)        f,               (4)
where D ∈ Rn×n represents dissipation, f ∈ Rm is the control input vector, and G  ∈ Rn×m is the
                                                                                   O I
control input matrix. This formulation has several disadvantages. The matrix −I      O represents the
                                                  2n
                                P
standard symplectic form Ω = i dqi ∧dpi on R , which cannot handle degeneracies. Dissipation
from multiple sources, such as dampers or friction, is condensed into a single term D, limiting
interpretability and modeling performance. Furthermore, this formulation cannot handle externally
defined velocities, as seen in models of buildings shaken by the ground. While Eidnes et al. (2023)
employed a non-standard form to address the first limitation, their method still inherits the latter two.

3     P OISSON -D IRAC N EURAL N ETWORKS
To overcome the limitations of existing methods, we propose Poisson-Dirac Neural Networks
(PoDiNNs), which leverage the Dirac structure to unify Poisson and port-Hamiltonian systems.
Detailed background theory and proofs of the following theorems are provided in Appendix D.

3.1   D IRAC S TRUCTURE

Let V be an n-dimensional vector space and V ∗ its dual space, with the natural pairing h·, ·i between
them. Define the symmetric pairing hh·, ·ii on V ⊕ V ∗ as
               hh(v, α), (v̄, ᾱ)ii = hα, v̄i + hᾱ, vi for (v, α), (v̄, ᾱ) ∈ V ⊕ V ∗
where ⊕ denotes the direct sum of two vector spaces (Courant, 1990).
Definition 1 (Courant (1990); Yoshimura & Marsden (2006a)). A Dirac structure on a vector space
V is a vector subspace D ⊂ V ⊕ V ∗ such that D = D⊥ , where D⊥ is the orthogonal complement
of D with respect to the pairing hh·, ·ii.
Since D = D⊥ , hα, v̄i + hᾱ, vi = 0 for any (v, α), (v̄, ᾱ) ∈ D, and hence hα, vi = 0 for any
(v, α) ∈ D. A typical Dirac structure can be constructed as follows:
Theorem 1 (Courant (1990); Yoshimura & Marsden (2006a)). Let V be a vector space and ∆ a
vector subspace. Define the annihilator ∆◦ of ∆ as ∆◦ = {α ∈ V ∗ | hα, vi = 0 for all v ∈ ∆} ⊂
V ∗ . Then, DV = ∆ ⊕ ∆◦ ⊂ V ⊕ V ∗ is a Dirac structure on V .
A vector bundle F over a manifold M is a collection of vector spaces Fu , called fibers, smoothly
assigned to points u ∈ M, where the manifold M is called the base space. A typical example is
the tangent bundle T M, where the fiber at u is the tangent space Tu M, and its dual bundle is the
cotangent bundle T ∗ M. The Whitney sum ⊕ defines a vector bundle whose fiber at each point is
the direct sum of the fibers of the two bundles at that point. Given a vector bundle F over M and its
dual E = F ∗ , the Dirac structure is defined as a subbundle of F ⊕ E.

                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Table 2: Categorization of Components in Different Domains

Domain                      Mechanical                        Rotational                 Electro-Magnetic             Hydraulic
Subdomain           Potential        Kinetic         Potential            Kinetic      Electric       Magnetic         Potential
flow (input)      velocity     force              angular velocity torque           current         voltage       volume flow rate
effort (output)   force        velocity           torque           angular velocity voltage         current       pressure
state             displacement momentum           angle            angular momentum electric charge magnetic flux volume
energy-storing     spring         mass            (potential)        inertia        capacitor      inductor       hydraulic tank
energy-dissipating damper         –               friction           –              resistor       resistor       —
external input     external force moving boundary external torque    –              voltage source current source incoming fluid flow



Definition 2 (Courant (1990); Yoshimura & Marsden (2006a); van der Schaft & Jeltsema (2014)).
Consider a vector bundle F over a manifold M. A distribution ∆ is a collection of vector subspaces
∆u ⊂ Fu , each assigned smoothly to M at point u, forming a vector subbundle of F. The annihi-
lator ∆◦ of ∆ is a collection of the annihilators ∆◦u of ∆u , also forming a subbundle of E = F ∗ .
Then, a Dirac structure D is constructed as D = ∆ ⊕ ∆◦ , which is a subbundle of F ⊕ E.

If F ⊕ E = T M ⊕ T ∗ M, the Dirac structure D can reformulate Hamiltonian, Poisson, and con-
strained Hamiltonian systems (see Appendix D). Here, we assume that the fibers Fu and Eu of the
vector bundles F and E at u are decomposed as
                                Fu = FuS ⊕ FuR ⊕ FuI             and Eu = EuS ⊕ EuR ⊕ EuI ,                                        (5)
where FuS = Tu M and EuS = Tu∗ M. A point on the fibers Fu and Eu is denoted by f =
(f S , f R , f I ) and e = (eS , eR , eI ), respectively. We refer to f ∈ Fu as flows, e ∈ Eu as ef-
forts, and both collectively as port variables. Note that our definitions mainly followed those in
Duindam et al. (2009); van der Schaft & Jeltsema (2014), while we can find other definitions in
Yoshimura & Marsden (2006a).
Theorem 2. Consider vector bundles F and E = F ∗ over M. The collection of
                                                                    ]
                                     Du = {(f , e) ∈ Fu × Eu | f = Bu (e)}
                    ]
for the bundle map Bu : Eu → Fu of a bivector B is a Dirac structure D ⊂ F ⊕ E.

Here, we define PoDiNNs as a special case of the Poisson-Dirac formulation (Courant, 1990).
Definition 3 (Poisson-Dirac Neural Network). Let F ⊕ E be a vector bundle over a manifold M
defined in Eq. (5), which assigns to each u ∈ M a vector space (FuS ⊕FuR ⊕FuI )×(EuS ⊕EuR ⊕EuI ).
Let D ⊂ F ⊕ E be a Dirac structure defined in Theorem 2. Let H : M → R be an energy function,
which determines the effort eS = dH ∈ EuS . The effort eR ∈ EuR is determined by a mapping
Ru : FuR → EuR of the flow f R ∈ FuR . The effort eI (t) ∈ EuI is a time-dependent function. The
functions H and Ru are implemented using neural networks. If for each u(t) and t ∈ [a, b], it holds
that
                       ((f S (t), f R (t), f I (t)), (eS (t), eR (t), eI (t))) ∈ Du(t) ,
the tuple (H, B, R, eI , f S ) is called Poisson-Dirac Neural Networks (PoDiNNs).

3.2     F LOWS AND E FFORTS FOR C OMPONENTS

The point u at the base space M represents the states of the dynamics, which include the displace-
ment of a spring, the momentum of a mass, the angle and angular momentum of a rotating rod, the
electric charge of a capacitor. Intuitively, flows f are the inputs to components, while efforts e are
the outputs from the components. Components considered in our formulation are summarized in
Table 2, with concrete examples in Appendices C and F.
Similar to Hamiltonian and Poisson systems, the flow f S ∈ Tu M represents the vector field XH
on M, defining the time evolution u̇ of the state u. The effort eS ∈ Tu∗ M corresponds to the
differential dH of the Hamiltonian H : M → R. The superscript S indicates that these components
store energy. In electric circuits, capacitors and inductors are examples, with states as electric charge
and magnetic flux, and efforts as the voltages across and currents through them, respectively. In
PoDiNNs, these components are modeled using neural networks that replace the energy functions
H, similar to HNNs and Dissipative SymODENs.


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The flow f R ∈ FuR and effort eR ∈ EuR represent energy-dissipating components, such as dampers
and resistors. A damper’s flow f R is the velocity (i.e., the rate of extension or compression), and
its effort eR is the force, which are related as eR = −df R for a linear damper with a damping
coefficient d. Unlike a spring, a damper does not store its own energy, so its flow f R is not on FuS
but on FuR . The superscript R indicates that these components are “resistive.” However, components
that supply energy, such as special diodes, can also be classified into this category. In any case, each
component is implemented in PoDiNNs by a neural network that approximates its characteristic
Ru : f R 7→ eR .
The flow f I ∈ FuI and effort eI ∈ EuI represent external inputs, such as an external force (where
force is the effort) or a moving boundary (where velocity is the effort). The superscript I indicates
that they are “inputs.” Their efforts eI depend only on time t, not on other components. Their flows
f I are not required for determining the system’s dynamics but represent the outcomes of external
inputs, such as the reaction force exerted on the moving boundary. In PoDiNNs, these external
inputs are fed into the neural networks.

3.3   B IVECTOR FOR R EPRESENTING C OUPLED S YSTEMS

For the coordinates qi and pi on M, the basis vectors of the tangent space Tu M are ∂q∂ i and ∂p            ∂
                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                ,
respectively. The i-th basis vectors of Fu , Fu , Eu , and Eu are denoted by ξi , ξi , ξi , and ξiI∗ ,
                                                R    I    R          I                    R    I  R∗

respectively. The bivector B assigns to each point u ∈ M wedge products of the basis vectors of
                             ∂
the flow space Fu , such as ∂p i
                                 ∧ ∂q∂ j , ∂p
                                            ∂
                                              i
                                                             ∂
                                                ∧ ξjR , and ∂p i
                                                                 ∧ ξjI , thereby defining the coupling patterns
                                         ∂
among components. For example, ∂p          i
                                             ∧ ξjI couples the j-th external input with the i-th mass mi
with the state pi . The effort of the j-th external input is expressed as eIj ξjI∗ when the basis is explicit.
                              ∂                     ∂                        ∂
This is fed to the bivector ∂p  i
                                  ∧ ξjI = −ξjI ∧ ∂p   i
                                                        , resulting in −eIj ∂p i
                                                                                 , which forms part of the flow
 S ∂
fi ∂pi for mass mi . Therefore, we can make the following remarks.
Remark 1 (Coupling as Non-zero Elements of Bivector). Coupling between two components is
represented by a non-zero bivector element, which links the effort of one to the flow of the other.
Thus, by learning the bivector B from the observations of the target system, we can identify the
coupling patterns between the system’s components.
Remark 2 (Degeneracy of Dynamics as Degeneracy of Bundle Map). Constraints between compo-
nents that cause degenerate dynamics are reflected in degeneracy of the bundle map B ] . Thus, by
learning the bivector B from the observations of the target system and examining how it degenerates,
we can identify the constraints imposed on the system.
Remark 3 (Coordinate Transformation by Bivector). The bivector B defines the coordinate system,
which allows PoDiNNs to learn system dynamics regardless of the coordinate system used for the
observations.
Remark 4 (Multiphysics). Our formulation can represent systems across various domains, as sum-
marized in Table 2.

These remarks are fundamental in system identification and can aid in reverse engineering, as the
coupling patterns of circuit elements serve as representations of the circuit diagrams. Also, PoDiNNs
are the first neural-network method to handle multiple domains of dynamical systems and their
interactions by leveraging the Dirac structure. See Appendix C for concrete examples.

3.4   D ISCUSSIONS FOR C OMPARISONS AND L IMITATIONS

As discussed above, PoDiNNs are the first model to cover degenerate dynamics, dissipation, external
inputs, and coordinate transformations in a unified manner.
Previous models, including HNNs, LNNs, NSFs, PNNs, and Dissipative SymODENs, approximate
the Hamiltonian H, Lagrangian L, or dissipative term D using neural networks, which implicitly
learn the relationships between variables. However, these relationships are difficult to extract due to
the implicit nature of the learning and the high nonlinearity of the networks. In contrast, PoDiNNs
separate the coupling patterns B from the energy functions H, improving interpretability and gen-
eralization performance.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                               𝑅𝑅2                                   𝑔𝑔


                                                                                                                                                             ⇒
         𝑘𝑘1           𝑘𝑘2           𝑘𝑘3                                                                                                     𝑅𝑅       𝐿𝐿
                                                  𝐹𝐹                     𝑙𝑙3                        𝐽𝐽       𝐶𝐶    𝑅𝑅1               𝐸𝐸                                   𝑙𝑙
                𝑚𝑚1           𝑚𝑚2           𝑚𝑚3                                                                                𝐸𝐸
         𝑑𝑑1                         𝑑𝑑3                                                                                                                            𝜃𝜃    𝑚𝑚
                                                                                                                               𝐿𝐿               (f) DC motor
    (a) with external force                                        𝑘𝑘4         𝑘𝑘5
               𝑘𝑘1           𝑘𝑘2           𝑘𝑘3         𝑙𝑙1 𝑘𝑘1                         𝑘𝑘2
                                                                                             (d) FitzHugh-Nagumo model                                         𝑔𝑔


                                                                                                                                                           ⇒
    𝑏𝑏               𝑚𝑚1           𝑚𝑚2           𝑚𝑚3         𝑚𝑚1                     𝑚𝑚2                           𝑅𝑅1
                                                                         𝑘𝑘3                                                                                        𝐹𝐹
               𝑑𝑑1           𝑑𝑑2           𝑑𝑑3                                                                                        𝑘𝑘1            𝑉𝑉                   𝑘𝑘2
 (b) with moving boundary (c) with redundancy
                                                                                                                         𝐶𝐶1   𝑅𝑅2                  𝐴𝐴, 𝜌𝜌      𝑚𝑚2 𝑑𝑑
     (a)–(c) Mass-spring(-damper) systems                                                      𝐿𝐿            𝐶𝐶2                      𝑑𝑑1 𝑚𝑚1                         2

                                                                                                         (e) Chua’s circuit                 (g) Hydraulic tank
Figure 2: Diagrams of systems that provide datasets. Detailed definitions are found in Appendix F.


In an absolute coordinate system, the displacements of springs were computed from the absolute po-
sitions of springs’ edges internally within the energy function. Although PoDiNNs canP handle   such
                                                                                           ∂      ∂
system, the bivector for energy-storing components takes the standard form B =          i ∂pi ∧  ∂qi ,
which hinders the identification of their coupling patterns. PoDiNNs are still able to identify cou-
pling patterns involving energy-dissipating components and external inputs. To identify the coupling
patterns between energy-storing components, it is necessary to employ a relative coordinate system
based on displacements, rather than absolute positions.
LNNs and NSFs are designed for non-canonical Hamiltonian systems, where the Hamiltonian vector
field XH is implicitly defined as Ω[ (XH ) = dH (Cranmer et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). These
require matrix inversion to compute XH , which is computationally expensive, numerically unstable,
and are not directly applicable to degenerate dynamics. In contrast, PoDiNNs explicitly define XH
as part of f = B ] (e), offering faster and more stable computations and handling degeneracy.
In mechanical systems, energy-dissipating components such as dampers and friction are character-
ized by first setting the velocities set, from which the corresponding forces are then derived. As a
result, flow is always defined as velocity, and effort as force. In the electric circuits, however, the
flow for resistors and diodes can be either current or voltage, depending on their coupling with other
components. In practice, it is advisable to include an abundance of both types of components. Any
excess components will either be ignored or exhibit redundant characteristics, as demonstrated in
the experiments.
The dynamics of electric circuits are generally described by differential-algebraic equations (DAEs).
For example, when a capacitor is connected to a direct voltage source in parallel, infinite current
instantaneously flows into the capacitor, and its voltage matches that of the direct voltage source.
This behavior cannot be represented by ODEs alone. While PoDiNNs cannot fully represent such
systems, they can still describe a wide range of systems and expand the scope of modeling unknown
dynamical systems from observations.
See also Appendix E for implementation and further discussions.

4         E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

4.1            E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Datasets We evaluated PoDiNNs and related methods to demonstrate their modeling performance
using seven simulation datasets, as shown in Fig. 2. Due to page limitations, we briefly overview
their characteristics. The full explanations can be found in Appendix F.
For the mechanical domain, we prepared three mass-spring(-damper) systems (a)–(c), with the ve-
locities of the masses as observations. In the absolute coordinate system, we used the absolute
positions of the springs’ ends as the springs’ states, and in the relative coordinate system, their dis-
placements. As external inputs, an external force F is applied to system (a), and a moving boundary
b is coupled with system (b). Dissipative SymODENs cannot directly account for the latter. System
(c) has redundant observations; while springs are coupled only with two masses, the displacements
of all five springs were provided as observations. CHNNs cannot model this redundancy, but PNNs
can. In all three systems, the springs and dampers exhibit nonlinear characteristics.


                                                                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We selected two nonlinear electric circuits, (d) the FitzHugh-Nagumo model and (e) Chua’s cir-
cuit, from the electro-magnetic domain (Izhikevich & FitzHugh, 2006; Chua, 2007). The capacitor
voltage and inductor current were used as the observations.
We also used two multiphysics systems (f) and (g). In system (f), a DC motor bridges an electric
circuit in the electro-magnetic domain and a pendulum in the rotational domain. In system (g), a
hydraulic tank in the hydraulic domain is connected to two cylinders with pistons in the mechanical
domain, each of which is also connected to a fixed wall via a spring and damper. An external force
is applied to the smaller piston, which moves the larger piston through the fluid in the tank.
Implementation Details We implemented all experimental code from scratch using Python
v3.11.9, along with numpy v1.26.4, scipy v1.12.1, pytorch v2.3.1, and desolver v4.1.1 (Paszke et al.,
2017). See also Appendix F for more details.
We compared Neural ODEs, Dissipative SymODENs, PNNs, and PoDiNNs. Neural ODEs were
evaluated on all datasets. Dissipative SymODENs were tested on systems (a) and (b) in the absolute
coordinate system, while PNNs were evaluated on system (c). Other combinations were out of
scope of the original studies. For PNNs, we used HNNs in place of SympNets for a fair comparison.
For Dissipative SymODENs and PoDiNNs, we assumed that the kinetic energy in the mechanical
                                 1 2
domain could be expressed as 2m     p , where m is the mass and p is the momentum. Therefore, we
employed this form with a learnable parameter m, rather than a neural network. The same approach
was applied to capacitors and inductors for PoDiNNs. All other components were assumed to be
nonlinear and were modeled using neural networks. In the absolute coordinate system, the potential
energy was modeled for all configurations q1 , . . . , qn plus the position qb of the moving boundary
collectively by a single neural network. In the relative coordinate system or other domains, the
potential energy was modeled separately for each component. We assumed that the number of
energy-dissipating components and the nature of their flows (e.g., current or voltage in electric
circuits) are known, and also examined the impact of inaccurate assumptions.
Each model was trained using one-step predictions on the training subset. Specifically, given a
random state snapshot u(n) at n-th step, each model predicted the next state ũ(n+1) after a time step
∆t. Then, all parameters were updated to minimize the squared error between the predicted state
ũ(n+1) and the ground truth u(n+1) , normalized by state standard deviations. It is known that longer
prediction steps can improve robustness against noise (Chen et al., 2020). However, as we aimed to
purely compare the representational performance of models, no noise was added to the datasets. We
confirmed that longer prediction steps only led to performance degradation.
Evaluation Metrics We evaluated models using the accuracy of the solution to the initial value
problem on the test subset. Starting from the initial value of each trajectory, each model predicted
the entire trajectory of N steps and calculated the mean squared error (MSE) between the predicted
state ũ(n) and the ground truth u(n) at each step indexed by n. The mean of these MSEs across all
trajectories and all time steps was computed as the evaluation metric, referred to as the overall MSE;
                                                PN
                             M SE(ũ; u) = N1 n=1 [MSE(ũ(n) , u(n) )].                             (6)
Lower values indicate better performance. Additionally, we defined the valid prediction time (VPT)
as the ratio of the number of steps taken before the MSE first exceeds a certain threshold θ to the
total length N of the test trajectory (Botev et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2020; Vlachas et al., 2020);
             V P T (ũ; u) = N1 arg maxnf {nf |MSE(ũ(n) , u(n) ) < θ for all n ≤ nf }.            (7)
Higher values indicate better performance. The threshold θ was set to ensure that most models
achieved VPTs between 0.1 and 0.9. For each dataset, models were trained and evaluated from
scratch over 10 trials per dataset.

4.2   R ESULTS

Numerical Performance The results in Table 3 show that PoDiNNs consistently outperformed all
other models across all datasets and metrics. VPTs show that PoDiNNs provided stable predictions
for durations 1.5 to 20 times longer. These differences were statistically significant, with p-values
less than 0.0005, as evaluated by the Mann-Whitney U test. In some cases, the difference in MSE
is small, while that in VPT is substantial. This happens when a model ignores oscillations in the


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           Table 3: Experimental Results.

                                                          Mass-Spring-Damper Systems
 Dataset                            with external force                                     with moving boundary                                  (c) with redundancy
 Coordinate              (a) relative                   (a’) absolute                (b) relative                   (b’) absolute                         relative
 Model              MSE↓            VPT↑          MSE↓            VPT↑             MSE↓          VPT↑             MSE↓         VPT↑                MSE↓               VPT↑
 Neural ODE 4.90 ±0.27 0.128 ±0.021 7.68 ±1.07 0.097 ±0.008 7.43 ±1.19 0.153 ±0.039 5.02 ±0.56 0.135 ±0.052 2490.61 ±1847.24 0.099 ±0.004
 HNN Variant∗         —             8.31 ±0.56 0.104 ±0.017           —             5.92 ±0.12 0.001 ±0.000 634.22 ±300.01 0.000 ±0.000
 PoDiNN            4.33 ±0.26 0.622 ±0.002 7.02 ±0.49 0.437 ±0.053 0.26 ±1.12 0.856 ±0.015 3.74 ±0.84 0.581 ±0.040 0000.11 ±0.02000 0.863 ±0.017
                       ×10−1    θ = 10−3          ×10−1           θ = 10−3         ×10−2         θ = 10−4         ×10−2       θ = 10−4              ×10−1             θ = 10−3

                                                       Electric Circuits                                                   Multiphysics
                                (d) FitzHugh-Nagumo                      (e) Chua’s                      (f) DC Motor                (g) Hydraulic Tank
                 Model              MSE↓              VPT↑            MSE↓           VPT↑             MSE↓           VPT↑            MSE↓            VPT↑
                 Neural ODE 48.96 ±17.43 0.322 ±0.041 14.74 ±1.33 0.287 ±0.016 16.03 ±5.15 0.276 ±0.168 30.62 ±8.22 0.045 ±0.010
                 PoDiNN        01.64 ±1.370 0.649 ±0.072 09.21 ±0.83 0.469 ±0.010 02.11 ±2.90 0.923 ±0.013 05.42 ±3.65 0.918 ±0.013
                                    ×10−4             θ = 10−3        ×10−1         θ = 10−3          ×10−3         θ = 10−4          ×10−2         θ = 10−4
Each score represents the median over 10 trials, followed by the ± symbol and the quartile deviation. ∗ Dissipative SymODENs for systems
(a) and (b), and PNNs for system (c).

            q1           q2          q3                      vx1             vx2                      V C1          V C2         IL                  V           q1        q2
  2.5
                                           0.5                                             2.5                                            1
  0.0                                      0.0                                             0.0                                            0
−2.5                                      −0.5
                                                                                       −2.5                                              −1
 0.05                                      0.05
                                                                                            5                                          0.05
 0.00                                      0.00
 0.05                                       0.5
                                                                                            0                                          0.00
 0.00                                       0.0
                                                                                            5                                          0.05
 0.05                                     0.005

 0.00                                     0.000                                             0                                          0.00
        0         20           40                 0              20          40                  0           10       20        30            0      25     50        75    100
      (a’) with external force                        (c) with redundancy                            (e) Chua’s circuit                           (g) Hydraulic tank
  in absolute coordinate system

Figure 3: Visualizations of example results. Each top panel shows ground truth trajectories, while
the other panels show the absolute errors of all 10 trials in semi-transparent color. See also Fig. A1.


trajectory and outputs an average path, which keeps the MSE low but results in poor VPT. This
suggests that VPT is a more reliable metric than MSE (Botev et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2020; Vlachas
et al., 2020). We show example trajectories and absolute errors in Figs. 3 and A1.
PoDiNNs perform well both in the absolute and relative coordinate systems, showing their adaptabil-
ity to different coordinate systems. Even in the absolute coordinate system, PoDiNNs decompose
dissipations and external inputs into coupling patterns and individual characteristics, providing a
more effective inductive bias, whereas Dissipative SymODENs treat dissipations and external in-
puts using black-box functions D and G.
PoDiNNs demonstrate excellent accuracy in system (c) because they successfully simplify the dy-
namics by identifying the degeneracy from high-dimensional observations. In contrast, PNNs strug-
gled to learn the appropriate coordinate transformation. Although the Darboux-Lie theorem guar-
antees the existence of such a transformation, it does not imply that learning it is straightforward.
Also, Neural ODEs lack guarantees for energy conservation, resulting in diverging trajectories.
Identifying Coupling Patterns and Component Characteristics (e) We examined how the
bivector B identifies coupling patterns in system (e), Chua’s circuit. When two coefficients dif-
fered by a factor of 1000 or more, we considered the larger one as a detected coupling and the
smaller one as effectively zero, indicating no coupling. In all 10 trials, we obtained the bivector
           ∂      ∂             ∂               ∂               ∂
B = −a ∂ψ     ∧ ∂Q  2
                      + bξ1R ∧ ∂Q 2
                                    − c1 ξ1R ∧ ∂Q 1
                                                    + c2 ξ2R ∧ ∂Q 1
                                                                    , with trial-wise positive parameters a,
                                                                                               ∂    ∂
b, c1 , and c2 . We emphasize that the coefficients of other bivector elements, such as ∂ψ       ∧ ∂Q 1
                                                                                                        and
 R       ∂
ξ2 ∧ ∂Q2 , were effectively zero. Because R1 and R2 cannot be directly observed and their indices
are interchangeable, they were appropriately reordered for analysis.


                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We normalized the coefficients of the bivector elements and the characteristics of system com-
ponents, as their scales cancel each other out. Then, from the learned bivector B, we can de-
rive Kirchhoff’s current laws, IC1 = −IR1 + IR2 and IC2 = −IL + IR1 , and Kirchhoff’s
voltage laws, VL = VC2 , VR1 = VC1 − VC2 , and VR2 = −VC1 . This allows us to con-
struct a circuit diagram, which perfectly matches that of Chua’s circuit, shown in Fig. 2 (e).
While coupling patterns in more complex circuits may not be unique
due to Norton’s and Thevenin’s theorems, our formulation can learn          2                    f
one valid realization. Figure 4 illustrates the input-output relationship   1


                                                                              I R2
of the neural network representing R2 . The results from all 10 trials,     0
shown as colored dashed lines, almost perfectly overlap the true re- −1
lationship, shown as a black dashed line, within the range of ±2.5. −2
This demonstrates that PoDiNNs accurately identified the component
characteristics, even though its response was never observed directly.         −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3
                                                                                          V R2
The region beyond this range was not included in the training subset, Figure 4: The identified
so it is expected that PoDiNNs did not learn the relationship there.      characteristics of R .   2
Identifying Coupling Patterns of System (g) We also examined the bivector B identified in sys-
tem (g), hydraulic tank. In all 10 trials, we consistently obtained the bivector B = ∂p∂ 1 ∧ ∂V          ∂
                                                                                                           −
      ∂      ∂       ∂       ∂        ∂         ∂
0.3( ∂p2 ∧ ∂V ) + ∂p1 ∧ ∂q1 + ∂p2 ∧ ∂q2 between the energy-storing components, with the coeffi-
cients 1.0 or −0.3, accurate to five significant figures. The coefficients of the first two terms, 1.0 and
−0.3, correspond to the cross-sectional areas a1 and a2 of two cylinders attached at the bottom of the
tank, with the negative sign indicating that the flow directions are opposite. The remaining two terms
represent the couplings between the masses and springs. All other couplings—between the dampers
and masses, ∂p∂ 1 ∧ ∂d∂ 1 and ∂p∂ 2 ∧ ∂d∂ 2 , and between the external force and the mass, ∂p∂ 2 ∧ ∂ξ∂S —were
also identified with non-zero coefficients, even though the overall scale is indeterminate due to the
cancellation of gravitational acceleration, fluid density, and masses.
Impact of Number of Hidden Components (b) The states of Table 4: Impact of # Com-
energy-storing components are provided as observations, and exter- ponents and VPT.
nal inputs are typically known (or inferred using methods like neural
CDE (Kidger et al., 2020)). PoDiNNs also require specifying the PoDiNNs Training                   Test
number and type of energy-dissipating components, which are usu- n = 0 0.005 ±0.000 0.000 ±0.000
                                                                            d
ally unknown. To assess the impact of the assumed number of com- nd = 1 0.009 ±0.002 0.001 ±0.000
ponents, nd , we tested system (b) in the relative coordinate system nd = 2 0.015 ±0.000 0.001 ±0.000
(see Table 4). The correct number of dampers is nd = 3. When nndd =             3 0.925 ±0.007 0.581 ±0.040
                                                                              = 4 0.932 ±0.010 0.597 ±0.058
nd < 3, performance was extremely poor, indicating incorrect dy- nd = 5 0.935 ±0.006 0.600 ±0.035
namics due to missing dampers. When nd > 3, performance was                         θ = 10−4     θ = 10−4
similar to the case for nd = 3. Redundant dampers provided the extra parameters, which some-
times made optimization easier, but were often ignored by learning identical properties to existing
dampers, by adopting a zero damping coefficient, or by having zero coupling strength. Interestingly,
this trend appeared in both the training and test subsets, which suggests that assessing performance
on the training subset can help identify the correct number of dampers. In this way, PoDiNNs offer
interpretable insights into the system’s internal structure.
See Appendix G for additional visualizations and analyses.

5    C ONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed Poisson-Dirac Neural Networks (PoDiNNs), which use a Dirac struc-
ture to unify the port-Hamiltonian and Poisson formulations. PoDiNNs offer a unified framework
capable of handling various domains of dynamical systems, identifying internal coupling patterns,
learning component-wise characteristics, and effectively modeling multiphysics systems. Our ex-
periments with mechanical, rotational, electro-magnetic, and hydraulic systems validate these capa-
bilities. Developing methods to address dynamical systems that are described by DAEs and partial
differential equations remains for future research.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was partly supported by JST PRESTO (JPMJPR24TB, JPMJPR21C7), CREST (JP-
MJCR1914, JPMJCR24Q5), ASPIRE (JPMJAP2329), Moonshot R&D (JPMJMS2033-14), and
JSPS KAKENHI (24K15105), and partly achieved through the use of SQUID at D3 Center, Os-
aka University.

E THICS S TATEMENT

This study is purely focused on dynamical systems and modeling, and it is not expected to have any
direct negative impact on society or individuals.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The environment, datasets, methods, evaluation metrics, and other experimental settings are given
in Section 4.1 and Appendix F. For full reproducibility, it is recommended to run the source code
attached as supplementary material.

R EFERENCES
Brandon Amos, Lei Xu, and J. Zico Kolter. Input Convex Neural Networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Anima Anandkumar, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li,
  Burigede Liu, and Andrew Stuart. Neural Operator: Graph Kernel Network for Partial Differen-
  tial Equations. In ICLR 2020 Workshop on Integration of Deep Neural Models and Differential
  Equations (DeepDiffEq), February 2020.
Philipp Becker, Harit Pandya, Gregor H.W. Gebhardt, Cheng Zhao, and Gerhard Neumann. Re-
  current Kalman Networks: Factorized Inference in High-Dimensional Deep Feature Spaces. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Petar Bevanda, Stefan Sosnowski, and Sandra Hirche. Koopman Operator Dynamical Models:
  Learning, Analysis and Control. Annual Reviews in Control, 52:197–212, 2021.
Aleksandar Botev, Andrew Jaegle, Peter Wirnsberger, Daniel Hennes, and Irina Higgins. Which
  priors matter? Benchmarking models for learning latent dynamics. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
Steven L. Brunton, Joshua L. Proctor, and J. Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations
  from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 113(15):3932–3937, April 2016.
Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural Ordinary Dif-
  ferential Equations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 1–19,
  2018.
Yuhan Chen, Takashi Matsubara, and Takaharu Yaguchi. Neural Symplectic Form : Learning Hamil-
  tonian Equations on General Coordinate Systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yuhan Chen, Takashi Matsubara, and Takaharu Yaguchi. KAM Theory Meets Statistical Learning
  Theory: Hamiltonian Neural Networks with Non-Zero Training Loss. In AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2022.
Zhengdao Chen, Jianyu Zhang, Martin Arjovsky, and Léon Bottou. Symplectic Recurrent Neural
  Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), pp. 1–23, 2020.
Leon O. Chua. Chua circuit. Scholarpedia, 2(10):1488, October 2007.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theodore James Courant. Dirac Manifolds. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society,
  319(2):631, 1990.
Miles Cranmer, Sam Greydanus, Stephan Hoyer, Peter Battaglia, David Spergel, and Shirley Ho.
 Lagrangian Neural Networks. In ICLR 2020 Workshop on Integration of Deep Neural Models
 and Differential Equations (DeepDiffEq), pp. 1–9, March 2020.
Luca Di Persio, Matthias Ehrhardt, and Sofia Rizzotto. Integrating Port-Hamiltonian Systems with
  Neural Networks: From Deterministic to Stochastic Frameworks. arXiv, March 2024.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using Real NVP. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), pp. 1–32, 2017.
J. R. Dormand and P. J. Prince. A reconsideration of some embedded Runge-Kutta formulae. Journal
   of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 15(2):203–211, 1986.
Yifan Du and Tamer A. Zaki. Evolutional deep neural network. Physical Review E, 104(4):045303,
  October 2021.
Vincent Duindam, Alessandro Macchelli, Stefano Stramigioli, and Herman Bruyninckx. Modeling
  and Control of Complex Physical Systems. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009.
Sølve Eidnes, Alexander J. Stasik, Camilla Sterud, Eivind Bøhn, and Signe Riemer-Sørensen.
  Pseudo-Hamiltonian Neural Networks with State-Dependent External Forces. Physica D: Non-
  linear Phenomena, 446:133673, April 2023.
Christopher Eldred, François Gay-Balmaz, Sofiia Huraka, and Vakhtang Putkaradze. Lie–Poisson
  Neural Networks (LPNets): Data-based computing of Hamiltonian systems with symmetries.
  Neural Networks, 173:106162, May 2024.
Marc Finzi, Ke Alexander Wang, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Simplifying Hamiltonian and La-
 grangian Neural Networks via Explicit Constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
 ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
François Gay-Balmaz and Hiroaki Yoshimura. Systems, variational principles and interconnections
  in non-equilibrium thermodynamics. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathe-
  matical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 381(2256):20220280, October 2023.
Sam Greydanus, Misko Dzamba, and Jason Yosinski. Hamiltonian Neural Networks. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 1–16, 2019.
Nate Gruver, Marc Finzi, Samuel Stanton, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Deconstructing the Induc-
  tive Biases of Hamiltonian Neural Networks. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR). arXiv, February 2022.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-Time Sequence Modeling with Selective State Spaces. In
  Conference On Language Modeling (COLM), 2024.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re. Efficiently Modeling Long Sequences with Structured
  State Spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Ernst Hairer, Christian Lubich, and Gerhard Wanner. Geometric Numerical Integration: Structure-
  Preserving Algorithms for Ordinary Differential Equations, volume 31. Springer-Verlag,
  Berlin/Heidelberg, 2006.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1–9,
  December 2016.
Sepp Hochreiter and J?rgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, November 1997.
Masanobu Horie, Naoki Morita, Toshiaki Hishinuma, Yu Ihara, and Naoto Mitsume. Isometric
 Transformation Invariant and Equivariant Graph Convolutional Networks. In International Con-
 ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eugene M. Izhikevich and Richard FitzHugh.                           FitzHugh-Nagumo       model.
  http://scholarpedia.org/article/FitzHugh-Nagumo model, 2006.
Pengzhan Jin, Aiqing Zhu, George Em Karniadakis, and Yifa Tang. Symplectic networks: Intrinsic
  structure-preserving networks for identifying Hamiltonian systems. Neural Networks, 132:166–
  179, 2020.
Pengzhan Jin, Zhen Zhang, Ioannis G. Kevrekidis, and George Em Karniadakis. Learning Poisson
  Systems and Trajectories of Autonomous Systems via Poisson Neural Networks. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–13, 2022.
Muhammad Firmansyah Kasim and Yi Heng Lim. Constants of motion network. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). arXiv, August 2022.
Hassan K. Khalil. Nonlinear Systems, Third Edition. Prentice Hall, 2002.
Patrick Kidger, James Morrill, James Foster, and Terry Lyons. Neural Controlled Differential Equa-
  tions for Irregular Time Series. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  volume 33, pp. 6696–6707. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), pp. 1–15, December 2015.
Rahul G. Krishnan, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag. Structured Inference Networks for Nonlinear
  State Space Models. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 1–13, 2017.
Remi Lam, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Matthew Willson, Peter Wirnsberger, Meire Fortunato, Fer-
  ran Alet, Suman Ravuri, Timo Ewalds, Zach Eaton-Rosen, Weihua Hu, Alexander Merose,
  Stephan Hoyer, George Holland, Oriol Vinyals, Jacklynn Stott, Alexander Pritzel, Shakir Mo-
  hamed, and Peter Battaglia. Learning skillful medium-range global weather forecasting. Science,
  382(6677):1416–1421, December 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In Inter-
   national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), pp. 1–16, 2017.
Jerrold E. Marsden and Tudor S. Ratiu. Introduction to Mechanics and Symmetry: A Basic Exposi-
   tion of Classical Mechanical Systems, volume 17 of Texts in Applied Mathematics. Springer New
   York, New York, NY, 1999.
Takashi Matsubara and Takaharu Yaguchi. FINDE: Neural Differential Equations for Finding
  and Preserving Invariant Quantities. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2023.
Takashi Matsubara, Ai Ishikawa, and Takaharu Yaguchi. Deep Energy-Based Modeling of Discrete-
  Time Physics. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Cyrus Neary and Ufuk Topcu. Compositional Learning of Dynamical System Models Using Port-
  Hamiltonian Neural Networks. In Proceedings of The 5th Annual Learning for Dynamics and
  Control Conference, pp. 679–691. PMLR, June 2023.
Oliver Nelles. Nonlinear System Identification. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
  2001.
Adam Paszke, Gregory Chanan, Zeming Lin, Sam Gross, Edward Yang, Luca Antiga, and Zachary
  Devito. Automatic differentiation in PyTorch. In NeurIPS2017 Workshop on Autodiff, pp. 1–4,
  2017.
Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter W. Battaglia. Learning Mesh-
  Based Simulation with Graph Networks. pp. 1–18, 2020.
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learn-
 ing framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential
 equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 378:686–707, February 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos. DGM: A deep learning algorithm for solving partial
  differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 375:1339–1364, December 2018.
Arjan van der Schaft. Implicit Hamiltonian systems with symmetry. Reports on Mathematical
  Physics, 41(2):203–221, 1998.
Arjan van der Schaft and Dimitri Jeltsema. Port-Hamiltonian Systems Theory: An Introductory
  Overview. Foundations and Trends® in Systems and Control, 1(2):173–378, 2014.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.
P. R. Vlachas, J. Pathak, B. R. Hunt, T. P. Sapsis, M. Girvan, E. Ott, and P. Koumoutsakos. Backprop-
   agation algorithms and Reservoir Computing in Recurrent Neural Networks for the forecasting of
   complex spatiotemporal dynamics. Neural Networks, 126:191–217, 2020.
Yi Jen Wang and Chin Teng Lin. Runge-Kutta neural network for identification of dynamical sys-
  tems in high accuracy. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 9(2):294–307, 1998.
Antoine Wehenkel and Gilles Louppe. Unconstrained Monotonic Neural Networks. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). arXiv, 2019.
Hiroaki Yoshimura and Jerrold E. Marsden. Dirac structures in Lagrangian mechanics Part I: Im-
  plicit Lagrangian systems. Journal of Geometry and Physics, 57(1):133–156, 2006a.
Hiroaki Yoshimura and Jerrold E. Marsden. Dirac structures in Lagrangian mechanics Part II: Vari-
  ational structures. Journal of Geometry and Physics, 57(1):209–250, 2006b.
Yaofeng Desmond Zhong, Biswadip Dey, and Amit Chakraborty. Dissipative SymODEN: Encoding
  Hamiltonian Dynamics with Dissipation and Control into Deep Learning. In ICLR 2020 Workshop
  on Integration of Deep Neural Models and Differential Equations (DeepDiffEq), pp. 1–6, 2020.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix

A    L ESS R ELATED W ORK


Research on methods for learning dynamical systems has a long history (Nelles, 2001). Although the
approaches discussed here are not directly related to the primary focus of this paper, we include them
for completeness and to clarify key distinctions. Since linear systems are relatively straightforward
to handle, our discussion is restricted to nonlinear systems.
A classical approach to learning nonlinear dynamics considers discrete-time systems of the form
xn+1 = f (xn ), where the mapping f is approximated using a neural network (Nelles, 2001). Even
when the underlying system is continuous in time, one can sample the trajectory at fixed intervals
and treat it as a discrete-time dynamics. A variant of this approach models the dynamics as xn+1 =
xn + Φ(xn ), which closely resembles the forward Euler method. Building on this idea, Wang & Lin
(1998) proposed a neural network architecture inspired by the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method.
Neural ODEs can be regarded as an extension of this approach although the original work noted
connections to ResNet (He et al., 2016).
If state x is only partially observable, the dynamics is typically modeled as a combination of latent-
state dynamics and an observation model y = φ(x), which is commonly referred to as a state-space
model (SSM). Among neural architectures, long short-term memories (LSTMs) can be interpreted as
discrete-time SSMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). More sophisticated models combine neural
networks with Bayesian inference to handle uncertainty in latent states (Krishnan et al., 2017; Becker
et al., 2018). Recently, SSMs have been employed in sequence modeling tasks such as language
processing, leading to architectures like S4 and Mamba (Gu et al., 2022; Gu & Dao, 2024). These
models are primarily designed for modeling logical reasoning or expressing causal relationships
rather than for modeling physical dynamical systems.
A different viewpoint on dynamical systems leverages the Koopman operator K, which describes
the time evolution of observations y rather than the latent states x themselves (Bevanda et al., 2021).
Formally, the operator K is linear (albeit typically infinite-dimensional) and satisfies y(t + s) =
Ks (y(t)). The Koopman operator provides an alternative perspective for an analysis, rather than for
modeling.
Another framework that is sometimes confused with our primary focus is that of Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs) (Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018; Raissi et al., 2019; Du & Zaki, 2021).
PINNs are designed to solve known symbolic governing equations by employing neural networks
as basis functions, analogous to classical numerical methods such as the finite element method.
Although PINNs can be used to estimate certain parameters within symbolic equations from data,
they are not intended for the discovery of unknown dynamical systems.
For directly learning symbolic governing equations from data, the Sparse Identification of Nonlinear
Dynamics (SINDy) framework has been extensively investigated (Brunton et al., 2016). SINDy typi-
cally represents the dynamics as a combination of predefined terms in a dictionary, which introduces
a trade-off between expressiveness and interpretability.
As summarized in Table 1, the research trend to which our work contributes is focused on data-driven
modeling of dynamical systems. We assume that the governing symbolic equations are unknown
and not the primary target for estimation, and that the full state of the system is observable. While
combining the proposed method with the aforementioned approaches could be a promising direction
for future research, it is not meaningful to directly compare their performance.
Moreover, our study specifically considers dynamical systems as coupled systems across multiple
physical domains and focuses on learning and uncovering both the coupling patterns and the char-
acteristics of individual components. This distinguishes our work from previous research. Although
system identification for coupled linear systems has been extensively studied (Nelles, 2001), to the
best of our knowledge, no prior work has tackled flexible identification using neural networks.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XAMPLES OF F ORMULATIONS

Consider the time evolution of a point u on a manifold M. If a local coordinate on M is denoted by
                                                                                    ∂
xi , the corresponding basis vector of the tangent space Tu M is denoted by ∂x        i
                                                                                        . A vector field X on
                                    ∂
                          P
M is expressed as X = i Xi ∂xi . If the curve u(t) satisfies u̇(t) = Xu(t) , Xi represents the local
rate of change of the state u(t) inPthe xi -direction, i.e., u̇i = Xi . For a function F : M → R, its
                                          ∂F
differential dF is given by dF = i ∂x       i
                                              dxi . The differential is a covector field, that is, a collection
of points on cotangent spaces Tu M. The basis vector of the cotangent space Tu∗ M is dxi , and the
                                   ∗
                                ∂
following relation holds: dxi ∂x  j
                                      = 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise.
When a function F defines dynamics, a 2-tensor field links a vector field X and the covector field
dF . Such a 2-tensor field can be a symplectic form, Poisson bivector, or Riemannian metric. For
example, a link with the negative of a Riemannian metric defines a gradient flow. A symplectic form
and Poisson bivector are defined using the wedge product ∧, which satisfies the skew-symmetry
                                                             ∂
dxi ∧ dxj = −dxj ∧ dxi , and the relation (dxi ∧ dxj )( ∂x     i
                                                                 ) = dxj . Marsden & Ratiu (1999)
and Hairer et al. (2006) have thoroughly discussed how to describe dynamical systems using these
geometric objects. While theoretical details are left to these textbooks, this section introduces a
mass-spring system as a concrete example.

B.1    M ASS -S PRING S YSTEM

Consider a mass-spring system with spring constant k and mass m. We will write its dynamics by
several formulations.
Canonical Hamiltonian Systems In the Darboux coordinates (i.e., on the cotangent bundle T ∗ Q),
the generalized coordinate q is the displacement of spring k, and the generalized momentum p is
obtained as p = mv for the velocity v of mass m. The manifold M is a 2-dimensional Euclidean
                                             1 2
space R2 . The Hamiltonian H is H(q, p) = 2m   p + 12 kq 2 , and the symplectic form Ω is standard,
i.e., Ω = dq ∧ dp.
                                                            ∂       ∂
Hamilton’s equations state that (Ω[ )(XH ) = (dq ∧ dp)(q̇ ∂q   + ṗ ∂p ) = q̇dp − ṗdq equals dH =
∂H      ∂H                                               ∂H
∂q dq +  ∂p dp, leading to the equations of motion, q̇ = ∂p   = p/m,    ṗ = − ∂H
                                                                               ∂q = −kq.

Non-Canonical Hamiltonian Systems On the tangent bundle M = T Q, the velocity v is used in
place of the momentum p, and the symplectic form Ω is the Lagrangian 2-form Ω = m(dq ∧ dv).
The Hamiltonian H is H(q, v) = 21 mv 2 + 12 kq 2 .
                                                            ∂        ∂
Hamilton’s equations state that (Ω[ )(XH ) = m(dq ∧ dv)(q̇ ∂q   + v̇ ∂v ) = mq̇dv − mv̇dq equals
      ∂H      ∂H                                              1 ∂H               1 ∂H
dH = ∂q dq + ∂v dv, leading to the equations of motion, q̇ = m ∂v = v, v̇ = − m    ∂q = −kq/m.
                                                                             ∂   ∂
Poisson Systems In the Darboux coordinates, the Poisson bivector B is B = ∂p   ∧ ∂q . Hamilton’s
equations state that XH = q̇ ∂q + ṗ ∂p equals B (dH) = ( ∂p ∧ ∂q )( ∂q dq + ∂p dp) = ∂H
                              ∂       ∂         ]         ∂    ∂    ∂H       ∂H            ∂
                                                                                        ∂p ∂q −
∂H ∂                                      ∂H               ∂H
 ∂q ∂p . The equations of motion are q̇ = ∂p = p/m, ṗ = − ∂q = −kq.
                                                             1 ∂       ∂
On the tangent bundle M = T Q, the Poisson bivector B is B = m ( ∂v ∧ ∂q ), and the Hamiltonian
              1    2   1  2                                        ∂       ∂
is H(q, v) = 2 mv + 2 kq . Hamilton’s equations state that XH = q̇ ∂q + v̇ ∂v equals B ] (dH) =
 1 ∂      ∂   ∂H       ∂H       1 ∂H ∂     1 ∂H ∂                                        1 ∂H
m ( ∂v ∧ ∂q )( ∂q dq + ∂v dv) = m ∂v ∂q − m ∂q ∂v . The equations of motion are q̇ = m ∂v =
          1 ∂H
v, v̇ = − m ∂q = −kq/m.

B.2    C ONSTRAINED M ASS -S PRING S YSTEM

Consider a pair of mass-spring systems, indexed by i ∈ {1, 2}, and introduce a constraint such that
the two masses are coupled and always have the same displacement and velocity; the dynamics is
degenerate. This constraint is expressed as q1 = q2 . The Hamiltonian is given simply by the sum
                               1         1
of two systems, H(q, p) = 2m      p2 + 2m
                                 1 1
                                            p2 + 12 k1 q12 + 12 k2 q22 . However, Hamilton’s equations
                                           2 2
Ω[ (XH ) = dH with the standard symplectic form Ω cannot describe the dynamics.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Degenerate Systems with Coordinate Transformation Define new coordinates q = q1 = q2 and
p = m1m+m
        1
          2
            p1 = m1m+m
                     2
                       2
                         p2 , and consider the submanifold M̃ spanned by (q, p). The Hamiltonian
H is unchanged but rewritten as H(q, p) = 2(m11+m2 ) p2 + 12 (k1 +k2 )q 2 . With the standard symplec-
                                                                           p
tic form Ω = dq ∧ dp on M̃, the equations of motion are written as q̇ = m1 +m 2
                                                                                , ṗ = −(k1 + k2 )q.
Degenerate Systems with Constraint Force The constraint on the coordinates, q1 − q2 = 0, is
naturally satisfied by the constraint on the velocities, q̇1 − q̇2 = 0, which is written as the constraint
on momenta, p1 /m1 − p2 /m2 = 0. The constants of motion are q1 − q2 and p1 /m1 − p2 /m2 . A
constraint force can be introduced to satisfy these constraints, yielding the same equation as above.
Finzi et al. (2020) proposed CHNNs by combining this approach with neural networks. However,
the automatic derivation of the constraint on momenta from that on the coordinates is non-trivial,
and it remains unclear how to learn constraints from data.
Degenerate Systems as Poisson Systems The equations of motion on the submanifold M̃, q̇ =
    p                                                                                         p1 +p2
m1 +m2 , ṗ = −(k1 + k2 )q, can be rewritten in the original coordinate system as q̇1 = m1 +m2 , q̇2 =
 p1 +p2              m1                                   m2
m1 +m2 , ṗ1 = − m1 +m2 (k1 q1 +k2 q2 ), ṗ2 = − m1 +m2 (k1 q1 +k2 q2 ). Even on the original manifold
M, these equations are obtained from Hamilton’s equations X = B ] (dH) with the Poisson bivector
         1
B = m1 +m   2
              (m1 ∂p∂ 1 + m2 ∂p∂ 2 ) ∧ ( ∂q∂ 1 + ∂q∂ 2 ) on M, while its bundle map B ] is degenerate. This
fact implies that, by adjusting the Poisson bivector from data, we can learn the Hamiltonian systems
with constraints and identify how the dynamics is degenerate.
On the tangent bundle M = T Q, the Hamiltonian is H(q1 , q2 , v1 , v2 ) = 12 m1 v12 + 12 m2 v22 +
1     2   1     2                                        1      ∂     ∂         ∂     ∂
2 k1 q1 + 2 k2 q2 , and the Poisson bivector B is B = m1 +m2 ( ∂v1 + ∂v2 ) ∧ ( ∂q1 + ∂q2 ). Then, the
                                                                  k1 q1 +k2 q2     k1 q1 +k2 q2
equations of motion are q̇1 = m1mv11 +m 2 v2
                                     +m2 , q̇2 =
                                                 m1 v1 +m2 v2
                                                  m1 +m2 , v̇1 = − m1 +m2 , v̇2 = − m1 +m2 .


C     P OISSON S YSTEMS
C.1    M ECHANICAL S YSTEMS

Using the mass-spring systems described above, we provide concrete examples of how the bivector
represents coupling and constraints in mechanical systems.
Coupled Systems as Poisson Systems Consider two masses and two springs, indexed by i ∈
{1, 2}, coupled in sequence from a fixed wall. Let qi denote the displacement of i-th spring. The
equations of motion are given by q̇1 = p1 /m1 , q̇2 = p2 /m2 − p1 /m1 , ṗ1 = −k1 q1 + k2 q2 , and
ṗ2 = −k2 q2 . The bivector B leading to these equations is B = ∂p∂ 1 ∧ ∂q∂ 1 − ∂p∂ 1 ∧ ∂q∂ 2 + ∂p∂ 2 ∧ ∂q∂ 2 for
                               1         1
the Hamiltonian H(q, p) = 2m      p2 + 2m
                                 1 1
                                            p2 + 21 k1 q12 + 12 k2 q22 . These terms indicate the couplings
                                           2 2
between p1 and q1 , p1 and q2 , and p2 and q2 . The negative coefficient indicates that the coupling
between p1 and q2 is in the opposite direction.
Degenerate Systems as Poisson Systems As shown in Appendix B.2, degenerate systems can
be expressed as Poisson systems. Recall the case of a pair of mass-spring systems, indexed by
i ∈ {1, 2}, constrained so that the two masses always have the same displacement and velocity.
                                                            1
This system is expressed with the Poisson bivector B = m1 +m   2
                                                                 (m1 ∂p∂ 1 + m2 ∂p∂ 2 ) ∧ ( ∂q∂ 1 + ∂q∂ 2 ),
                                                        ]
which is degenerate in the sense that its bundle map B is degenerate. This indicates the absence
of a corresponding symplectic form. Conversely, by learning the bivector B and examining how it
degenerates, one can identify the constraints imposed on the system.
The coefficient m1m+m1
                        2
                           for the term ∂p∂ 1 ∧ ∂q∂ 1 indicates the coupling strength between mass p1 and
spring q1 . The effort eSq1 = ∂q∂H
                                  1
                                    from spring q1 is distributed to the masses such that m1m+m
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                  eq1 goes
                    m2
to mass m1 and m1 +m2 eq1 goes to mass m2 .
Coordinate Transformation by Bivector As shown in Appendix B.2, the elements of the Poisson
bivector B in a Poisson system depend on whether the dynamics are defined on the tangent bundle
T Q (using generalized velocities as part of the state) or the cotangent bundle T ∗ Q (using generalized
momenta as part of the state). Despite this difference, both coordinate systems are represented by
Poisson bivectors. Thus, by learning the bivector B to approximate the dynamics of a given system,
one can implicitly learn the coordinate system employed by that system.


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   E LECTRIC C IRCUITS

Our formulation is applicable to electric circuits, as summarized in Table 2. Let IX and VX denote
the current through and voltage across a circuit element X, respectively.
A capacitor with capacitance C has the electric charge Q as its state, and stores the energy HC =
 1   2
2C Q . Its flow is the current IC , which leads to the change in the electric charge Q as Q̇ = IC . Its
effort is the voltage VC because the stored electric charge Q generates the voltage VC as VC = Q C =
∂HC
 ∂Q  .
An inductor with inductance L has the magnetic flux ϕ as its state, and stores the energy HL =
 1 2
2L ϕ . Its flow is the voltage VL , which leads to the change in the magnetic flux ϕ as ϕ̇ = VL . Its
                                                                                      ϕ
effort is the current IL because the magnetic flux ϕ generates the current IL as IL = L  = ∂H
                                                                                            ∂ϕ .
                                                                                              L



Consider a system composed of an inductor L and a capacitor C coupled in series. The state space
M is the space of the magnetic flux ϕ and electric charge Q. The total energy is H = HL + HC ,
                             ϕ
and its differential is dH = L dϕ + Q                            ∂      ∂
                                    C dQ. Define a bivector B = ∂ϕ ∧ ∂Q , which leads to
                                                 ϕ ∂   Q ∂
                                    B ] (dH) =       −     .
                                                 L ∂Q C ∂ϕ
                                 ∂       ∂
The vector field on M is X = ϕ̇ ∂ϕ + Q̇ ∂Q . Hamilton’s equations X = B ] (dH) lead to the
equations of motion:
                                   Q                       ϕ
                       VL = ϕ̇ = − = −VC and IC = Q̇ = = IL .
                                   C                       L
However, electrical circuits that can be described as Poisson systems are limited to energy-
conservative LC circuits. Our formulation extends this to include resistors, diodes, voltage sources,
and current sources.

D     D IRAC S TRUCTURE
D.1   D IRAC S TRUCTURE ON A V ECTOR S PACE

Proof of Theorem 1(Yoshimura & Marsden, 2006a). By Definition 1,
            DV⊥ = {(w, β) ∈ V × V ∗ | hα, wi + hβ, vi = 0 for all v ∈ ∆ and α ∈ ∆◦ }.
Let (v̄, ᾱ) ∈ DV . Then, v̄ ∈ ∆ and ᾱ ∈ ∆◦ , so hα, v̄i + hᾱ, vi = 0 for all (v, α) ∈ DV . This
implies (v̄, ᾱ) ∈ DV⊥ Thus, DV ⊂ DV⊥ .
Let (w, β) ∈ DV⊥ . In the above definition of DV⊥ , setting α = 0 gives hβ, vi = 0 for all v ∈ ∆.
Hence, β ∈ ∆◦ . Similarly, setting v = 0 gives hα, wi = 0 for all α ∈ ∆◦ , which implies w ∈ ∆.
Hence, (w, β) ∈ DV . Thus, DV⊥ ⊂ DV .
Therefore, DV = DV⊥ .

D.2   D IRAC S TRUCTURE ON A M ANIFOLD

Definition 4 (Courant (1990); Yoshimura & Marsden (2006a)). A distribution ∆ on a manifold
M is a collection of vector subspaces ∆u of tangent spaces Tu M, each assigned smoothly to M
at point u, forming a vector subbundle of T M. The annihilator ∆◦ of ∆ is a collection of the
annihilator ∆◦u of ∆u , also forming a subbundle of T ∗ M. Then, a Dirac structure D is constructed
as D = ∆ ⊕ ∆◦ , which is a subbundle of the Pontryagin bundle T M ⊕ T ∗ M.
A type of Dirac structure on a manifold M can be defined using a symplectic form Ω on M.
Theorem 3 (Yoshimura & Marsden (2006a)). Let ∆M be a distribution on a manifold M. Let Ω
be a symplectic form on a manifold M. Ω is restricted to ∆M and denoted by Ω∆M . Then, the
collection of
   (D∆M )u = {(v, α) ∈ Tu M × Tu∗ M |v ∈ (∆M )u ,
                                          and hα, wi = (Ω∆M )u (v, w) for all w ∈ (∆M )u }

                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is a Dirac structure D∆M ⊂ T M ⊕ T ∗ M on M, which is said to be induced by Ω.

Proof of Theorem 3(Yoshimura & Marsden, 2006a). By definition, the orthogonal of D∆M at u ∈
M is given by
           ⊥
         (D∆  ) = {(w, β) ∈ Tu M × Tu∗ M | hα, wi + hβ, vi = 0 for all v ∈ (∆M )u ,
             M u

                                and hα, wi = (Ω∆M )u (v, w) for all w ∈ (∆M )u }.

Let (v, α), (v̄, ᾱ) ∈ (D∆M )u , hα, v̄i+hᾱ, vi = Ω∆M (v, v̄)+Ω∆M (v̄, v) = 0. The latter equality
                                                                       ⊥
holds because of the skew-symmetry of Ω. This implies (v, α) ∈ (D∆         ) . Thus, (D∆M )u ⊂
                                                                         M u
   ⊥
(D∆M )u .
                  ⊥
Let (w, β) ∈ (D∆      ) . Then, hα, wi + hβ, vi = 0 for all (v, α) ∈ (D∆M )u . First, setting
                    M u
v = 0 gives hα, wi = (Ω∆M )u (0, w) = 0 for any α ∈ (∆◦M )u . Thus, w ∈ (∆◦M )◦u = (∆M )u .
Second, if α satisfies hα, wi = (Ω∆M )u (v, w) for any v ∈ (∆M )u , then hα, wi + hβ, vi =
(Ω∆M )u (v, w) + hβ, vi = 0 for any v ∈ (∆M )u . This implies hβ, vi = (Ω∆M )u (w, v) for
any v ∈ (∆M )u . Because it has been proved that w ∈ (∆M )u , (w, β) ∈ (D∆M )u . Thus,
   ⊥
(D∆   ) ⊂ (D∆M )u .
     M u

                       ⊥
Therefore, (D∆M )u = (D∆  ) .
                         M u

Definition 5 (Hamilton-Dirac System (Yoshimura & Marsden, 2006b)). Let M be a manifold, H :
M → R be an energy function, and D be a Dirac structure on M. Given a vector field XH on M,
if it holds for each u(t) ∈ M and t ∈ [a, b] that
                                  ((XH )u(t) , dHu(t) ) ∈ (D∆M )u(t) ,
the tuple (H, D∆M , XH ) is called a Hamilton-Dirac system (or implicit Hamiltonian system).

Note that the symplectic form restricted to a distribution ∆M , denoted by Ω∆M , satisfies
(Ω∆M )u (v, w) = Ωu (v, w) for any v, w ∈ (∆M )u . The symplectic form Ω is degenerate in the
sense that its bundle map Ω[ on the tangent space Tu M is degenerate, but Ω∆M is non-degenerate
on the distribution (∆M )u . If there is no constraint, ∆M = T M and Ω∆M = Ω. When the Dirac
structure D is given as in Theorem 3 with no constraint, the Hamilton-Dirac system is identical
to the Hamiltonian system Ω[ (XH ) = dH in Eq. (2). The distribution ∆M describes constraints
on the velocities, and hence constrained Hamiltonian systems can be rewritten as Hamilton-Dirac
systems. Therefore, Hamiltonian-Dirac systems are generalizations of Hamiltonian and constrained
Hamiltonian systems. For example, the system in Appendix B.2 can be written as a Hamilton-Dirac
system as follows:
Degenerate Systems as Hamilton-Dirac Systems The distribution ∆M is given by (∆M )u =
{(q̇1 , q̇2 , ṗ1 , ṗ2 ) ∈ Tu M | q̇1 − q̇2 = 0, ṗ1 /m1 − ṗ2 /m2 = 0} = span{ ∂q∂ 1 + ∂q∂ 2 , m11 ∂p∂ 1 +
 1 ∂                                                                        m1 +m2      m1 +m2
m2 ∂p2 }. Define the new coordinates q = q1 = q2 and p =                      m1 p1 =    m2 p2 , with
                        ∂  ∂
∆M = span{ ∂q , ∂p }. The symplectic form Ω∆M restricted to the distribution ∆M should satisfy
(Ω∆M )u (v, w) = Ωu (v, w) for any v, w ∈ (∆M )u at u. Such form is given as Ω∆M = dq ∧ dp.
                                                           p
Then, the equations of motion are written as q̇ = m1 +m        2
                                                                 , ṗ = −(k1 + k2 )q.

D.3    P ORT- BASED S YSTEMS

Proof of Theorem 2. By definition, the orthogonal of D at u ∈ M is given by
         D⊥ = {(f¯, ē) ∈ Fu × Eu | he, f¯i + hē, f i = 0 for all e ∈ Eu and f = B ] (e)}.
           u                                                                               u

Let (f , e), (f¯, ē) ∈ Du . Then, he, f¯i + hē, f i = he, Bu    ]               ]
                                                                    (ē)i + hē, Bu (e)i = Bu (e, ē) +
                                                                             ⊥                 ⊥
Bu (ē, e) = 0 due to the skew-symmetry of B. This implies (f , e) ∈ Du . Thus, Du ⊂ Du          .
Let (f¯, ē) ∈ Du . Then, for any (f , e) ∈ Du (i.e., for any e ∈ Eu and f = Bu (e)), 0 = he, f¯i +
                  ⊥                                                                  ]

hē, f i = he, f¯i + hē, Bu
                           ]
                             (e)i = he, f¯i + Bu (ē, e) = he, f¯i − Bu (e, ē) = he, f¯i − he, Bu ]
                                                                                                     (ē)i.
     ¯                                           ¯       ]               ⊥
he, f i = Bu (e, ē) for all e ∈ Eu implies that f = Bu (ē). Thus, Du ⊂ Du .
                 ⊥
Therefore, Du = Du .


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By extending the above Hamilton-Dirac system from the Pontryagin bundle T M ⊕ T ∗ M to the
vector bundle F ⊕ E, we obtain the so-called port-Hamiltonian systems (Courant, 1990; van der
Schaft & Jeltsema, 2014). However, previous neural network-based methods employed the canoni-
cal form in Eq. (4) and have not attempted to identify coupling patterns or component-wise charac-
teristics (Zhong et al., 2020; Eidnes et al., 2023; Neary & Topcu, 2023; Di Persio et al., 2024).
In a bond graph representation of a dynamical system, a bond represents a component, its ports (flow
and effort) represent points of interaction with other bonds, and the arrows connected to the ports
represent the interactions between them. Both the Port-Hamiltonian and our formulations, as well
as their terminology, are based on this bond graph structure (Duindam et al., 2009).
Instead of the symplectic form Ω, our formulation employs (Poisson) bivector B to define the Dirac
structure D on the tangent and cotangent bundles (Tu M = F S and Tu∗ M = E S ) plus the vector
bundles for port variables (F R , F I , E R , and E I ). As is the case with the symplectic form Ω, we
can constrain a Poisson bivector B on a codistribution ∆∗M , which is a subbundle of the cotangent
bundle T ∗ M, and then define the Dirac structure. However, because the bivector inherently handles
constraints, we did not adopt this formulation. Thus, our formulation is a special case of the Poisson-
Dirac formulation with ports, as summarized in Table 1. Note that, for a bivector to be called a
Poisson bivector, it must satisfy certain conditions, such as the Jacobi identity (Courant, 1990).
However, the learned bivector in our formulation does not necessarily satisfy these conditions, nor
are these conditions required for the proofs presented earlier. Thus, throughout this paper, we refer
to B simply as a bivector, without restricting it to being a Poisson bivector.

E     I MPLEMENTATION

E.1   C OORDINATE - BASED F ORM AND R EDUCTION TO E XISTING M ODELS

In the main body, we have introduced PoDiNNs in a coordinate-free form for a general and theoret-
ical derivation. However, by introducing a specific coordinate system, we can rewrite PoDiNNs in
a more intuitive form at the cost of generality. In this section, we will clarify the relationship with
previous work through such rewrite.
As stated in Theorem 2, PoDiNNs use a bivector B to define the Dirac structure D as a subbundle
of F ⊕ E. When local coordinates xi are introduced on M, the corresponding basis vectors for
                                              ∂
the tangent space Tu M (that is, FuS ) are ∂x   i
                                                  . Additionally, the basis vectors for FuR and FuI are
specified as ξiR and ξiI , respectively. The basis vectors for Eu are then defined as their duals. The
bivector B at u can be expressed as a linear combination of wedge products of pairs of basis vectors
for Fu = FuS ⊕ FuR ⊕ FuI .
We assume that the state space M is a Euclidean space. Then, at a specific point u, flows f and
                                                                       ]
efforts e can be represented as vectors, and the linear bundle map Bu     is represented as a skew-
                    ]     m×m
symmetric matrix Bu ∈ R        , where m denotes the total number of dimensions of Fu (Marsden
& Ratiu, 1999). A skew-symmetric matrix M satisfies the property M = −M > , which implies that
the maximum number of independent degrees of freedom is 12 m(m − 1). This characteristic arises
                                                                           ∂      ∂        ∂      ∂
from the skew-symmetry of the wedge product, particularly the relation ∂x    j
                                                                               ∧ ∂x i
                                                                                      = − ∂x i
                                                                                               ∧ ∂x j
                                                                                                      .
Each bivector element corresponds to a specific pair of elements within this matrix.
                                   ]
In this context, the equation f = Bu (e) in Theorem 2 can be expressed with a matrix-vector
product:                            S           S
                                      f           e
                                   f R  = Bu ]  R
                                                  e .
                                      fI          eI
By substituting the variables as in Definition 3, we obtain:
                                                           
                                       u̇            ∇u H(u)
                                      R         ] 
                                     f  = Bu  Ru (f R )  ,
                                                              
                                       fI              eI (t)
where the differential dH reduces to the gradient ∇u H in a Euclidean space.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the absence of dissipation (R) and external inputs (I), the equation reduces to
                                               ]
                                         u̇ = Bu ∇u H(u).
This form aligns with those derived in NSFs and CHNNs, up to certain constraints imposed on the
matrix (Chen et al., 2021; Finzi et al., 2020). In this sense, PoDiNNs are a generalization of these
previous models. Since NSFs are a generalization of LNNs, PoDiNNs are also a generalization of
LNNs.
Furthermore, if the Darboux coordinates are introduced on M, the state u can be
                                                                             P decomposed   into
                                                                                 ∂      ∂
the position q and momentum p, and the bivector B takes the standard form i ∂p     i
                                                                                     ∧ ∂qi The
                                                                                          .
equation reduces to:
                                         O I ∇q H(q, p)

                                 q̇
                                    =                          ,
                                ṗ      −I O ∇p H(q, p)
where u = [ pq ]. This is identical to Hamilton’s equations in Eq. (1), which is the form HNNs
employed. Therefore, PoDiNNs are a generalization of HNNs. If the target system is known to be
learnable by HNNs, it is also learnable by PoDiNNs of the form identical to HNNs. Consequently,
a performance comparison between PoDiNNs and HNNs is not meaningful.
Let us consider a specific example from Appendix C.2: a system where a capacitor C and an inductor
L are coupled in series. The state of the capacitor C is its electric charge Q, while the state of the
                                                                                            ∂      ∂
inductor L is its magnetic flux ϕ. Their coupling is represented by the bivector B = ∂ϕ        ∧ ∂Q  .
                                                                          h 0 1i
Using local coordinates (Q, ϕ), we can represent B as the matrix B =             . The Poisson-Dirac
                                                                           −1 0
formulation states that applying this matrix to the effort (∇Q HC , ∇ϕ HL ) yields the flows (Q̇, ϕ̇),
that is,
                               IC       0 1 ∇Q HC               IL
                                    =                       =          .
                               VL      −1 0 ∇ϕ HL              −VC
This corresponds to the standard form of Hamilton’s equations. We can see that the first line rep-
resents Kirchhoff’s current law, IC = IL , and the second line represents Kirchhoff’s voltage law,
VL = −VC . The sign inversion follows from the skew-symmetric property of the bivector B. As
the number of components increases, the dimensionality of the flows, efforts, and matrix also grows,
and the bivector may not retain a standard form, as observed in system (e). Nonetheless, the bivector
consistently represents Kirchhoff’s laws, independent of the component-wise characteristics, and the
Poisson-Dirac formulation ensures the satisfaction of these laws. Similarly, in mechanical systems,
bivectors represent the law of action and reaction.
In general, the coordinate systems are not limited to the Darboux coordinates, components can
                                                         ]
exhibit a variety of coupling patterns, and the matrix Bu  can contain elements beyond the restricted
values of -1, 0, or 1. The state u is not confined to mechanical position and momentum; it may also
be decomposed into various quantities such as electric charge, voltage, or the volume of fluid in a
tank, depending on the domain from which these states are derived, as shown in Table 2.

E.2   P ERFORMANCE AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OST

In the above case, PoDiNNs use two neural networks to approximate two energy functions HC and
HL : R → R, thereby forming a mapping that defines an ODE, R2 → R2 , (Q, ϕ) 7→ (Q̇, ϕ̇) =
(IC , VL ). PoDiNNs introduce the assumption that the target system can be decomposed into inter-
acting components and use separate neural networks R → R to model n individual components.
This approach is distinct from NODEs, which directly learn the mapping Rn → Rn without explicit
assumptions between variables. In this way, PoDiNNs can mitigate the curse of dimensionality.
Moreover, while neural networks used in NODEs are universal approximators capable of learning
Kirchhoff’s laws and the law of action and reaction, they inherently introduce approximation errors.
This means that these laws are only approximately satisfied, and over time, these errors tend to ac-
cumulate, becoming significant. In contrast, PoDiNNs explicitly encode these laws using bivector
elements, independently of the component-wise characteristics. This explicit separation enhances
robustness.
If the target system includes n components, we need to compute n neural networks, along with
the bivector. This increases the computational cost to at n times that of a single NODE. We view


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


this computational overhead as a reasonable trade-off for the improved accuracy and interpretability
provided by PoDiNNs.


F     DATASETS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

F.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Following previous studies (Greydanus et al., 2019; Matsubara et al., 2020), we used fully-connected
neural networks with two hidden layers to implement any vector fields and energy functions for all
models. Each hidden layer had 200 units, followed by a hyperbolic tangent activation function.
Weight matrices were initialized using PyTorch’s default algorithm.
In PoDiNNs, each element of the bivector B related to energy-dissipating components was initial-
ized from a uniform distribution U (−0.1, 0.1), while the remaining elements are set to zero. These
bivector elements were updated along with the neural network parameters. Elements representing
incompatible couplings are constrained to be zero. For instance, masses cannot couple directly with
each other but can couple with springs, dampers, or external forces.
Unless stated otherwise, the time step size was set to ∆t = 0.1. Each training subset consisted of
1,000 trajectories of 1,000 steps, and each test subset consisted of 10 trajectories of 10,000 steps.
The Dormand–Prince method (dopri5) with absolute tolerance atol = 10−7 and relative tolerance
rtol = 10−9 was used to integrate the ground truth ODEs and neural network models (Dormand &
Prince, 1986). The Adam optimization algorithm (Kingma & Ba, 2015) was applied with parameters
(β1 , β2 ) = (0.9, 0.999) and a batch size of 100 for updates. The learning rate was initialized at 10−3
and decayed to zero using cosine annealing (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017). The number of training
iterations was set to 100,000.
All experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU.


F.2   M ECHANICAL S YSTEMS

Overview and Experimental Setting A spring k generates a force that restores it to its original
length when stretched or compressed. Specifically, this force is given by eS = −k(∆q), where ∆q
is the spring’s displacement. In both the Hamiltonian and our formulations, the potential energy U
is obtained by integrating this force eS with respect to the displacement ∆q. Conversely, the force
eS is obtained as to the partial derivative of the potential energy U with respect to the displacement
∆q. The spring’s flow f S is the rate of extension, ∆q̇.
A mass m has a velocity v, and its momentum is given by p = mv. The kinetic energy is 12 mv 2 =
 1 2
2m p . In general, velocity v is more easily observed than momentum p as the state of a mass.
Therefore, we provided velocity v as the observation.
Coupling between two components means the output (effort) of one flows into the input (flow)
of the other. Hence, possible couplings are limited to interactions between potential and kinetic
components, as shown in Table 2. Specifically, the following couplings are possible: mass and
        ∂
spring ∂p i
            ∧ ∂q∂ j , mass and damper ∂p
                                       ∂
                                         i
                                                                            ∂
                                           ∧ ξjR , mass and external force ∂p i
                                                                                ∧ ξjI , moving wall and
spring ξiI ∧ ∂q∂ j , and moving wall and damper ξiI ∧ ξjR . These combinations were incorporated as
elements of the learnable bivector B, while all other possible pairings were fixed to zero.
In the absolute coordinate system, the positions qi are used to represent the states of the springs, and
their displacements ∆qi are then calculated within the potential energy function U . Therefore, the
potential energy function U depends on all positions qi of springs and moving boundaries collec-
tively. In the relative coordinate system, the displacements ∆qi are used instead, and in this case,
the potential energy function Ui is defined individually for each displacement ∆qi .
In both Dissipative SymODENs and PoDiNNs, since we assume to know the symbolic expression
  1 2
2m p for the kinetic energy, this was used, rather than a neural network. Also, the velocity v was
transformed into momentum p using the learnable parameter m with p = mv. This approach was
originally adopted by Dissipative SymODENs and is a realistic and practical choice.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For Dissipative SymODENs and PoDiNNs in the absolute coordinate system, a single neural net-
work was trained to approximate the potential energy function U using all positions qi of springs
and moving boundaries as inputs. In the relative coordinate system, a separate neural network Ui
was used for the potential energy of each spring ki .
For Dissipative SymODENs, the dissipative terms D and input gain G were modeled using neural
networks. In the original paper (Zhong et al., 2020), D was defined as a symmetric matrix that
depended solely on the positions q of the springs, which is suitable for modeling linear dampers. To
extend this to nonlinear dampers, we modified D to also depend on the velocity v of the masses.
(a) Mass-Spring-Damper System with External Force This system consists of three springs ki
and three masses mi arranged sequentially and indexed by i ∈ {1, 2, 3} from a fixed wall. Two
dampers d1 and d3 are placed in parallel with springs k1 and k3 , respectively. An external force F
is applied to mass m3 .
The masses were set to mi = 0.8 + 0.2i. The characteristics of the nonlinear spring were given by
ki (∆qi ) = (0.1 + 0.1i)∆qi + 0.1∆qi3 . The characteristics of the nonlinear dampers were defined as
di (vi ) = (0.1 − 0.02i) sgn(vi )|vi |1/3 , where vi denotes the extension velocity of the i-th damper,
and sgn is the sign function that returns 1 for a positive value and −1 for a negative value. The ini-
tial positions of the springs and the initial velocities of the masses were sampled from the uniform
distributions U (−0.5, 0.5) and U (−0.3, 0.3), respectively. The external force F (t) = eI (t) was de-
fined as the sum of three sine waves, with each wave’s amplitude, angular velocity, and initial phase
sampled from the uniform distributions U (0.2, 0.5), U (0.1π, 0.2π), and U (0, 2π), respectively.
(b) Mass-Spring-Damper System with Moving Boundary This system consists of three springs
ki and three masses mi arranged sequentially and indexed by i ∈ {1, 2, 3} from a moving wall b.
Three dampers di are placed in parallel with springs ki . This potentially represents a building’s
response during an earthquake.
The masses were set to mi = 1.6 − 0.2i. The characteristics of nonlinear spring were given by
ki = (0.6 − 0.1i)∆qi + 0.1∆qi3 , where ∆qi denotes the displacement of the i-th spring. The
characteristics of nonlinear damper were defined as di (vi ) = d˜i sgn(vi )|vi |1/3 for d˜1 = 0.10, d˜2 =
0.05, and d˜3 = 0.02. The initial positions of springs ki and the initial velocities of masses mi were
sampled from the uniform distributions U (−0.5, 0.5) and U (−0.3, 0.3), respectively. The position
qb (t) of moving wall b was set as the sum of three sine waves, with each wave’s amplitude, angular
velocity, and initial phase sampled from the uniform distributions U (0.2, 0.4), U (0.05π, 0.2π), and
U (0, 2π), respectively.
In the absolute coordinate system, it is necessary to represent the potential energy of spring k1
connected to the moving wall b. For both Dissipative SymODENs and PoDiNNs, the position qb of
the moving wall b was included as part of the inputs to the neural network U for the potential energy,
along with the positions qi of all springs ki . It was also fed to Neural ODEs.
The effort eI of the moving wall b was its velocity vb , which was fed to PoDiNNs and Neural ODEs
as part of the external inputs. However, no such mechanism exists for Dissipative SymODENs.
Without this, models cannot represent the force generated by damper d1 , connected to moving wall
b.
(c) Mass-Spring System with Redundancy This system consists of five springs ki and two
masses mi arranged in 2-dimensional space, as shown in Fig. 2 (c). Masses m1 and m2 are con-
nected to a fixed wall via springs k1 and k2 , respectively. These masses are also connected to
each other by spring k3 . Additionally, springs k4 and k5 diagonally connect masses m2 and m1
to the fixed wall, respectively, similar to cross braces. Since there are no energy-dissipating com-
ponents or external inputs, the total energy is conserved. The masses were set to m1 = 5.0 and
m2 = 3.0. The natural lengths of spring k1 and k2 to l1 = 3.0, that of k3 to l3 = 4.0, and those
of k4 and k5 to l4 = 5.0. The characteristics of nonlinear spring were k1 (∆q) = 2.5∆q + 3.4∆q 3 ,
k2 (∆q) = 3.0∆q + 0.5∆q 3 , k3 (∆q) = 2.1∆q + 4.1∆q 3 , k4 (∆q) = 3.5∆q + 2.4∆q 3 , k5 (∆q) =
2.5∆q + 1.6∆q 3 for the displacement ∆q. The initial positions of masses m1 and m2 were sam-
pled from uniform distributions U (−0.5, 0.5) in both x and y directions, and their velocities from
U (−0.1, 0.1).


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Because of two masses in 2-dimensional space, the system has 4 degrees of freedom for configu-
ration, or 8 when including velocities. However, the observations were composed of the velocities
of both masses and the displacements of all five springs, resulting in a 14-dimensional observation
space M. Hence, the dynamics is degenerate.
Due to the degeneracy, HNNs are not applicable (Greydanus et al., 2019). Also, since this degen-
eracy does not come from a holonomic constraint of the form that CHNNs assumed, CHNNs are
also not applicable (Finzi et al., 2020). In PNNs, we used a Real-NVP consisting of four coupling
layers for the coordinate transformation. Each coupling layer was made of a fully-connected neural
network with two hidden layers of 200 units, followed by a hyperbolic tangent activation function.
The 14-dimensional observations were transformed, and the 8 dimensions were extracted (with the
remaining 6 dimensions considered constant) as input to the energy function of HNNs.

F.3   E LECTRICAL S YSTEMS

Overview and Experimental Settings Refer to Appendix C.2 for basic characteristics of capaci-
tors and inductors. Since the electric charge is analogous to displacement, a capacitor corresponds
to a spring, while an inductor corresponds to a mass in mechanical systems.
The states of a capacitor C and inductor L are the electric charge Q and magnetic flux ϕ, respec-
tively, but these are difficult to observe directly. We used the capacitor voltage VC = Q/C and
inductor current IL = ϕ/L as the observations, which linearly correlate with their states. PoDiNNs
learned the element characteristics C and L as learnable parameters and internally performed the
transformations Q = CVC and ϕ = LIL . This is the same approach used by Dissipative SymOD-
ENs for masses. Strictly speaking, since PoDiNNs can learn coordinate transformations, they can
approximate the dynamics even without such transformations.
In a mass-spring-damper system, the damper always has velocity as flow and force as effort, but
the flow of a resistor can be either current or voltage. This depends on the overall coupling pattern
and the formulation step, though the total number remains constant. If two resistors with different
types of flow are coupled, PoDiNNs would result in a DAE, which cannot be solved explicitly.
Additionally, components that share the same effort type, such capacitors and direct voltage sources,
may couple. In this case, an infinite current instantaneously flows into the capacitor, and its voltage
matches that of the direct voltage source. This dynamics also requires a DAE, rather than an ODE.
In this study, we assumed that the system does not include couplings requiring DAEs. Methods
capable of handling such circuits will be a topic for future research.
A separate neural network was used for approximating the characteristics of each energy-storing and
dissipating component.
(d) FitzHugh-Nagumo Model FitzHugh-Nagumo model is a model for the electrical dynamics of
a biological neuron, exhibiting oscillatory behavior when the external current J is applied (Izhike-
vich & FitzHugh, 2006). The governing equations are written as:
                                             V3
                                    V̇ = V −    − W + J,
                                              3                                                   (A1)
                                   Ẇ = 0.08(V + 0.7 − 0.8W ),
where V denotes the membrane potential, W is the recovery variable, and J is the input.
A circuit representation consists of a resistor R2 , an inductor L, a capacitor C, a direct voltage
source E, and a tunnel diode R1 , with an external current J. The characteristics of these elements
are defined as L = 1/0.08, R2 = 0.8, C = 1.0, and E = −0.7. The current IR1 through tunnel
diode R1 is characterized by IR1 = D(VR1 ) = VR31 /3 − VR1 , where VR1 is the voltage across the
diode. The membrane potential V and recovery variable W are represented by the capacitor voltage
VC and the inductor current IL . In our formulation, resistor R2 and diode R1 have the current and
voltage as their flows, respectively. Also, because the voltage generated by the direct voltage source
E is unchanged for any trials, it can be treated as a part of resistor R2 .
The initial values of V and W were sampled from the uniform distribution U (−3.0, 3.0). The
external current J was sampled at evenly spaced intervals within the range of 0.1 to 1.5 for each
trajectory, and it was kept constant within each individual trajectory to evaluate whether each model
can learn the oscillatory behavior.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since the external current J was kept constant, the variability of the dynamics was reduced, making
the learning process easier. To preserve the challenge of the task, only 30 trajectories were generated
for the training subset.
(e) Chua’s Circuit Chua’s circuit is a nonlinear electronic circuit known for its chaotic behav-
ior (Chua, 2007). It consists of linear elements (a resistor R1 , two capacitors C1 and C2 , and an
inductor L) and a nonlinear element R2 , known as Chua’s diode. With R1 = 1, the governing
equations are:
                                 V̇C1 = α(VC2 − VC1 − f (VR2 )),
                                  V̇C2 = VC1 − VC2 + IL ,
                                                                                                  (A2)
                                    I˙L = −βVC ,2

                                  VR2 = VC1 .
The parameters are α = 1/C and β = 1/L. The nonlinear function f (VR2 ) describes the voltage-
current characteristic of Chua’s diode:
                   f (VR2 ) = m1 VR2 + 0.5(m0 − m1 )(|VR2 + 1| − |VR2 − 1|),                      (A3)
where VR2 is the voltage across the diode, equal to VC1 , and m0 and m1 are parameters. In our
formulation, both resistor R1 and diode R2 have voltages as flows.
We set α = 15.6, β = 28, m0 = −8/7, and m1 = −5/7. The initial values of VC1 , VC2 , and IL
were sampled from the uniform distribution U (−0.5, 0.5).
Due to its chaotic behavior, we set the time step size to ∆t = 0.01, step number of test subset to
3,000 and the number of training iterations to 1,000,000.

F.4   M ULTIPHYSICS

Overview A multiphysics system involves components from different domains that are coupled
together. Our formulation inherently handles multiphysics systems as long as careful attention is
paid to which components can and cannot be coupled.
(f) DC Motor In this system, a DC motor bridges the electro-magnetic and the rotational domains.
In the electric circuit, an inductor L and a resistor R represent the inductance and resistance of the
motor’s armature winding, respectively. Additionally, a voltage source E serves as an external
input. A massless pendulum rod of length l is attached to the DC motor. The pendulum’s angle θ is
measured from the vertical position, and its angular velocity is denoted by ω. With a mass m at the
rod’s end and the gravitational acceleration g, the pendulum has a potential energy of −mgl cos θ
and experiences a torque of −mgl sin θ. Additionally, friction d occurs at the pivot point of the
pendulum.
The DC motor generates torque τDC based on the current IDC through the armature. We assume a
linear relationship with constant K, such that τDC = KIDC . Conversely, when the motor rotates at
an angular velocity ω, it produces a back electromotive force given by VDC = −Kω. The governing
equations are:
                                      θ̇ = ω,
                                ml2 ω̇ = −mgl sin θ + KI − d(ω),
                                  LI˙ = −ωK + E − R(I).

We set L = 2.5, m = 2.0, l = 1.5, g = 1.0, and K = 0.5, respectively. Also, we set d(ω) =
0.02 sgn(ω)|ω|1/3 for friction d, and R(I) = 0.05I 3 for resistor R. The voltage source E(t) was
defined as the sum of five sine waves, where the amplitude, angular velocity, and initial phase of
each wave were sampled from the uniform distributions U (0.1, 0.3), U (0.05π, 0.3π), and U (0, 2π),
respectively.
PoDiNNs can model this multiphysics system seamlessly. In the magnetic domain, inductor L has
magnetic flux ϕ = LI as its state, voltage as its flow, and current as its effort. For the pendulum’s
motion in the rotational domain, the state is angular momentum p = ml2 ω, the flow is torque, and
the effort is angular velocity (see Table 2). Because the properties of the armature are represented by


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


inductor L and resistor R, the remaining function of the DC motor can be represented by a coupling
                                                                                     ∂      ∂
between inductor L and the pendulum’s motion p, that is, the bivector element K ∂ϕ      ∧ ∂p  . Both
inductor L and mass m are considered to store kinetic energies, and this type of coupling is referred
to as a gyrator.
Therefore, the only notable point for the implementation is that magnetic flux ϕ and angular mo-
mentum p, which belong to different domains, can be coupled. Since there are only a few elements
in each domain, the coupling patterns are unique, and their strengths were set to 1.0 while keeping
                                           ∂   ∂
the coefficient K of the bivector element ∂ϕ ∧ ∂p learnable.
(g) Hydraulic Tank Consider a hydraulic tank storing incompressible fluid, which belongs to the
hydraulic domain and can couple with components in the mechanical domain. Let V denote the
volume of the fluid inside the tank. The tank has a cross-sectional area A and a fluid height h,
giving the relationship V = Ah. Let ρ represent the density of the fluid per unit volume, and g the
gravitational acceleration. The pressure p exerted on the bottom of the tank per unit area is given by
p = ρgh = ρgV A , and the total force acting on the bottom surface is ρghA.
Assuming that fluid is supplied from the bottom of the tank, the potential energy stored in the tank
can be expressed as:
                                   Z h
                                                   1            ρg 2
                            UV =       ρghA dh = ρgh2 A =          V .
                                    0              2            2A
Then, ∂U
       ∂V = ρgV /A = p.
         V



Consider two cylinders attached in opposite directions at the bottom of the tank, with cross-sectional
areas a1 and a2 . Each cylinder contains a piston, with masses m1 and m2 , respectively. The forces
acting on the pistons are −pa1 and pa2 , where the positive direction is towards m2 . When piston m1
moves by a displacement q1 , a volume of fluid a1 q1 flows into the tank. Similarly, when piston m2
moves by q2 , a volume a2 q2 flows out of the tank. For simplicity, we assume that these inflows and
outflows occur adiabatically, without any resistance. However, compressible fluids, non-adiabatic
process, fluid momentum, and fluid resistance could also be incorporated (Duindam et al., 2009).
Each piston mi moves with a velocity vi , and is connected to a fixed wall via a spring ki and a
damper di for each i. An external force F = eI is applied to piston m2 .
The equations of motion for the system can be written as:

                                    V̇ = a1 v1 − a2 v2 ,
                                m1 v̇1 = −pa1 − k(q1 ) − d1 (v1 ),
                                m2 v̇2 = pa2 − k(q2 ) − d2 (v2 ) + F,

Each piston has kinetic energy, and each spring has potential energy. The state of each piston can be
expressed as momentum, pi = mi vi , and the state of the spring can be described by the displacement
qi for each i. Thus, the total energy of the system is given by:
                                    2              2
                                    X p2   i
                                                   X                  ρg 2
                               H=              +         Ui (qi ) +      V ,
                                     i=1
                                         2mi       i=1
                                                                      2A

where Ui denotes the potential energy stored in spring ki , as well as the characteristics of dampers
di .
The above equations of motion can be expressed using the energy function H with the following
bivector B:

                       ∂      ∂            ∂     ∂        ∂     ∂      ∂     ∂
            B =a1         ∧        − a2       ∧        +     ∧     +      ∧
                     ∂p1 ∂V               ∂p2 ∂V         ∂p1 ∂q1      ∂p2 ∂q2
                     ∂            ∂           ∂
                 +       ∧ ξ1R +     ∧ ξ2R −     ∧ ξI ,
                    ∂p1          ∂p2         ∂p2
where ξiR and ξ I represent the basis vectors of the spaces F R and F I for dampers di and external
force F , respectively.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         q1          q2             q3                        q1          q2             q3                     q1         q2        q3
               2.5                                            2.5                                               1
                                                                                                                0
               0.0                                            0.0                                              −1

              −2.5                                        −2.5
                                                                                                              0.05
                                                              0.1
              0.05
                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                              0.25
              0.00                                            0.0

                                                              0.1                                             0.00
              0.05
                                                                                                              0.05

              0.00                                            0.0                                             0.00
                     0        20              40                    0              20              40                  0              20        40
                    (a) with external force                    (b) with moving boundary                         (b’) with moving boundary
                in relative coordinate system                 in relative coordinate system                    in absolute coordinate system

                                                         VC              IL                              θ         ω             I
                                    2.5                                                  0.5

                                    0.0
                                                                                         0.0
                                   −2.5
                                    0.5
                                                                                        0.02


                                    0.0                                                 0.00
                                    0.5
                                                                                        0.02


                                    0.0                                                 0.00
                                          0        250    500           750    1000            0        25    50           75        100
                                    (d) FitzHugh-Nagumo model                                       (f) DC motor

Figure A1: Visualizations of example results. Each top panel shows ground truth trajectories, while
the other panels show the absolute errors of all 10 trials in semi-transparent color. See also Fig. 3.


From this, it seems that the hydraulic tank behaves similarly to a spring, but the key difference is
that the coupling strength depends on the cross-sectional areas a1 and a2 of the cylinders. This type
of coupling is referred to as a transformer. If the cross-sectional area of the tank is not constant, the
tank would behave like a nonlinear spring.
We set the parameters as follows: A = 5.0, g = 1.0, ρ = 10.0, a1 = 1.0, a2 = 0.3, m1 = 3.0, and
m2 = 1.0. The spring forces were defined as ki (qi ) = 0.1qi + 0.01qi3 , and the damping forces as
di (vi ) = (0.1 − 0.04i) sgn(vi )|vi |1/3 for i = 1, 2.
As the system tends to reach equilibrium around V = 5, q1 = −10, and q2 = 6, the initial fluid
volume V and the springs’ displacements q1 and q2 were sampled from the uniform distributions
U (5 − 0.25, 5 + 0.25), U (−10 − 0.3, −10 + 0.3), and U (6 − 0.3, 6 + 0.3), respectively, The initial
velocities of the pistons were sampled from the uniform distribution U (−0.3, 0.3). The external
force F (t) = eI (t) was defined as the sum of three sine waves, where the amplitude, angular
velocity, and initial phase of each wave were sampled from the uniform distributions U (0.05, 0.2),
U (0.1π, 0.3π), and U (0, 2π), respectively.
In Fig. 3, for clarity, we displayed the changes relative to 5, −10, and 6, rather than the actual values
of V , q1 , and q2 .


G     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS

G.1   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Additional Visualization We show example visualizations of trajectories and absolute errors in
Fig. A1 in addition to Fig. 3. Across all datasets, PoDiNNs demonstrate superior predictive perfor-
mance compared to other methods. However, in both systems (b) and (b’), there was one failure.
This was due to minor inaccuracies in the learned bivectors, as discussed later. While this issue
only occurred twice out of 90 trials, it indicates that there is room for further improvement of the
initialization and regularization of bivector elements.


                                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Identifying Coupling Patterns of System (b) We examined how the bivector B identifies the
coupling patterns using system (b), that is, the mass-spring-damper system with moving boundary.
When two coefficients differ by a factor of 1,000 or more, we considered the larger one as a detected
coupling and the smaller one as effectively zero, indicating no coupling. The basis vector ∂q∂ i
                            ∂
corresponds to spring ki , ∂p i
                                to mass mi , and ξ S to moving boundary b.

In the relative coordinate system, we obtained the bivector B = ( ∂p∂ 1 − ξ S ) ∧ ( ∂q∂ 1 + a1 ξ1R ) +
( ∂p∂ 2 − ∂p∂ 1 ) ∧ ( ∂q∂ 2 + a2 ξ2R ) + ( ∂p∂ 3 − ∂p∂ 2 ) ∧ ( ∂q∂ 3 + a3 ξ3R ) in all 10 trials. Here, the basis vectors
ξ1R , ξ2R , and ξ3R for dampers d1 , d2 , and d3 were appropriately reordered because their indices are
interchangeable. a1 , a2 , and a3 are trial-wise positive parameters. This result matches the ground
truth coupling pattern in Fig. 2 (b). Notably, the coefficients of other bivector elements, such as
ξ S ∧ ∂q∂ 3 and ∂p∂ 3 ∧ ∂q∂ 2 , were effectively zero, indicating that PoDiNNs correctly identified the
absence of non-existent couplings.
The coefficients expected to be 1 or −1 were accurate to five significant figures in 9 out of 10 trials.
However, in one trial, there was a small error of approximately 0.002. This trial corresponded with
the failure case shown in Fig. A1. This suggests that even minor errors in the coefficients of the
bivector elements can lead to significant prediction failures. Nonetheless, as mentioned earlier, such
occurrences are extremely rare.
Identifying Coupling Patterns of System (b’) In the absolute coordinate system, we obtained
the bivector B = ∂p∂ 1 ∧ ∂q∂ 1 + ∂p∂ 2 ∧ ∂q∂ 2 + ∂p∂ 3 ∧ ∂q∂ 3 + a1 ( ∂p∂ 1 − ξ S ) ∧ ξ1R + a2 ( ∂p∂ 2 − ∂p∂ 1 ) ∧
ξ2R + a3 ( ∂p∂ 3 − ∂p∂ 2 ) ∧ ξ3R in 9 out of 10 trials, where coefficients with a difference of less than 1%
were considered identical. P    The relationship between the masses and the springs is represented by the
                                     ∂
standard Poisson bivector i ∂p         i
                                         ∧ ∂q∂ i , as indicated by the first three terms. Due to this, PoDiNNs
cannot identify their specific coupling pattern. The springs’ displacements are computed internally
within the potential energy function. However, we can still identify how the dampers are coupled
with the masses and the moving boundary, as indicated by the latter three terms. In one trial, the
coefficients of bivector elements between the dampers and masses were disorganized, and this trial
corresponded with the failure case shown in Fig. A1.
Identifying Coupling Patterns of System (c) We also examined case of system (c). We denote
the displacement of i-th spring in x-direction by qxi . The learned bivector B was B = ∂m∂x1 ∧
  ∂       ∂      ∂        ∂        ∂        ∂      ∂        ∂       ∂       ∂      ∂     ∂
∂qx1 + ∂my1 ∧ ∂qy1 + ∂mx2 ∧ ∂qx2 + ∂my2 ∧ ∂qy2 − ∂mx1 ∧ ∂qx3 − ∂my1 ∧ ∂qy3 + ∂mx2 ∧
 ∂      ∂      ∂      ∂      ∂      ∂      ∂      ∂      ∂      ∂      ∂
∂qx3 + ∂my2 ∧ ∂qy3 + ∂mx2 ∧ ∂qx4 + ∂my2 ∧ ∂qy4 + ∂mx1 ∧ ∂qx5 + ∂my1 ∧ ∂qy5 in all 10 trials.
The coefficients were exactly 1.0 or -1.0, accurate to five significant figures. This is because the
velocities of the masses and the displacements of the springs are all observable, and their scales are
known. However, the scales of spring constants ki and masses mi still cancel each other out, which
means the parameters cannot be uniquely determined for the system as a whole.
The masses and springs are coupled in either the x- or the y-directions, which implies that the data
is neatly separated along the x- and y-axes. From the bivector B, we can say the following; mass
m1 is coupled with springs k1 and k5 , while mass m2 is coupled with springs k2 and k4 ; and spring
k3 is coupled with both masses m1 and m2 , but the coupling to m1 is in the opposite direction.
This means that the coupling pattern shown in Fig. 2 (c) was fully identified. By reorganizing the
expression for B, we get B = ∂m∂x1 ∧ ( ∂q∂x1 − ∂q∂x3 + ∂q∂x5 ) + ∂m∂y1 ∧ ( ∂q∂y1 − ∂q∂y3 + ∂q∂y5 ) +
 ∂        ∂      ∂      ∂        ∂        ∂      ∂      ∂
∂mx2 ∧ ( ∂qx2 + ∂qx3 + ∂qx4 ) + ∂my2 ∧ ( ∂qy2 + ∂qy3 + ∂qy4 ), which indicates that system (c) has
eight degrees of freedom. In this way, PoDiNNs can identify the constraints and handle degenerate
dynamics.
Impact of Number of Hidden Components for System (d) In the electric circuits, the flow
for resistors and diodes can be either current or voltage, depending on their coupling with other
components. Let nd denote the assumed number of resistors whose flow is current, and ng the
assumed number of resistors whose flow is voltage. We tested system (d), the FitzHugh-Nagumo
model, to explore the impact of the assumed numbers nd and ng , and summarized the results in
Table A1. The correct numbers for this model are nd = 1 and ng = 1. When fewer components
are assumed, VPT values became significantly poor. On the other hand, assuming more components
yields similar accuracy to the correct configuration. This trend is consistent in both the training and


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


test subsets. Therefore, similar to the case with system (b) in Table 4, we can identify the number of
unobservable energy-dissipating components and their flow types using the training subset.

G.2   A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSIONS                                       Table A1: Impact of # Compo-
                                                                     nents and VPT.
Non-Identifiability The characteristic scales of the energy-
storing and dissipating components (e.g., spring constants k,        PoDiNNs           Training         Test
masses m, and damper constants d) and the coefficients of the        nd = 0, ng = 0   0.000 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
bivector elements among them cancel each other out. Hence, the       nd = 1, ng = 0   0.000 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
                                                                     nd = 2, ng = 0   0.000 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
overall scale of the system is indeterminate. Once the coupling      nd = 3, ng = 0   0.000 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
pattern has been identified, the coefficients of the bivector ele-   nd = 4, ng = 0   0.000 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
ments can be normalized, as shown in Section 4.2. If external        nd = 5, ng = 0   0.000 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
                                                                     nd = 0, ng = 1   0.007 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
forces are present, they determine the scale of force, which, in     nd = 0, ng = 2   0.007 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
turn, uniquely determines the scale of the coupled mass. This        nd = 0, ng = 3   0.007 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
                                                                     nd = 0, ng = 4   0.007 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
cascading effect determines the system’s overall scale.              nd = 0, ng = 5   0.007 ±0.000   0.000 ±0.000
When the characteristics of elements are linear, different cou-      nd = 1, ng = 1   0.985 ±0.002   0.640 ±0.070
pling patterns can result in the same dynamics. Additionally, a      nd = 1, ng = 2   0.985 ±0.000   0.630 ±0.038
                                                                     nd = 2, ng = 1   0.985 ±0.003   0.681 ±0.062
weighted average of these coupling patterns can also be a valid      nd = 2, ng = 2   0.985 ±0.006   0.656 ±0.108
solution.                                                            nd = 2, ng = 3   0.984 ±0.001   0.577 ±0.072
                                                                     nd = 3, ng = 2   0.978 ±0.008   0.553 ±0.061
While non-identifiability may be problematic for system identi-      nd = 3, ng = 3   0.984 ±0.008   0.557 ±0.040
fication, it does not impact prediction accuracy.                                      θ = 10−3       θ = 10−3


Passivity and Convexity In understanding the behavior of dynamical systems, passivity can be
a crucial concept (Khalil, 2002). Passivity implies that the system always dissipates energy and,
without external inputs, converges to a stable invariant set. In PoDiNNs, general neural networks
are used to model energy-dissipating components, which may sometimes learn energy-supplying
characteristics, like a negative resistance. This flexibility is beneficial for learning special diodes
used in the FitzHugh-Nagumo model or Chua’s circuit, but it poses a problem when passivity is
desired in the system. A simple solution to this issue is to replace the general neural networks
with ones specialized for functions that have zero output for zero input and are monotonic non-
decreasing (Wehenkel & Louppe, 2019). This ensures the system remains passive. If convexity is
required in the energy function, a neural network enforcing this property can be introduced (Amos
et al., 2017).
PoDiNNs decompose coupled systems into individual components, along with their coupling pat-
terns, and learn the specific characteristics of each component. This structure allows for the intro-
duction of constraints beforehand and ensure each component to meet the necessary properties. This
flexibility is another key advantage of PoDiNNs.


                                                  29
