Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T WO E FFECTS , O NE T RIGGER : O N THE M ODALITY
G AP, O BJECT B IAS , AND I NFORMATION I MBALANCE
IN C ONTRASTIVE V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Simon Schrodi∗,1 David T. Hoffmann∗,1,2 Max Argus1 Volker Fischer2 Thomas Brox1
 1
   University of Freiburg, 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence


                                             A BSTRACT
         Contrastive vision-language models (VLMs), like CLIP, have gained popularity
         for their versatile applicability to various downstream tasks. Despite their suc-
         cesses in some tasks, like zero-shot object recognition, they perform surprisingly
         poor on other tasks, like attribute recognition. Previous work has attributed these
         challenges to the modality gap, a separation of image and text in the shared rep-
         resentation space, and to a bias towards objects over other factors, such as at-
         tributes. In this analysis paper, we investigate both phenomena thoroughly. We
         evaluated off-the-shelf VLMs and while the gap’s influence on performance is
         typically overshadowed by other factors, we find indications that closing the gap
         indeed leads to improvements. Moreover, we find that, contrary to intuition, only
         few embedding dimensions drive the gap and that the embedding spaces are differ-
         ently organized. To allow for a clean study of object bias, we introduce a definition
         and a corresponding measure of it. Equipped with this tool, we find that object
         bias does not lead to worse performance on other concepts, such as attributes per
         se. However, why do both phenomena, modality gap and object bias, emerge in
         the first place? To answer this fundamental question and uncover some of the in-
         ner workings of contrastive VLMs, we conducted experiments that allowed us to
         control the amount of shared information between the modalities. These experi-
         ments revealed that the driving factor behind both the modality gap and the object
         bias, is an information imbalance between images and captions, and unveiled an
         intriguing connection between the modality gap and entropy of the logits.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Contrastive Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are successfully applied to numerous tasks. They
benefit from their ability to exploit weak supervision in contrastive pre-training (Radford et al., 2021;
Jia et al., 2021), which can be acquired by scraping image-text pairs from the internet. In spite of this,
they exhibit intriguing properties: strong zero-shot image recognition performance (Radford et al.,
2021; Menon & Vondrick, 2023), cross-modal understanding (Chen et al., 2023a), retrieval (Ma
et al., 2022), or robustness (Nguyen et al., 2022). Despite such remarkable advancements, our
understanding of the representations learned by VLMs is still limited. Liang et al. (2022) identified
a modality gap in the shared embedding space and Bravo et al. (2023) conjectured about a bias
towards objects. However, how do these phenomena affect downstream performance, why do they
emerge, and can we mitigate them? To answer these questions and enhance our understanding of
the learned representations, we thoroughly study both, modality gap and object bias.
The modality gap is a geometric phenomenon characterized by the two modalities lying in com-
pletely separate regions of the shared embedding space of contrastive VLMs. Liang et al. (2022)
attributed its emergence to the cone effect during model initialization with the contrastive loss pre-
serving the gap. Subsequent work studied the influence of the temperature parameter (Udandarao,
2022; Shi et al., 2023). Intuitively, one would expect the gap to limit performance, but despite pre-
vious efforts, the impact of the modality gap on performance has remained unclear so far: Is the gap
even a relevant problem worth fighting? Similarly, the interaction between closing the gap post-hoc
  ∗
    Equal contribution. Correspondence to: {schrodi, hoffmann}@cs.uni-freiburg.de. Code is available at
https://github.com/lmb-freiburg/two-effects-one-trigger.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and its effect on performance also remained elusive. Beyond these performance-related questions,
we aim to more thoroughly understand the modality gap: Are all dimensions contributing equally?
Are the modalities structured similarly, in a sense that neighborhood relations are similar? Do the
representations of both modalities have similar meaning? Lastly, we investigate whether the modal-
ity gap is rather a bug or a feature. Despite the importance of these questions, they have not been
thoroughly addressed so far. Our analysis offers answers to these questions and equips practitioners
with actionable insights to address various issues related to the modality gap.
Beyond the modality gap, recent work (Bravo et al., 2023; Trager et al., 2023) found significantly
worse performance of contrastive VLMs for attribute tasks compared to object tasks, which led them
to the hypothesis that they are biased towards objects (Bravo et al., 2023). However, “bias towards
objects” was previously not formally defined and was only assessed by the poorer performance. For
a thorough study of object bias and its emergence, we go beyond the previous notion of bias towards
objects and introduce a novel metric to measure object bias: Matching Object Attribute Distance
(MOAD). It assesses the bias towards objects compared to other factors, such as attributes. Beyond
assessing bias towards objects or attributes, MOAD’s generic formulation allows to also study other
types of biases in learned representations. Equipped with this new metric, we can now answer
questions about object bias: Does object bias even affect performance on non-object (attribute)
tasks? Are objects just more often mentioned in captions, leading to the object bias? Answering
these questions, can guide us to effective strategies to overcome such biases of VLMs.
Finally, we investigate the fundamental ques-                                            a photo of a red cat
tion of what actually leads to the emergence of                                          sitting on a tree with
the modality gap and object bias. We identify                                                 yellow leaves
a common cause: information imbalance. In-                             oracle image                 perfect
                                                             captioned   encoder                   alignment
formation imbalance refers to the availability of            by human                             impossible
more information in one modality than the other.
For example, captions are often sparse (lossy),        a photo of                                   a photo of
focusing on the most salient object(s), while im-       a red cat                                    a red cat
ages hold far more information not captured by                              oracle text encoder
their captions; see Figure 1. Since the caption is
unknown to the image encoder, it cannot know Figure 1: Illustration of information imbalance
what information of the image it needs to en- between images (top left) and captions (bottom
code to align the image encoding with the text left). This imbalance makes it even for an oracle
encoding. The best that the image encoder can image encoder virtually impossible to predict the
do is to focus on the most salient parts of the content of a caption, leading to undesirable ef-
image, i.e., the parts that are typically present in fects in contrastive training, such as the modality
the captions. As a result, the image encoder de- gap and object bias (see Section 6).
velops a bias towards these parts. For natural language captions, these are typically object names.
Besides that, the modality gap also emerges as a by-product of contrastive training under an in-
formation imbalanced regime. Here, the model trades off alignment—which is limited due to the
information imbalance—with uniformity by making all images and all texts more dissimilar. We
thoroughly validate our hypothesis by manipulating information imbalance in experiments on syn-
thetic as well as real data. Our insights equip researchers with the understanding needed to craft, for
example, data filtering or caption enrichment strategies to reduce the modality gap or object bias.
The findings of our analysis paper are: 1) For off-the-shelf contrastive VLMs, a larger modality
gap correlates with better performance due to common confounders. However, controlling for these
confounders suggests that a lower modality gap correlates with better performance. 2) Only few
embedding dimensions drive the modality gap. 3) Image and text embeddings have distinct char-
acteristics, like different neighborhood orderings. 4) Object bias does not negatively correlate with
performance on object tasks. 5) An information imbalance between the modalities leads to both the
modality gap and the object bias. 6) The modality gap is a by-product of the model’s efforts to deal
with the uncertainty (entropy) caused by information imbalance. 7) Object bias is caused by higher
per-sample caption presence bias, which is also a consequence of the information imbalance.


2    R ELATED WORK
Contrastive VLMs have emerged as an effective approach to learn representations through weak
supervision that work for a wide range of tasks and have intriguing properties, such as strong zero-


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


shot abilities. However, the learning framework comes with potential issues and our understanding
of it is in its infancy.
For example, recent work showed the existence of a modality gap. They attributed it to the cone
effect at model initialization and the contrastive loss that preserves it (Liang et al., 2022). The cone
effect refers to the observation that the embedding space is restricted to a narrow cone. The modality
gap emerges at initialization, as it is unlikely that both encoders use the same cone with random
initialization. Subsequent work studied the influence of the temperature parameter (Udandarao,
2022; Shi et al., 2023). Other work found that the modality gap is orthogonal to the span of image
and text embeddings (Zhang et al., 2023). In this work, we find that few dimensions drive the
modalities apart and show that information imbalance is the main factor for the emergence of the
modality gap.
Geirhos et al. (2021); Li et al. (2023b) found that large contrastive VLMs close the gap to human per-
ception, but others found several failure modes of them (Yuksekgonul et al., 2022; Brody, 2023). The
importance of data was studied by Nguyen et al. (2022); Xu et al. (2024), generalization/robustness
by Mayilvahanan et al. (2024); Crabbé et al. (2023), the learned features were analyzed by Goh
et al. (2021); Materzyńska et al. (2022); Rashtchian et al. (2023), compositionality was studied by
Jia et al. (2021); Couairon et al. (2022); Trager et al. (2023), and learned abilities and (social) biases
by Agarwal et al. (2021); Yamada et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2022); Wu & Maji (2022); Shtedritski
et al. (2023); Hamidieh et al. (2023). Lastly, Bravo et al. (2023) hypothesized that VLMs may be
biased towards objects. Here, we validate that VLMs are biased towards objects but find that VLMs
with smaller object bias may not necessarily perform better on attribute tasks.

3    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

In this work, we performed a series of experiments using both real as well as fully-controllable,
synthetic data. Below, we briefly outline the common experimental details. We describe the specific
experimental settings in the respective sections.
Pre-trained contrastive VLMs. We used a total of 98 contrastive VLMs such as CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) or SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023) for our analysis. The VLMs were pre-trained on various
datasets. Refer to Appendix A for the full list. We distinguished between VLMs pre-trained on
medium- (i.e., dataset size of ≤140 M) and large-scale datasets. For in-depth analysis, we used the
pre-trained CLIP ViT-B/16 (Radford et al., 2021) and SigLIP ViT-B/16 (Zhai et al., 2023).
Evaluation protocols. We evaluated the pre-trained contrastive VLMs on MS COCO (Lin et al.,
2014; Chen et al., 2015), ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), MIT-States (Isola et al., 2015),
and UT-Zappos (Yu & Grauman, 2014) with the standard evaluation protocols from the literature.
We prepended the prompt "a photo of" to the description, object class, or attribute, following
Radford et al. (2021). For evaluation, we used R@1 for zero-shot image-to-text retrieval or top-1
accuracy for zero-shot object and attribute recognition. Further details on the datasets and evaluation
protocols are provided in Appendix A.
Fully-controlled, synthetic data. To study the effect of information imbal-
ance on the modality gap and object bias, we built a fully-controllable dataset
based on Morpho-MNIST (Castro et al., 2019), called Multi-modal Attributes
and Digits (MAD). We used the following morphing or warping operations as
latent factors (i.e., attributes) from Castro et al. (2019): thickness, swelling,
fractures. We further added scaling, colors, and captions. Figure 2 and Ap-
pendix B provide examples. To generate captions, we mapped the digit class
                                                                                     Figure 2: Exam-
and the other factors to words and chained them together in random order, e.g.,
                                                                                     ples from MAD.
1-thickening-swelling-fractures-large-blue. We embedded
each factor to a single token. To study the effect of information imbalance, we varied the number of
attributes within each caption while, importantly, keeping the images unchanged. For example, if we
restrict each caption to one attribute (in addition to the always present object), above (full) caption
becomes, e.g., 1-blue or 1-large. Model and training details are provided in Appendix B.
Experiments on real data. To validate our hypothesis in a realistic setting, we trained CLIP RN50
models on the image-text dataset CC12M (Changpinyo et al., 2021), and manipulated the captions.
We provide further details in Section 6 and Appendix F.1.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          75                                                                                                                                                                                                   75
                                                                                                        75                                                                                                                                                                                                           75



MS COCO


                                                                                                                                                                                             MS COCO
                                                                                      ImageNet


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ImageNet
                                                                                       accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     accuracy
          50



  R@1


                                                                                                                                                                                               R@1
                                                                                                        50                                                                                                     50
                                               Dataset size                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
          25                                                 large                                      25
                                                             medium                                                                                                                                            25                                                                                                    25

                         0.6                   0.8                    1.0                                                   0.6                 0.8                  1.0                                                                           0.5                           0.6                                                         0.5                        0.6
                                         L2M                                                                                                    L2M                                                                                                   RMG                                                                                                    RMG


Figure 3: Relation between modality gap (L2M & RMG, larger value → larger gap) and down-
stream performance for a total of 98 contrastive VLMs pre-trained on medium- and large-scale
datasets (each scatter point is a VLM). The plots indicate no to weak positive correlations between
performance and modality gap (see the numbers in Table 1).

Table 1: Kendall’s τ rank correlation between downstream performance and various factors
for models trained on medium and large datasets. ✓denotes statistical significance (p < 0.05).
Model, embedding, and dataset size correlate stronger with performance than the modality gap.

  Downstream                                     Modality                                                              Modality                                                                         Model                                                           Embedding                                                                     Dataset
     task                                       gap (L2M)                                                             gap (RMG)                                                                          size                                                             size                                                                         size
  MS COCO                        0.167 (✗) / 0.148 (✗) 0.083 (✗) / -0.007 (✗) -0.354 (✗) / 0.579 (✓) 0.264 (✗) / 0.62 (✓) -0.129 (✗) / 0.252 (✓)
  ImageNet                       -0.008 (✗) / 0.28 (✓) -0.109 (✗) / 0.169 (✓) -0.5 (✓) / 0.62 (✓) 0.318 (✗) / 0.668 (✓) -0.034 (✗) / 0.206 (✓)



4         PARTING WITH FALSE INTUITIONS ABOUT THE MODALITY GAP

Liang et al. (2022) showed the existence of a modality gap; a geometric phenomenon of the shared
embedding space of multi-modal models, such as contrastive VLMs. Specifically, they showed that
the embeddings of each modality lie in completely separate regions. They proposed that the gap ex-
ists at model initialization (cone effect) and that the contrastive loss preserves it. They proposed the
                                                                               PN             PN
L2-distance between the Means (L2M) to measure the gap: L2M := || N1 i=1 xi − N1 i=1 yi ||,
where xi is the i-th L2-normalized image embedding and yi the i-th text embedding.
Despite Liang et al.’s (2022) and subsequent work (Udandarao, 2022; Shi et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2023), many questions about the modality gap remain unanswered so far: What is its impact on
downstream performance? How does it manifest itself in the embeddings? We will answer these
questions in the following: We discuss the relationship between the modality gap and downstream
performance (Section 4.1) and find that only few embedding dimensions drive it (Section 4.2). In
contrast to the cone hypothesis (Liang et al., 2022), the gap emerges even when we initialize with
no gap and find evidence that the contrastive loss can narrow the gap (see Appendices F.4 and F.5).
Thus, the cone effect can’t be the main factor. What else leads to the emergence of the gap? We
show in Section 6 that an information imbalance is the main factor that leads to its emergence.

4.1            D OES A SMALLER MODALITY GAP LEAD TO BETTER PERFORMANCE ?

The effect of the modality gap on downstream performance has been discussed controversially (So
et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023). We intuitively expect that a
smaller modality gap leads to better performance. However, do we observe this also in practice?
To answer this question, we compared the downstream performance and the modality gap across 98
contrastive VLMs, e.g., CLIP or SigLIP, pre-trained on various datasets such as LAION or WebLI.
We evaluated the downstream performance on MS COCO for image-to-text retrieval (text-to-image
retrieval yielded similar results) as well as on ImageNet zero-shot image classification. Using L2M
to measure the gap and particulary to compare the gap across models comes with some limitations.
For instance, L2M neglects whether an image-text pair matches, and it does not take the effectively
used space into account; refer to Appendix D.1 for a detailed discussion. To address these short-
comings of L2M, we propose the Relative Modality Gap (RMG) measure:


                 \label {eq:rmg} \text {RMG}\coloneqq \frac {\frac {1}{N}\sum \limits _{i=1}^N d(\mathbf {x}_i, \mathbf {y}_i)}{\frac {1}{2N(N-1)}\Big (\sum \limits ^N_{i,j=1;i\neq j}d(\mathbf {x}_i, \mathbf {x}_j)+\sum \limits ^N_{i,j=1;i\neq j}d(\mathbf {y}_i, \mathbf {y}_j)\Big ) + \frac {1}{N}\sum \limits _{i=1}^N d(\mathbf {x}_i, \mathbf {y}_i)} \quad ,      (1)


                                                                                                                                                                                         4
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           0.5
                                                                                       CLIP ViT-B/16                                                             CLIP ViT-B/16


                                                                                                                                      MS COCO R@1
                                                                                       SigLIP ViT-B/16                                              52.5
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.55
                           0.4             0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                           RMG
Abs. difference of means
                                                                                                                                                    50.0
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.50
                                           0.4                                                                                                      47.5
                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.45
                                           0.3

                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                SigLIP ViT-B/16


                                                                                                                                            MS COCO R@1
                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                                           0.1


                                                                                                                                                                                          RMG
                           0.1                                                                                                                            60
                                                 0           2         4          6              8                                                                                  0.5
                           0.0                                                                                                                            50

                                 0   100    200        300       400   500       600       700       800                                                        0      10    20
                                                 Embedding dimensions (sorted)                                                                                 Ablated dimensions

                           (a) Some dimensions have vastly different means.                                    (b) Separating dims.                   (c) Removing dims.

  Figure 4: Few embedding dimensions separate the modalities. Results on MS-COCO. (a) We
  plot the absolute difference in the means of each embedding dimension between the modalities.
  Most dimensions have similar means for both modalities, but for some the differences are huge. (b)
  Pairs of these high difference dimensions can perfectly separate the modalities (we show the ones
  with largest mean for each modality). (c) Successive removal of embedding dimensions based on
  the sorting of embedding dimensions from (a) leads to a sharp drop, followed by a partial recovery
  of downstream performance, while the modality gap gradually closes (similar results for L2M). See
  Appendix D.3 for results on ImageNet and the plots in (b) with the largest two dimensions of (a).


  where xi , yi are the i-th L2-normalized image or text embeddings, respectively, and d is some
  distance function (we used cosine dissimilarity scaled to [0,1]). Intuitively, the numerator measures
  the gap where it matters, i.e., for matching image-text pairs, and the denominator accounts for the
  effectively used space through an approximation using the intra-modality distances. We added the
  distances of matching image-text pairs to the denominator to scale RMG to [0, 1].
  Figure 3 and Table 1 show that a larger modality gap counter-intuitively correlates with better down-
  stream performance. However, does this imply that a larger modality gap leads to better perfor-
  mance? No, as Table 1 reveals, other factors such as model or embedding size have a stronger effect
  on performance. It appears that the negative impact of the modality gap is overshadowed by these
  other factors. Indeed, when we control for these factors, we find weak indications for the expected
  negative correlation for some of the pre-training datasets, i.e., a smaller gap seems to correlate with
  better performance (see Appendix D.2). Thus, the modality gap is a problem worth fighting.
                           Takeaway 1: A larger modality gap has mild positive correlation with downstream perfor-
                           mance. However, there is no indication that a larger modality gap leads to a better performance;
                           rather, it suggests the presence of common confounders (e.g., model size).


   4.2                           F EW EMBEDDING DIMENSIONS DRIVE THE MODALITY GAP

  To obtain better insights into the nature of the modality gap, we studied two questions: 1) Is the
  modality gap present in all dimensions or only a subset thereof, and 2) does post-hoc closing of the
  modality gap improve downstream performance?
  Do all embedding dimension contribute to the gap? To study the influence of each embedding
  dimension, we compared their means. Figure 4a shows that while most embedding dimensions
  have very similar means, interestingly, some have stark differences. When we plot the dimensions
  with the largest mean in each modality, we find that they suffice to perfectly separate the modalities
  (Figure 4b). Further, they have large variance within one modality but only negligible variance in the
  other. In summary, Figures 4a and 4c show that these dimensions are the main contributors.
                           Takeaway 2: Few embedding dimensions drive the modality gap. We find that two dimen-
                           sions suffice to perfectly separate the modalities.

  Can we close the gap post-hoc? One could suspect that removing above embedding dimensions
  will close the modality gap and as a result yield better performance. To test this, we successively


                                                                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Dissimilarity of neighborhood orderings in the embedding space using normalized
Kendall-τ distance ∈ [0, 1]. Higher normalized Kendall-τ distances indicate that the ranking of
neighbors differs more. We used three different ImageNet-100 splits.

                                             CIFAR-10        CIFAR-100                 ImgNet-100-1                        ImgNet-100-2              ImgNet-100-3
     CLIP ViT-B/16                             0.3399              0.4965                         0.4975                         0.5046                 0.5081
     SigLIP ViT-B/16                           0.5044              0.4981                         0.5003                         0.4965                 0.4987



                                                                                                            Kendall’s τ : 74.5                  Kendall’s τ : 78.1


                                                                                       attr accuracy
                                    Dataset size
attr accuracy


                                                                                        MIT-States
 MIT-States


                20                       large        20                                               20                                  20
                                         medium                                                                            Dataset size
                                                                                                       10                       large      10
                10                                    10                                                                        medium

                                                                                                              20      40         60             20     40      60    80
                     0.02    0.04     0.06     0.08           0.02           0.03
                                                                                                            Kendall’s τ : 39.4                  Kendall’s τ : 39.0


                                                                                       attr accuracy
                                                                                                       40


                                                                                        UT-Zappos
attr accuracy


                40                                    40
 UT-Zappos


                                                                                                                                           25
                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                            0
                20                                    20
                                                                                                        0                                 −25
                                                                                                              20      40         60             20     40      60    80
                     −0.02     0.00     0.02               0.005     0.010     0.015                               MS COCO                             ImageNet
                             MOAD text                       MOAD image                                              R@1                                accuracy

                (a) Object bias vs. downstream performance.                                                 (b) Object vs. attribute performance.

Figure 5: Object bias and performance on attribute tasks. (a) We find a bias towards objects
(positive MOAD values) but no correlation with attribute performance. We attribute this to the (b)
positive correlation between performance improvements on object tasks and attribute tasks.



ablated embedding dimensions (i.e., set their values to zero) based on the sorting from Figure 4a,
re-normalized, and evaluated their downstream performance. Figure 4c shows that the modality gap
and the downstream performance sharply decreases, followed by a partial recovery of the perfor-
mance. The behavior on downstream performance is explained by the substantial change in cross-
modal neighborhoods caused by the ablation and re-normalization of the largest and thereby most
influential embedding dimensions on the geometry of the embedding space. Refer to Appendix D.4
for an illustrative example. Thus, while removing the largest contributors closes the gap, it leads to
degraded performance.
Similar to the above, other post-hoc approaches tested in previous work also did not lead to consis-
tent improvements: Liang et al. (2022) show that computing the “modality gap vector” and closing
the gap by adding this vector generally hurts performance. Similarly, for the ideal words approach
of Trager et al. (2023) we find that simple shifting closes the gap, increases average similarities, but
does not improve performance (refer to Appendix D.5 for details). But why can we not just close
the gap post-hoc with such translation approaches to improve the performance?
A key precondition of these translation approaches are similar neighborhood relations across modal-
ities. To test their similarity, we computed the mean embedding of each class in CIFAR-10, CIFAR-
100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and three ImageNet-100 splits (Hoffmann et al., 2022). We computed
the Kendall-τ distance normalized by the number of classes. Intuitively, it counts the percentage of
bubble-sort swaps w.r.t. all possible swaps needed to transform modality A’s nearest neighbor list
to match modality B’s. Table 2 shows that the neighborhood orderings are dissimilar between the
modalities. Hence, these simple transformations cannot improve performance.

       Takeaway 3: Simple post-hoc approaches can close the modality gap but do not improve
       performance. One reason for this is that the modalities have different local neighborhoods.


Looking at the bigger picture, why does the modality gap emerge in the first place? In Section 6, we
will show that an information imbalance between modalities is the main factor for its emergence.


                                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5     O BJECT BIAS IS A CAPTION PRESENCE BIAS
The hypothesis that contrastive VLMs are biased towards objects was based on their poorer perfor-
mance on non-object (e.g., attribute) compared to object tasks (Bravo et al., 2023). However, this
can be misleading, as an attribute-based task could just be more difficult than an object-based task.
Thus, to study the bias towards objects, we propose a measure for object vs. attribute bias, denoted as
Matching Object Attribute Distance (MOAD). MOAD quantifies how well a model can distinguish
matching from non-matching images (or texts) of objects o compared to attributes a. Matching im-
ages (texts) show the same object or attribute, whereas non-matching images (texts) show different
objects or attributes. MOAD can be computed for each modality. For images, we define it as:

               \text {\obm }_{\mathbf {\text {img}}}\coloneqq \frac {1}{2|O|}\sum \limits _{\text {obj}\in O} \left ( \text {sim}_\text {obj}^+ - \text {sim}_\text {obj}^- \right ) - \frac {1}{2|A|}\sum \limits _{\text {att}\in A} \left ( \text {sim}_\text {att}^+ - \text {sim}_\text {att}^-\right ),            (2)


where O denotes the object classes, sim+         obj                                                                                                                   108
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Objects                                                                                                   Text
denotes the mean similarity between the L2-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Always in caption
                                                                                                                                                                       107                             Attributes                                                                                                Image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
normalized image embeddings that entail the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bias (MOAD)
                                                                                                                                                                       106


                                                                                                                                                             Counts
same object obj, sim− obj the mean similarity be-                                                                                                                      105                                                                                                       0.4
tween different objects (i.e., the image does not                                                                                                                      104
entail the same object) and sim+            −
                                   att & simatt are                                                                                                                    103
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2

similarly defined for attributes A. Positive val-
                                                                                                                                                                       102
ues of MOAD indicate a bias towards objects,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
negative values a bias towards attributes, and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C ess
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ac g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sc ure

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Th lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ig
                                                                                                                                                                                       Object/Attribute ID


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ol
zero no bias. Refer to Appendix E.1 for the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                kn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sw


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fr
detailed definition. Intuitively, MOAD mea-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Always in caption
sures whether the visible/present objects or at-
                                                                                                                                                              (a) Object and attribute (b) We can bias the model
tributes have a larger influence on the similarity                                                                                                            counts in LAION-2B.      to any factor of choice.
of two images/captions. Note that MOAD is
not specific to objects and attributes, we pro-   Figure 6: Object bias is caused by a per-sample
vide a generic formulation, called Bias mea-      caption presence bias. (a) Object bias is not
sure via Relative Angle Change of Embeddings      caused by the word frequency as attributes appear
(BRACE) , in Appendix E.2.                        more frequently than objects. (b) We trained CLIP
Similar to the analysis on the modality gap in models on MAD and changed which factor is al-
Section 4, we first investigated the relation be- ways in the caption (i.e., caption presence bias).
tween object bias and attribute performance. The models are biased towards whichever factor
Figure 5a shows that the majority of contrastive (e.g., color, thickness, etc.) that we made preva-
VLMs exhibit a bias towards objects (positive lent in the captions.
MOAD values), as expected. Notably, models trained on large-scale data are less biased towards
objects (smaller positive values) compared to models trained on medium-scale data. However, we
find no clear correlation between the bias towards objects and performance; especially for models
trained on large-scale data.
Thus, reducing the object bias does not appear to affect attribute performance—but what does?
Figure 5b shows medium-to-strong correlations between performance on object and attribute tasks.
Thus, it seems that simply improving VLMs (without specific focus on attributes) also improves
their performance on attributes as a by-product.
    Takeaway 4: Contrastive VLMs trained on large-scale data tend to have a lower object bias
    than models trained on medium-scale. However, there is no clear relation between object
    bias and attribute performance. This can be attributed to the observation that performance
    improvements on object tasks correlate with improvements on attribute tasks.


Is object bias explained by the global word frequencies of the dataset? One may suspect that
the word frequency of the training dataset (i.e., prior distribution over words p(word)) causes the bias
towards objects. However, Figure 6a disproves this, as attributes are actually mentioned more often
than objects in the LAION-2B’s captions (Schuhmann et al., 2022) (we used object and attribute
classes from Bravo et al. (2023)). Thus, we hypothesize that the bias towards objects arises from the
per-sample prevalence of objects in natural language, i.e., humans tend to describe the most salient


                                                                                                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


object(s) and typically only few of their attributes in a caption. In other words, we propose that the
conditional probability of words given an image p(word|image) is what leads to the bias.
To verify this, we used MAD (Section 3) and redefined the prevalence of words in the caption.
Specifically, we trained five contrastive VLMs for which we varied the prevalent factor by making it
always present in the caption and sampling one of the other factors randomly by chance. Figure 6b
validates that each model is biased towards whichever factor was prevalent during its training (larger
positive MOAD values). We also find that the bias is larger for the image encoder. This is expected,
as it needs to match to the most likely caption, while the text encoder can simply encode the entire
information (that information is likely always present in the image), as sketched in Figure 1 and
outlined in detail in Section 6. We provide further experimental evidence in Appendix E.3.
    Takeaway 5: Bias towards concepts, e.g., objects, is caused by their high probability of
    appearing in captions (given that said concept is present in an image), rather than by their
    overall frequency in the dataset.

Naturally, the question that arises is how we can reduce the object bias. We will address this in the
next section.

6     I NFORMATION IMBALANCE TRIGGERS MODALITY GAP AND OBJECT BIAS
The previous sections analyzed both the modality gap and bias towards objects. However, what
causes their emergence in contrastive VLMs? In this section, we will show that an information
imbalance in the data is the main cause of both. Information imbalance refers to unequal amount
of information transmitted by the modalities, i.e., while an image contains a lot of information, its
caption is typically incomplete; as illustrated in Figure 1. Specifically, it mostly only entails one or
two of the most salient objects and a handful of other factors such as attributes of these objects.

6.1    H OW DOES INFORMATION IMBALANCE CAUSE THE MODALITY GAP AND OBJECT BIAS ?

The origin of the object bias. A consequence of the information imbalance in the data is that
the encoders can hardly align their embeddings, as they have no way of knowing what information
is available in the other modality. To achieve sufficient alignment1 (numerators in the CLIP loss
(Equation 4)) despite the uncertainty from the information imbalance, the best both encoders can do
(especially the image encoder) is to focus on the factors that are most likely present in the caption (or
image)—typically objects—while using a smaller scale or fewer dimensions for factors that are less
likely to be present (e.g., attributes). By that, the average cosine similarity will be less affected when
the unlikely factors are not present. This leads to the caption presence bias discussed in Section 5,
i.e., a bias towards the most likely present words given the images.
The origin of the modality gap. We also hypothesize that the main factor for the emergence
of the modality gap is an information imbalance between modalities in the data. This imbalance
makes it difficult for the encoders to align their embeddings, as discussed above. As a result, max-
imizing alignment for matching image-text pairs (numerators of the CLIP loss (Equation 4)) be-
comes challenging. In other words, the alignment term is bounded. With alignment being bounded
(and optimized), the only way to further reduce the total loss is by maximizing uniformity (the
denominators). Consequently, contrastive VLMs tend to focus more on increasing the distance of
non-matching pairs, i.e., maximizing the uniformity. After all, the contrastive loss maximizes the
similarity of matching image-text pairs relative to non-matching pairs. In other words, VLMs com-
promise on alignment, which is inherently limited by the information imbalance, to achieve higher
uniformity. Since uniformity operates only across modalities, as in the CLIP loss, VLMs push the
modalities apart, ultimately leading to the gap. We conjecture it does so by using few dimensions
(e.g., the ones in Figures 4a and 4b) which substantially increase uniformity but have a small effect
on alignment.
Experimental validation in a fully-controlled synthetic setting. To validate that information
imbalance triggers both the modality gap and the object bias, we manipulated information imbalance
   1
     For our explanation, we use the alignment and uniformity terms of the contrastive loss (e.g., CLIP loss
Equation 4) defined by Wang & Isola (2020). Refer to Appendix C for background.


                                                     8
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) Larger information imbalance (fewer attributes) → larger gap & smaller bias.


          (c) Larger information imbalance (shorter captions) → larger gap (real data).           (b) UMAP embeddings.

  Figure 7: Increasing shared information between modalities (smaller information imbalance)
  improves the representations. (a) To study the influence of information imbalance between the
  modalities, we manipulated the number of attributes in the captions in MAD (the images are always
  affected by all attributes). As the amount of shared information between the modalities increases,
  the modality gap (I) and bias towards objects reduce (II), while downstream accuracy improves (III).
  We show additional results in Figure 13. (b) The contrastive loss is able to close the modality gap
  given full shared information (no information imbalance) between modalities, as illustrated by the
  UMAP embeddings (McInnes et al., 2018) at model initialization (top) and after training (bottom).
  (c) To verify our explanation also on real data, we trained CLIP models on CC12M and created an
  information imbalance by dropping ½ or ¾ of the captions. Similarly, we find that lower information
  imbalance leads to a smaller modality gap. Additional results are provided in Appendix F.1.
                                                   75                                               1.0
Entropy


                                           Temp.


          5.0                                                              0.6                L2M
                                                                     RMG


                      Frozen temp.                 50
          2.5         Learnable temp.                                                               0.5
                                                                           0.4
                0.0   2.5    5.0    7.5 10.0            0     5     10           0     5     10           0     5     10
                            Epoch                           Epoch                    Epoch                    Epoch
  Figure 8: A model trained with frozen temperature increases the modality gap more than a
  model with trainable temperature to achieve a similar logit entropy.


  in a fully-controlled synthetic experimental setting. Specifically, we varied the number of attributes
  included in the captions of MAD, while the object (digit) was always included. Importantly, we only
  manipulated the captions and left the images unchanged. The information imbalance is larger with
  fewer attributes and smaller with more attributes. Section 3 provides further experimental details.
  Figure 7a shows that both the modality gap and object bias decrease as we reduce information im-
  balance. This validates our hypothesis. Notably, even when the modality gap is large at model
  initialization, contrastive VLMs can close it in the full information setting (Figure 7a(I) and quali-
  tatively in Figure 7b). This is aligned with our hypothesis. In contrast, the cone effect hypothesis
  is not consistent with our observation. Further, we find that the image encoders are more biased
  towards objects than the text encoders (Figure 5a, 6b and 13(III-IV)). This is expected, as the text
  encoders know what to encode, whereas the image encoders must model the uncertainty over the
  captions’ content. Finally, we find that performance improves as information imbalance decreases
  (Figure 7a(III)), and that our findings are consistent across different embedding dimensions.
  Experimental validation on real data. The main advantage of the synthetic setting above is that
  we have full control over the interventions and avoid confounding factors. To verify that our findings
  also apply to real data, we trained three CLIP models on CC12M, either with the “full” captions or
  omissions of ½ (“half”) or ¾ (“quarter”) contiguous parts of them; see Appendix F.1 for details.
  The omissions increase the information imbalance. It is important to note that this can also be
  viewed in reverse: the “full” captions represent enriched versions (i.e., less information imbalance)
  of the “half” or “quarter” captions, similar to work on caption enrichment (Fan et al., 2023), but


                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


without introducing hallucinations. Figure 7c confirms that the modality gap is smaller with lower
information imbalance. Thus, our hypothesis (Section 6.1) also holds on real data.
    Takeaway 6: An information imbalance between modalities leads to both modality gap and
    object bias. Reducing this imbalance decreases both the modality gap and object bias.


6.2    I S THE MODALITY GAP A BUG OR A FEATURE ?

Figure 7c shows that the validation losses for “full” and “half” captions are very similar at the end
of training, but retrieval performance (R@1) is clearly higher for “full” captions. The lower per-
formance for “half” captions suggests that the model does not align positives (w.r.t. their negatives)
as well and makes false retrievals more likely. However, why is this not reflected in the validation
loss? A possible explanation is a different logit entropy, which directly influences the loss values.
The entropy over the logits models the entropy (uncertainty) of the data.
To change the (global) entropy, contrastive VLMs have a learnable temperature parameter (τ in the
CLIP loss (Equation 4)). However, changing the modality gap may also change the entropy. For
example, reducing the similarity between a pair of positives while keeping the negatives identical
(increasing the gap), increases the entropy. Thus, changes to the embeddings that increase the modal-
ity gap also increase the entropy. Consequently, the training can control the entropy in the output
logits (i.e., the uncertainty) in two ways: via the temperature or the embeddings (e.g., by changing
the modality gap). One way to achieve this is by changing a few embeddings, as in Section 4.2.
The ability to also change the entropy via the modality gap2 equips the model with the flexibility
to change the entropy independently for each sample. In contrast, the temperature parameter only
affects the entropy globally.
Experimental validation. To investigate whether CLIP changes the modality gap to change the
entropy, we first trained CLIP on CC12M with the “full” captions (low information imbalance).
We subsequently fine-tuned this model on the “quarter” captions (increased information imbalance,
resulting in higher entropy) in two conditions: with learnable temperature (learn. temp.) or frozen
(frozen temp.). Note that “learn. temp.” can adjust both the temperature and modality gap, but
“frozen temp.” can only adjust the gap. Appendix F.2 provides further experimental details.
Following our explanation in Section 6.1 and the hypothesis that CLIP “increases the gap to adjust
the entropy”, we expect low entropy and modality gap at the start of fine-tuning followed by a sharp
increase. Importantly, we would expect that entropy is similar for both, “frozen temp” and “learnable
temp.” As a consequence, the modality gap should be larger when the temperature is kept frozen.
Indeed, we observe that “frozen temp.” increases the modality gap significantly more to match the
same entropy (Figure 8). Thus, the modality gap can be interpreted as a feature, not a bug, as it adds
flexibility to the model to change the entropy.
    Takeaway 7: During training, models learn to estimate the entropy (uncertainty) of the data.
    For contrastive VLMs, changes to the embeddings that lead to a higher/smaller modality gap
    lead to a higher/lower entropy of the logits. This increases the model’s flexibility in controlling
    logit entropy.


7     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we showed that both, the modality gap and object bias of contrastive VLMs, are
triggered by an information imbalance between modalities. This information imbalance limits the
achievable alignment in the embedding space. We showed that the effect of the modality gap on
performance is typically overshadowed by other factors, and it is driven by only few embedding
dimensions. We find that the modality gap is a symptom of changes to the embedding that lead to
higher logit entropy. Further, we confirmed that contrastive VLMs have a bias towards objects, and
could relate it to a per-sample caption presence bias due to information imbalance. These insights
will serve researchers and practitioners in understanding and modifying the learned representations
of contrastive VLMs.
   2
     For simplicity, we refer to this as “increasing/decreasing the gap to increase/decrease the entropy”. How-
ever, we do not claim a causal relationship; the changes can also just be measurable by the modality gap.


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Con-
servation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection based on a resolution of the German Bun-
destag (67KI2029A), the German Research Foundation (DFG) under grant numbers 417962828
and 499552394 (SFB 1597), and the Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence.
We would like to thank Philipp Schröppel and Sudhanshu Mittal for helpful comments on the draft,
Maria A. Bravo and Simon Ging for insightful discussions, and Simon Ging and Elias Kempf for
preparing the CC12M and CC3M datasets.

R EFERENCES
Sandhini Agarwal, Gretchen Krueger, Jack Clark, Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, and Miles
  Brundage. Evaluating CLIP: Towards Characterization of Broader Capabilities and Downstream
  Implications. arXiv, 2021.
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Getting ViT in
   Shape: Scaling Laws for Compute-Optimal Model Design. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Maria A. Bravo, Sudhanshu Mittal, Simon Ging, and Thomas Brox. Open-vocabulary Attribute
 Detection. In CVPR, 2023.
Justin Brody. On the Potential of CLIP for Compositional Logical Reasoning. In ICLP, 2023.
Minwoo Byeon, Beomhee Park, Haecheon Kim, Sungjun Lee, Woonhyuk Baek, and Saehoon Kim.
 COYO-700M: Image-Text Pair Dataset, 2022. URL https://github.com/kakaobrain/
 coyo-dataset.
Daniel C. Castro, Jeremy Tan, Bernhard Kainz, Ender Konukoglu, and Ben Glocker. Morpho-
  MNIST: Quantitative Assessment and Diagnostics for Representation Learning. JMLR, 2019.
Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual 12M: Pushing Web-
  Scale Image-Text Pre-Training To Recognize Long-Tail Visual Concepts. In CVPR, 2021.
Runnan Chen, Youquan Liu, Lingdong Kong, Xinge Zhu, Yuexin Ma, Yikang Li, Yuenan Hou,
  Y. Qiao, and Wenping Wang. CLIP2Scene: Towards Label-efficient 3D Scene Understanding by
  CLIP. In CVPR, 2023a.
Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, AJ Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Sebastian
  Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Joan Puigcerver,
  Nan Ding, Keran Rong, Hassan Akbari, Gaurav Mishra, Linting Xue, Ashish V Thapliyal,
  James Bradbury, Weicheng Kuo, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Chao Jia, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Car-
  los Riquelme Ruiz, Andreas Peter Steiner, Anelia Angelova, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby, and
  Radu Soricut. PaLI: A Jointly-Scaled Multilingual Language-Image Model. In ICLR, 2023b.
Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and
  C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO Captions: Data Collection and Evaluation Server. arXiv,
  2015.
Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gor-
 don, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for
 contrastive language-image learning. In CVPR, 2023.
Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, and Yann LeCun. Learning a Similarity Metric Discriminatively, with
  Application to Face Verification. In CVPR, 2005.
Guillaume Couairon, Matthijs Douze, Matthieu Cord, and Holger Schwenk. Embedding Arithmetic
  of Multimodal Queries for Image Retrieval. In CVPR, 2022.
Jonathan Crabbé, Pau Rodrı́guez, Vaishaal Shankar, Luca Zappella, and Arno Blaas. Robust multi-
  modal models have outlier features and encode more concepts. arXiv, 2023.

                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. In ICLR, 2020.
Abrar Fahim, Alex Murphy, and Alona Fyshe. Its Not a Modality Gap: Characterizing and Address-
  ing the Contrastive Gap. arXiv, 2024.
Lijie Fan, Dilip Krishnan, Phillip Isola, Dina Katabi, and Yonglong Tian. Improving CLIP Training
  with Language Rewrites. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Gabriel Ilharco, Alex Fang, Jonathan Hayase, Georgios Smyrnis, Thao
  Nguyen, Ryan Marten, Mitchell Wortsman, Dhruba Ghosh, Jieyu Zhang, et al. DataComp:
  In search of the next generation of multimodal datasets. In Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track@NeurIPS, 2023.
Robert Geirhos, Kantharaju Narayanappa, Benjamin Mitzkus, Tizian Thieringer, Matthias Bethge,
  Felix A. Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. Partial success in closing the gap between human and
  machine vision. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata, Chelsea Voss, Shan Carter, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Alec
  Radford, and Chris Olah. Multimodal Neurons in Artificial Neural Networks. Distill, 2021.
Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle
 for unnormalized statistical models. In AISTATS, 2010.
Kimia Hamidieh, Haoran Zhang, Thomas Hartvigsen, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Identifying Implicit
  Social Biases in Vision-Language Models. Workshop@ICLR, 2023.
Jun-Yi Hang and Min-Ling Zhang. Partial multi-label learning with probabilistic graphical disam-
  biguation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:1339–1351, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In CVPR, 2016.
David T. Hoffmann, Nadine Behrmann, Juergen Gall, Thomas Brox, and Mehdi Noroozi. Ranking
  Info Noise Contrastive Estimation: Boosting Contrastive Learning via Ranked Positives. In AAAI,
  2022.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. OpenCLIP, 2021.
Phillip Isola, Joseph J. Lim, and Edward H. Adelson. Discovering States and Transformations in
  Image Collections. In CVPR, 2015.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling Up Visual and Vision-Language Representation Learn-
  ing With Noisy Text Supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images,
  2009.
Yann LeCun. The MNIST database of handwritten digits. http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.
Xianhang Li, Zeyu Wang, and Cihang Xie. An Inverse Scaling Law for CLIP Training. In NeurIPS,
  2023a.
Xianhang Li, Zeyu Wang, and Cihang Xie. Grounding Visual Illusions in Language: Do Vision-
  Language Models Perceive Illusions Like Humans? In EMLNP, 2023b.
Victor Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Yongchan Kwon, Serena Yeung, and James Y Zou. Mind the
  Gap: Understanding the Modality Gap in Multi-modal Contrastive Representation Learning. In
  NeurIPS, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In ECCV,
  2014.

Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A ConvNet for the 2020s. In CVPR, 2022.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. In ICLR, 2019.

Yiwei Ma, Guohai Xu, Xiaoshuai Sun, Ming Yan, Ji Zhang, and Rongrong Ji. X-CLIP: End-to-
  End Multi-grained Contrastive Learning for Video-Text Retrieval. In International Conference
  on Multimedia, 2022.

Joanna Materzyńska, Antonio Torralba, and David Bau. Disentangling visual and written concepts
  in CLIP. In CVPR, 2022.

Prasanna Mayilvahanan, Thaddäus Wiedemer, Evgenia Rusak, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Bren-
  del. Does CLIP’s Generalization Performance Mainly Stem from High Train-Test Similarity? In
  ICLR, 2024.

Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and
  Projection for Dimension Reduction. arXiv, 2018.

Sachit Menon and Carl Vondrick. Visual Classification via Description from Large Language Mod-
  els. In ICLR, 2023.

Thao Nguyen, Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Sewoong Oh, and Ludwig Schmidt. Quality
  Not Quantity: On the Interaction between Dataset Design and Robustness of CLIP. In NeurIPS,
  2022.

Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation Learning with Contrastive Pre-
  dictive Coding. arXiv, 2018.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning Transferable Visual
  Models From Natural Language Supervision. In ICML, 2021.

Cyrus Rashtchian, Charles Herrmann, Chun-Sung Ferng, Ayan Chakrabarti, Dilip Krishnan, De-
  qing Sun, Da-Cheng Juan, and Andrew Tomkins. Substance or Style: What Does Your Image
  Embedding Know? arXiv, 2023.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. ImageNet Large Scale Vi-
  sual Recognition Challenge. IJCV, 2015.

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman,
  Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick
  Schramowski, Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk,
  and Jenia Jitsev. LAION-5B: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text
  models. In Datasets and Benchmarks Track@NeurIPS, 2022.

Peiyang Shi, Michael C. Welle, Mårten Björkman, and Danica Kragic. Towards understanding the
  modality gap in CLIP. In Workshop@ICLR, 2023.

Aleksandar Shtedritski, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi. What does CLIP know about a
  red circle? Visual prompt engineering for VLMs. In ICCV, 2023.

Junhyuk So, Changdae Oh, Yongtaek Lim, Hoyoon Byun, Minchul Shin, and Kyungwoo Song.
  Geodesic Multi-Modal Mixup for Robust Fine-Tuning. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Kihyuk Sohn. Improved Deep Metric Learning with Multi-class N-pair Loss Objective. In NeurIPS,
  2016.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Łukasz Struski, Adam Pardyl, Jacek Tabor, and Bartosz Zieliński. Propml: probability partial multi-
  label learning. In 2023 IEEE 10th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced
  Analytics (DSAA), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2023.
Quan Sun, Yuxin Fang, Ledell Wu, Xinlong Wang, and Yue Cao. EVA-CLIP: Improved Training
  Techniques for CLIP at Scale. CVPR, 2023.
Bart Thomee, David A. Shamma, Gerald Friedland, Benjamin Elizalde, Karl Ni, Douglas Poland,
  Damian Borth, and Li-Jia Li. YFCC100M: The New Data in Multimedia Research. Communica-
  tions of the ACM, 2016.
Matthew Trager, Pramuditha Perera, Luca Zancato, Alessandro Achille, Parminder Bhatia, and Ste-
 fano Soatto. Linear Spaces of Meanings: Compositional Structures in Vision-Language Models.
 In ICCV, 2023.
Vishaal Udandarao. Understanding and Fixing the Modality Gap in Vision-Language Models, 2022.
  Master’s thesis.
Jack Urbanek, Florian Bordes, Pietro Astolfi, Mary Williamson, Vasu Sharma, and Adriana Romero-
  Soriano. A picture is worth more than 77 text tokens: Evaluating clip-style models on dense
  captions. In CVPR, 2024.
Alexander Visheratin. NLLB-CLIP–train performant multilingual image retrieval model on a bud-
  get. arXiv, 2023.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding Contrastive Representation Learning through
  Alignment and Uniformity on the Hypersphere. In ICML, 2020.
Chenyun Wu and Subhransu Maji. How well does CLIP understand texture? Workshop@ECCV,
  2022.
Ming-Kun Xie and Sheng-Jun Huang. Partial Multi-Label Learning. In AAAI, 2018.
Hu Xu, Saining Xie, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Po-Yao Huang, Russell Howes, Vasu Sharma, Shang-Wen
  Li, Gargi Ghosh, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Demystifying CLIP Data. In
  ICLR, 2024.
Yutaro Yamada, Yingtian Tang, and Ilker Yildirim. When are Lemons Purple? The Concept Asso-
  ciation Bias of CLIP. In EMNLP, 2023.
Aron Yu and Kristen Grauman. Fine-Grained Visual Comparisons with Local Learning. In CVPR,
  2014.
Jiahui Yu, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Legg Yeung, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, and Yonghui Wu.
   CoCa: Contrastive Captioners are Image-Text Foundation Models. TMLR, 2022.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. When and
 Why Vision-Language Models Behave like Bags-Of-Words, and What to Do About It? In ICLR,
 2022.
Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid Loss for Language
  Image Pre-Training. In ICCV, 2023.
Renrui Zhang, Ziyao Zeng, Ziyu Guo, and Yafeng Li. Can Language Understand Depth?                In
  International Conference on Multimedia, 2022.
Yuhui Zhang, Jeff Z. HaoChen, Shih-Cheng Huang, Kuan-Chieh Wang, James Zou, and Serena
  Yeung. Diagnosing and Rectifying Vision Models using Language. In ICLR, 2023.
Chenliang Zhou, Fangcheng Zhong, and Cengiz Öztireli. CLIP-PAE: Projection-Augmentation
  Embedding to Extract Relevant Features for a Disentangled, Interpretable and Controllable Text-
  Guided Face Manipulation. In SIGGRAPH, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A       F URTHER DETAILS FOR THE ANALYSIS EXPERIMENTS OF PRE - TRAINED
        VISION - LANGUAGE MODELS

List of contrastive VLMs. For our large-scale analyses, we considered a total of 112 contrastive
VLMs trained across various datasets provided by OpenCLIP (Ilharco et al., 2021; Cherti et al.,
2023)3 before filtering (see below). We considered the following contrastive VLMs with the follow-
ing characteristics:

          • CLIP variants: OpenAI’s CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), OpenCLIP (Cherti et al., 2023),
            MetaCLIP (Xu et al., 2024), CLIP-A (Li et al., 2023a), EVA-CLIP, EVA-02-CLIP (Sun
            et al., 2023), CoCa (Yu et al., 2022), NLLB-CLIP (Visheratin, 2023), or SigLIP (Zhai
            et al., 2023; Alabdulmohsin et al., 2023).
          • Vision backbones: ResNet (He et al., 2016), ConvNeXt (Liu et al., 2022), or ViT (Doso-
            vitskiy et al., 2020).
          • Pretraining datasets: OpenAI’s proprietary (400 M) WebImageText dataset (Radford
            et al., 2021), LAION-400 M, LAION-2 B, LAION-Aesthetic (900 M) (Schuhmann et al.,
            2022), Merged-2 B (merge of 1.6 B samples from LAION-2 B and 0.4 B samples from
            COYO-700 M (Byeon et al., 2022)) (Sun et al., 2023), WebLI (Chen et al., 2023b), So-
            400 M (Alabdulmohsin et al., 2023), MetaCLIP (400 M) (Xu et al., 2024), Conceptual 12 M
            (Changpinyo et al., 2021), YFCC (15 M) (Thomee et al., 2016), CommonPool-s (max.
            12.8 M; refer to Table 3 of Gadre et al. (2023) for the details of filtering), CommonPool-m
            (max. 128 M), CommonPool-l (max. 1.28 B), CommonPool-xl (max. 12.8 B) (Gadre et al.,
            2023), and DataComp-s (1.4 M), DataComp-m (14 M), DataComp-l (140 M), DataComp-
            xl/DataComp-1B (1 B) (Gadre et al., 2023).

OpenCLIP contains a large variety of models, some of which, e.g., have poor performance or are
redundant. Thus, we filtered models using the following criteria:

          • We removed models that were specifically fine-tuned, e.g., on MS COCO.
          • When there were models that were trained on the same dataset but saved at different check-
            points, we selected the latest checkpoint.
          • We excluded models that achieve < 5% R@1 on MS COCO, under the assumption that
            such low scores indicate some sort of failure that is likely to distort the analyses.

After filtering, we used 98 (out of 112) contrastive VLMs for our analyses.
Dataset details. We ran our evaluations on MS COCO (Lin et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2015),
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), MIT-States (Isola et al., 2015), and UT-Zappos (Yu & Grau-
man, 2014). The datasets comprise 25000 (5000 images with 5 captions each), 50000, 12995, or
2914 test samples, respectively. MS COCO and ImageNet are standard datasets for evaluation of
retrieval or object recognition performance, respectively. We used the standard evaluation protocols
to image-to-text retrieval performance (text-to-image retrieval yielded similar results) or computed
top-1 accuracy. MIT-States consists of 245 objects and 115 adjectives (attributes), while UT-Zappos
consists of 12 shoe types with 16 fine-grained states (∼ attributes). For both datasets, we assume
that we do not know the object of a respective image and only want to find the adjective or fine-
grained state. We considered this a classification problem, following previous work (Trager et al.,
2023). Note that these datasets implicitly assume that the adjectives are mutually exclusive per im-
age. However, this may not be necessarily true, as multiple adjectives or fine-grained states may be
present in the image.
Evaluation prompts. For MS COCO, we prepended the prompt "a photo of" to the descrip-
tion of each image following Radford et al. (2021). For ImageNet, we used the prompts "a photo
of a {obj}" (Radford et al., 2021). For both MIT-States and UT-Zappos, we used the prompts
"an image of a {attr} object".

    3
        https://github.com/mlfoundations/open_clip


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Thickness



                                               Swelling


                                                 Base
                                                image

                              Digit class


                                               Fractures



                                                Scaling



                                                Color


                                    Figure 9: Causal graph of MAD.


B    F URTHER DETAILS FOR THE EXPERIMENTS ON THE M ULTI - MODAL
     ATTRIBUTES AND D IGITS DATASET
Multi-modal Attributes and Digits (MAD). Our dataset Multi-modal Attributes and Digits
(MAD) is based on the MNIST (LeCun, 1998) variation Morpho-MNIST (Castro et al., 2019).
The causal graph of the data-generating process of MAD is depicted in Figure 9. We used
the following words for digits (0, ..., 9), altering image thickness (thickening, thinning,
no thickthinning), swelling (swelling, no swelling), fractures (fracture, no
fracture), scaling (large, small), and color (gray, red, green, blue, cyan, magenta,
yellow). Thus, we have 10 digits and 16 attributes. Figure 10 provides examples of image-text
pairs of MAD.
In our experiments, we investigated information imbalance in the captions by restricting the number
of attributes present within each caption. We provide examples below, where we sequentially remove
the amount of information within the captions, i.e., fewer latent factors (attributes) are present in the
caption:

       • Full information setting (i.e., digit & all five attributes)
           – yellow-swelling-thickening-9-large-fracture
           – swelling-thickening-6-red-small-fracture
           – 5-large-yellow-no swelling-fracture-thinning
       • Partial information setting I (i.e., digit & four attributes)
           – yellow-swelling-thickening-9-large
           – swelling-thickening-6-red-small
           – 5-large-yellow-no swelling-fracture
       • Partial information setting II (i.e., digit & three attributes)
           – yellow-swelling-thickening-9
           – swelling-thickening-6-red
           – 5-large-yellow-no swelling
       • Partial information setting III (i.e., digit & two attributes)
           – yellow-swelling-9
           – swelling-thickening-6
           – 5-large-yellow
       • Partial information setting IV (i.e., digit & one attribute)


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        4                 0                  5                     8                 8                   9
no thickthinning     thickening         thickening         no thickthinning     thickening       no thickthinning
  no swelling        no swelling        no swelling            swelling          swelling          no swelling
    fracture          fracture           fracture            no fracture        no fracture        no fracture
      small             large              small                 small             large               large
      gray            magenta              gray                magenta           magenta             magenta


        1                  0                 3                    7                   5                 9
   thickening         thickening         thinning            thickening       no thickthinning     thickening
   no swelling         swelling          swelling             swelling            swelling          swelling
    fracture           fracture          fracture             fracture          no fracture        no fracture
      small              small             small                small               small             small
      gray               green              red                 green                red             yellow


        5                  2                 2                    8                   6                 8
no thickthinning   no thickthinning     thickening            thinning        no thickthinning     thickening
  no swelling        no swelling         swelling            no swelling          swelling         no swelling
  no fracture          fracture         no fracture          no fracture        no fracture        no fracture
      large              large             small                small               small             large
    magenta               blue             green                green                red               red


        9                  6                 4                    2                   0                 8
   thickening      no thickthinning     thickening           thickening       no thickthinning     thickening
    swelling         no swelling         swelling             swelling          no swelling         swelling
    fracture         no fracture         fracture             fracture          no fracture        no fracture
      small              large             small                large               small             small
       red             magenta              red                  blue             magenta              red


Figure 10: Example images with corresponding caption of our MAD dataset. For example, the
image in the first row and first column shows the digit 4 without altering the thickness, no swelling
applied, with fracture augmentation, scaled down and the color gray. Note that the words of the
captions are shuffled (not in this figure for convenience).


            – yellow-9
            – swelling-6
            – 5-large

Note that while all the latent factors, i.e., digit and all five attributes, still affect the generated image,
the caption may only provide partial information, i.e., attributes are missing from the caption but not
the image.
Model details for MAD experiments. We used small CLIP models. Specifically, the ViT-based
vision backbone comprises 6 layers, each with a dimensionality d of 256 and ⌊d/64⌋ = 4 heads.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The transformer-based language backbone also comprises 6 layers, each with a dimensionality of
256 and 8 heads. We set the patch size to 7 and context length to 8. The vocabulary consists of 28
words, i.e., all the words for digits (10) and attributes (16), as well as a start and end symbol (2).
Training details. We trained all models with a batch size of 128 for 200 epochs with a learning
rate warm-up period of 5 epochs. We used AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) as optimizer with
cosine annealing learning rate schedule (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019). We always selected the best
performing learning rate across 3 learning rates {5 · 10−4 , 5 · 10−5 , 10−5 } each trained with 3
random seeds. The best learning rate was selected by comparing average of the average ideal word
accuracy and average zero-shot accuracy on all attributes and the class label. For all of our results,
we report the average over 3 random seeds.

C                 BACKGROUND ON THE CLIP LOSS
Contrastive representation learning (Chopra et al., 2005; Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; Sohn, 2016;
Oord et al., 2018) leverages paired inputs as weak supervision signal. The basic idea is to learn rep-
resentations in a shared representation space that are as similar as possible for “positive/matching”
pairs, while as dissimilar as possible for “negative/non-matching” pairs. A popular choice for con-
trastive learning approaches is the InfoNCE objective (Oord et al., 2018):

                                                                                        \label {eq:infonce} \mathcal {L}(f_x,f_y)\coloneqq -\frac {1}{N}\sum \limits _{i=1}^N\log \frac {\exp (\tau f_x(\mathbf {x}_i)^T f_{y}(\mathbf {y}_i)))}{\sum \limits _{j=1}^N \exp (\tau f_x(\mathbf {x}_i)^T f_{y}(\mathbf {y}_j)))} \quad ,                                                                                          (3)



where fx , fy are two encoders for the inputs {x}1:N , {y}1:N and τ is the scalar temperature. Wang
& Isola (Wang & Isola, 2020) define two components of the loss:

                          • Alignment (numerator): matching pairs should be close, i.e., aligned.
                          • Uniformity (denominator): representations should be roughly uniformly distributed on the
                            unit hypersphere.

For multi-modal contrastive representation learning, it is popular to use a symmetric version of
above objective (Radford et al., 2021):

  \label {eq:clip_loss} \mathcal {L}_{\text {CLIP}} = -\frac {1}{2N}\sum \limits _{i=1}^N\log \frac {\exp (\tau f_x(\mathbf {x}_i)^T f_{y}(\mathbf {y}_i)))}{\sum \limits _{j=1}^N \exp (\tau f_x(\mathbf {x}_i)^T f_{y}(\mathbf {y}_j)))} -\frac {1}{2N}\sum \limits _{j=1}^N\log \frac {\exp (\tau f_x(\mathbf {x}_j)^T f_{y}(\mathbf {y}_j)))}{\sum \limits _{i=1}^N \exp (\tau f_x(\mathbf {x}_i)^T f_{y}(\mathbf {y}_j)))} \quad .


                                                                                                    (4)
We can define the alignment and uniformity term similarly for the CLIP loss. It is important to
observe that the repulsive forces of the CLIP loss only act across the modalities but not within them.

D                  E XTENDED DETAILS FOR S ECTION 4
D.1                     F URTHER DETAILS ON R ELATIVE M ODALITY G AP MEASURE (RMG)

Limitations of L2M. L2M has been initially proposed as modality gap distance by Liang et al.
(2022). However, it has several limitations that we will discuss below:

                 (a) L2M does not account for difference of the effectively used embedding space.
                 (b) L2M takes a distributional instead of a per-sample view.
                 (c) The L2 norm can be sensitive to outlier embedding dimensions.
                 (d) The L2 norm is an unintuitive distance measure when all points lie on the surface of a
                     sphere.

Regarding (a): note that different models can use different amounts of the unit hypersphere, as the
contrastive loss accounts for relative cosine similarities. Here, the similarity is always relative to


                                                                                                                                                                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: When controlling for the dataset choice, the modality gap seems to correlate negatively
with performance (i.e., the smaller the gap the better the performance) in most cases. We
report the Kendall’s τ rank correlations between RMG (top) or L2M (bottom) and the respective
downstream performance. Additionally, we report the p-values of the correlations. Note, that the
p-values are sometimes large due to the small number of models we are left with for each dataset
(see parenthesis) and therefore results should be taken with a grain of salt.

                                                     RMG
 Evaluation
              DataComp-1B (10)   LAION-400M (7)       LAION-2B (20)       OpenAI (12)          WebLI (9)
  dataset
 MS COCO       0.244 (p=0.375)    -0.619 (p=0.069)    -0.263 (p=0.114)   -0.143 (p=0.548)   -0.611 (p=0.02)
 ImageNet      0.644 (p=0.011)     -0.714 (p=0.03)    -0.168 (p=0.319)   0.302 (p=0.195)     -0.5 (p=0.073)

                                                     L2M
 MS COCO       0.333 (p=0.221)    -0.619 (p=0.069)    -0.189 (p=0.259)   0.238 (p=0.304)     -0.5 (p=0.073)
 ImageNet      0.733 (p=0.003)     -0.714 (p=0.03)    -0.063 (p=0.738)   0.397 (p=0.077)    -0.333 (p=0.257)



the similarity to the negative samples. Consequently, models can use a varying degree of the unit
hypersphere and, thus, L2 distances can have a different meaning. For example, consider two models
that have the same L2M but the first model uses the entire unit hypersphere, while the second model
only uses a small fraction of it. While L2M suggests that the modality gap distance is the same, the
actual gap of the first model is significantly smaller, since the average distances between the samples
are larger.
Regarding (b): intuition suggests that matching image-text pairs should be close but non-matching
pairs can (and should) be large. L2M considers the distance of the means of all pairs. This can
lead to misleading results. An illustrative (but unlikely) example is the case of two distributions that
occupy exactly the same region of the hypersphere, but are rotated by n-degree (i.e., they are very
misaligned). Clearly, there exists a gap between the modalities but L2M does not indicate it.
Lastly for (c) or (d), the L2 norm can be sensitive to embedding dimensions that exhibit vast differ-
ences and are unintuitive since CLIP’s embeddings are on the unit hypersphere. For instance, our
discovered most modality-separating embedding dimensions qualify for this.
Relative Modality Gap (RMG). As a remedy to above outlined limitations, we proposed a Relative
Modality Gap (RMG) measure in the main text (see Equation 1). RMG computes the distances
between matching image-text pairs instead of the means to address (b). Since density estimation in
high-dimensional spaces is difficult, we used the mean distances between all samples per modality
as rough approximation to address (a). Finally, we used cosine similarities instead of the L2 norm
to address (c) and (d).

D.2   F URTHER ANALYSIS ON THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE MODALITY GAP AND
      DOWNSTREAM PERFORMANCE

Controlling for the dataset choice. To mitigate the impact of the dataset, we studied the rela-
tionship between the modality gap and downstream performance for each dataset individually. For
this, only datasets with at least seven models were considered: DataComp-1B (10 models), LAION-
400M (7), LAION-2B (20), OpenAI’s CLIP dataset (12), and WebLI (9).
Table 3 shows that when controlling for dataset choice, we observe the expected negative rank
correlation (i.e., smaller modality gap correlates with better downstream performance) in seven and
six out of ten cases for RMG or L2M, respectively. However, we do not find statistical significance
for these correlations in most cases. Note that this is most likely due to the small number of models
used.
Through further inspection, we made an interesting observation for models that were pre-trained on
DataComp-1B and evaluated on MS COCO: the positive correlation we found can be attributed to
the differences in training of CLIP and CLIP-A models (Li et al., 2023a). CLIP-A models utilize an
inverse scaling law, where larger image/text encoders are trained on fewer image/text tokens, i.e.,
image resizing or masking and shorter context length for the text tokens (e.g., through truncation or


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Data filtering makes the modality gap more narrow. We report RMG (1st, 2nd table)
and L2M (3rd, 4th) on MS COCO (1st, 3rd) and ImageNet (2nd, 4th). For all filtering strategies, the
modality gap narrows after filtering the unfiltered dataset.

                                          MS COCO, RMG
  CommonPool                                    filtering strategy
     scale         none     basic    text-based   image-based      LAION-2B-based     CLIP-based
       small       0.533    0.462      0.461           0.445             0.447            0.461
      medium       0.537    0.499      0.507           0.494             0.446            0.487
       large       0.603    0.577      0.593           0.587             0.511            0.544
       xlarge      0.586     n/a        n/a             n/a              0.531            0.543

                                          ImageNet, RMG
       small       0.598    0.502      0.492           0.461             0.468            0.485
      medium       0.595    0.547      0.553           0.525             0.478            0.523
       large       0.651    0.628      0.628           0.625             0.557            0.584
       xlarge      0.647     n/a        n/a             n/a              0.593            0.603

                                          MS COCO, L2M
       small       0.733    0.508      0.515           0.356             0.346            0.519
      medium       0.773    0.678      0.702           0.677             0.482            0.639
       large       0.898     0.86      0.892           0.877             0.742             0.8
       xlarge      0.875      n/a       n/a             n/a              0.849            0.862

                                           ImageNet, L2M
       small       0.805    0.525      0.516            0.3               0.3             0.491
      medium       0.837    0.735      0.745           0.701             0.514            0.681
       large       0.947    0.915       0.92           0.911             0.792            0.843
       xlarge      0.961     n/a         n/a            n/a              0.935             0.95


masking). According to our explanations from Section 6, the use of fewer (text) tokens leads to a
larger modality gap due to the greater information imbalance. Interestingly, despite this, downstream
performance still improves on common benchmarks, as shown by Li et al. (2023a). When consider-
ing CLIP and CLIP-A models separately, we do find negative rank correlations: -0.667 (p=33.3%)
for CLIP models and -0.6 (p=0.136) for CLIP-A models for RMG. When using L2M instead, we
find 0.0 (p=1.0) for CLIP models and -0.6 (p=0.136) for CLIP-A models.
Impact of data filtering. There are two ways to reduce information imbalance from a data perspec-
tive: (1) caption enrichment and (2) filtering out high information imbalance image-text pairs, i.e.,
pairs with high uncertainty between them. We have shown extensive results for the former in Sec-
tion 6 and Appendix F. To study the latter, we used CLIP models trained on CommonPool (Gadre
et al., 2023), a benchmark to assess data filtering approaches.
Table 4 shows that data filtering is also effective in reducing the modality gap.



D.3    I MAGE N ET RESULTS FOR F IGURE 4

Figure 11 shows similar results on ImageNet to the ones shown in the main text in Figure 4 on MS
COCO.
Figure 12 shows that the modalities are also well separable when we select embedding dimensions
based on the largest mean differences; similar to Figures 4b and 11c.


                                                  20
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           0.6
                                                                                                    CLIP ViT-B/16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CLIP ViT-B/16
                                                                                                    SigLIP ViT-B/16                                                                                                                                     0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ImageNet
                           0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    accuracy
                                           0.6                                                                                                                                                                                 65.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RMG
Abs. difference of means                   0.5
                           0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                 62.5                     0.5
                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60.0
                           0.3
                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SigLIP ViT-B/16
                           0.2             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 75


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ImageNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      accuracy
                                           0.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RMG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                           0.1
                                                 0           2         4                      6                         8                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                           0.0

                                 0   100    200        300       400   500                600                 700                800                                                                                                  0     20    40
                                                 Embedding dimensions (sorted)                                                                                                                                                    Ablated dimensions

                           (a) Some dimensions have vastly different means.                                                                              (b) Separating dims.                                             (c) Removing dims.

  Figure 11: Few embedding dimensions separate the modalities. Results on ImageNet. (a) We plot
  the absolute difference in the means of each embedding dimension between the modalities. Most
  dimensions have similar means for both modalities, but for some the differences are huge. (b) Pairs
  of these high difference dimensions can perfectly separate the modalities. (c) Successive removal
  of embedding dimensions based on the sorting of embedding dimensions from (a) leads to a sharp
  drop, followed by a partial recovery of downstream performance, while the modality gap gradually
  closes (similar results for L2M).


  Figure 12: Pairs based on the largest mean differences. In the main paper, we show the di-
  mensions with largest means. Note that using the largest mean difference also leads to separable
  dimensions. Top: OpenAI’s CLIP ViT-B/16, bottom: SigLIP ViT-B/16. Left: MS COCO, right: Im-
  ageNet. In Figures 4b and 11c, we selected the embedding dimension of each modality, as each of
  the embedding dimensions most dominate the direction of the embedding vector of each modality.


   D.4                           E XAMPLE FOR THE EFFECT OF THE EMBEDDING DIMENSION REMOVAL

  Consider the following example: let x = [8, 0.6, 0.7, 0.3]T be an image embedding, and y =
  [5, 0.13, 0.035, 0.02]T and y′ = [5, 1.5, 0.7, 0.45]T be the matching or non-matching text embed-
  ding, respectively. We have cosine similarities d of d(x, y) = 0.995 and d(x, y′ ) = 0.975. After
  ablating the first dimension, we have cosine similarities of 0.822 and 0.917 and hence the image-text
  alignment flipped. Finally, it flips back after ablating also the second dimension.


   D.5                           C LOSING THE GAP FOR IDEAL WORDS

  We showed that we can close the modality gap post-hoc by successive removal of embedding di-
  mensions in Section 4.2 but performance did not improve. Similarly, Liang et al. (2022) shifted the
  embeddings by the modality gap vector

                                                                             \overrightarrow {\Delta }_{\text {gap}}:=\frac {1}{N}\sum _{i=0}^N \mathbf {x}_i - \frac {1}{N}\sum _{i=0}^N \mathbf {y}_i \quad ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (5)


                                                                                                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where xi , yi are the i-th L2-normalized image or text embeddings, respectively. Simple shifting
closed the modality but also did not improve performance.4 But what’s the effect on ideal words
(Trager et al., 2023)?
Ideal words. Ideal words (Trager et al., 2023) can be computed as follows:

                                                                                                                                                \mathbf {y}_{z_i} := \frac {1}{\alpha _{z_i}} \sum \limits _{z'=(z_1',...,z_k')~\text {with}~z_i'=z_i} \beta _z \mathbf {y}_{z'} - \mathbf {y}_0 \quad ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (6)


where zi is a component of the factored set of concepts z ∈ Z = Z1 × ... ×
                                                                         QZ1k each with ni possible
concept values, y is the L2-normalized text embedding, αzi = n1i , βz =    ni , and y0 is defined as


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \mathbf {y}_0 := \beta _z \sum \limits _z \mathbf {y}_z \quad .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (7)


In words, ideal words are computed by marginalizing out all other factors j ̸= i. Intuitively, we can
understand the ideal word yzi for component zi as the direction for that concept (e.g., “green”) in
the embedding space. Note that y0 is simply the average text, which is used to remove the “textness”
from the embedding vector.
Extension to ideal images. For our analysis, we propose to extend the notion of ideal words to
ideal images by simply replacing the text embeddings, y, by the image embeddings, x, and utilize
datasets with object-attribute information (MIT-States, UT-Zappos) to control z.
Results. Ideally, the ideal words and ideal images should align, i.e., the directions in the embedding
space have a similar meaning. The cosine similarities between ideal words and ideal images in
Table 5 show that ideal words and ideal images are roughly aligned. Once we correct for the modality
gap, they are well aligned. However, Table 5 shows that the shifting has negligible to no effect on
performance. This indicates that the removal of the main elements of the modality gap improves
the cosine similarities (by removing the parts that lead to a low cosine similarity) but it does not fix
the underlying problem, i.e., the modality gap does not limit performance of pre-trained contrastive
VLMs.


E        E XTENDED DETAILS FOR S ECTION 5

E.1       F URTHER DETAILS ON OUR OBJECT ATTRIBUTE BIAS METRIC MOAD

For readability and to provide a better intuition about the metric we substituted parts with more
informative variables in the main text. The definition of MOAD without substitution is given by:


                \begin {split} \text {\obm }_{\mathbf {\text {img}}}\coloneqq ~&\frac {1}{2|O|}\sum \limits _{o\in O} \left ( \frac {1}{N_1} \sum \limits _{\substack {\mathbf {x}_i,\mathbf {x}_j\in X_o\\i\neq j}} \mathbf {x}_{i}^T\mathbf {x}_{j} - \frac {1}{N_2} \sum \limits _{\mathbf {x}_i\in X_o, \mathbf {x}_j\in X_{\neg o}} \mathbf {x}_{i}^T\mathbf {x}_{j}\right ) \\ -&\frac {1}{2|A|}\sum \limits _{a\in A} \left ( \frac {1}{N_3} \sum \limits _{\substack {\mathbf {x}_i,\mathbf {x}_j\in X_a\\i\neq j}} \mathbf {x}_{i}^T\mathbf {x}_{j} - \frac {1}{N_4} \sum \limits _{\mathbf {x}_i\in X_a, \mathbf {x}_j\in X_{\neg a}} \mathbf {x}_{i}^T\mathbf {x}_{j}\right )\quad , \end {split}

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (8)


where xi denotes the normalized image embeddings, N1 , ..., N4 are normalization factors given
by N1 = |Xo |2 − |Xo |, N2 = |Xo × X¬o |, N3 = |Xa |2 − |Xa | and N4 = |Xa × X¬a |,
Xo , X¬o , Xa , X¬a are all image embeddings x that (not) entail the object o ∈ O or attribute a ∈ A,
respectively.

    4
        Only when they optimized the shift length, they could improve performance.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Shifting ideal words makes them more similar to ideal images but does not improve
performance. We report the cosine similarities between ideal words and ideal images, and top-1
test accuracy on attributes and objects for CLIP ViT-B/16 (1st, 2nd table) and SigLIP ViT-B/16
(3rd, 4th) on MIT-States (1st, 3rd) and UT-Zappos (2nd, 4th). Note that we subtracted y0 for “ideal
                                  →
                                  −
words” and for “ideal words with ∆ gap ” we did not. The reason for this is (approximate) equivalence
                                                                   →
                                                                   −
between subtracting y0 and adding x0 to the modality gap vector ∆ gap .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CLIP ViT B/16 on MIT-States
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cosine similarity between                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  top-1 test accuracy
                           Variant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ideal words & ideal images                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         attribute                                                                                             object
                           real words                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n/a                                                                                                                                                                             18.65                                                                                        44.69
                           ideal words                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.388                                                                                                                                                                            19.74                                                                                        46.87
                                            →
                                            −
                           ideal words with ∆ gap                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.858                                                                                                                                                                            19.70                                                                                        46.84

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CLIP ViT B/16 on UT-Zappos
                           real words                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n/a                                                                                                                                                                             15.92                                                                                        60.54
                           ideal words                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.381                                                                                                                                                                            21.83                                                                                        62.46
                                            →
                                            −
                           ideal words with ∆ gap                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.898                                                                                                                                                                            21.76                                                                                        62.42

                                                                                                                                                                                                                SigLIP ViT B/16 on MIT-States
                           real words                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n/a                                                                                                                                                                             21.82                                                                                        50.23
                           ideal words                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.456                                                                                                                                                                            25.81                                                                                        52.54
                                            →
                                            −
                           ideal words with ∆ gap                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.858                                                                                                                                                                            25.73                                                                                        52.66

                                                                                                                                                                                                                SigLIP ViT B/16 on UT-Zappos
                           real words                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n/a                                                                                                                                                                             27.14                                                                                        73.27
                           ideal words                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.439                                                                                                                                                                            35.38                                                                                        72.07
                                            →
                                            −
                           ideal words with ∆ gap                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.870                                                                                                                                                                            35.14                                                                                        72.00


E.2   G ENERAL FORMULATION FOR B IAS MEASURE VIA R ELATIVE A NGLE C HANGE OF
      E MBEDDINGS (BRACE)

MOAD is an instantiation of our novel metric Bias measure via Relative Angle Change of Embed-
dings (BRACE). BRACE is defined as follows:


            \begin {split} \text {BRACE}_{\mathbf {\text {img}}}\coloneqq ~&\frac {1}{2|B|}\sum \limits _{b\in B} \left ( \frac {1}{N_1} \sum \limits _{\substack {\mathbf {x}_i,\mathbf {x}_j\in X_b\\i\neq j}} \mathbf {x}_{i}^T\mathbf {x}_{j} - \frac {1}{N_2} \sum \limits _{\mathbf {x}_i\in X_b, \mathbf {x}_j\in X_{\neg b}} \mathbf {x}_{i}^T\mathbf {x}_{j}\right ) \\ -&\frac {1}{2|C|}\sum \limits _{c\in C} \left ( \frac {1}{N_3} \sum \limits _{\substack {\mathbf {x}_i,\mathbf {x}_j\in X_c\\i\neq j}} \mathbf {x}_{i}^T\mathbf {x}_{j} - \frac {1}{N_4} \sum \limits _{\mathbf {x}_i\in X_c, \mathbf {x}_j\in X_{\neg c}} \mathbf {x}_{i}^T\mathbf {x}_{j}\right )\quad , \end {split}

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (9)


where xi denotes the normalized image embeddings, N1 , ..., N4 are normalization factors given by
N1 = |Xb |2 −|Xb |, N2 = |Xb ×X¬b |, N3 = |Xc |2 −|Xc | and N4 = |Xc ×X¬c |, Xb , X¬b , Xc , X¬c
are all image embeddings x that (not) entail some group of concepts B (e.g., objects O) or some
other group of concepts C (e.g., attributes A), respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: We define four conditions with various prior distributions over words p(word).
Throughout all conditions, digits are treated as the objects. In condition A, we ensure that each
word appears the same number of times in the dataset, meaning p(word) is uniform. Note that
p(worddigit |image) = 1 and p(word¬digit |image) < 1. In condition D, all factors appear in the
caption, meaning p(word|image) = 1. Conditions B and C interpolate between conditions A and
D. Note that the appearance probability (appearance counts in the dataset) of attributes p(word) is
higher than for objects for conditions B, C, and D.

                                    resulting p(word) for given p(word|image)
                         object                             attribute
           Condition      digit    thickthinning    swelling     fracture     scaling   color
                A         0.1           0.1              0.1       0.1          0.1      0.1
                B         0.1         0.177             0.233     0.233        0.233    0.114
                C         0.1         0.255             0.366     0.366        0.366    0.129
                D         0.1          0.33              0.5       0.5          0.5     0.143

Table 7: Even though attributes are globally more frequent (see Table 6), the object bias per-
sists. We observe object bias, even though p(word) is uniform (for A) or attributes are more fre-
quently present in the captions (for B-D).

                                                    MOAD img
                       Condition    emb size 12     emb size 15         emb size 18
                           A            0.41              0.40             0.34
                           B            0.34              0.25             0.31
                           C            0.29              0.30             0.29
                           D            0.14              0.17             0.22


E.3    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENT ON WHERE THE OBJECT BIAS STEMS FROM

Experimental setup. Complementary to the experiment in Figure 5, we conducted experiments
for which we controlled p(word) and p(word|image) on MAD. We considered four conditions A-D
(see Table 6) that varied p(word) for objects and attributes.
Results. Table 7 shows that the models still exhibit a bias towards digits, even though attributes
occur more frequently globally (in the dateset). This further confirms that the prior distribution over
words p(word) cannot be the main factor for the emergence of the bias towards objects.

F     E XTENDED DETAILS FOR S ECTION 6
F.1   CC12M TRAINING AND INFORMATION IMBALANCE CAUSES THE MODALITY GAP
      EXPERIMENTS

Experimental setup. We largely followed the training setup of Ilharco et al. (2021). As common
for CC12M, we used a ResNet-50 image encoder. We trained for 30 epochs, with each epoch having
9263104 image-text samples. We used a global batch size of 1760 and a learning rate of 1e-3 with
1000 steps of warm-up. For all other settings, we used the default values of Ilharco et al. (2021).
We trained CLIP models in 3 conditions:

       • full caption: using the complete captions.
       • half caption: we randomly dropped the first or second half of a caption.
       • quarter caption: we only kept a randomly selected quarter of the caption.

Note, that we do not sample words randomly, but select a contiguous string of words from the
caption. All hyperparameters are identical between the conditions.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Complete version of Figure 7a. To study the influence of information imbalance be-
tween the modalities, we control the number of attributes present in the captions (the image is
always affected by all attributes) in MAD. As the amount of information shared between the modal-
ities increases, the modality gap (I-II) and bias towards objects reduces (III-IV), while downstream
accuracy improves (V-VI).
                                                                                                    Validation loss


                                                                                                                      1.5                                                  75


                                                                                                                                                             Temperature
                                                                                                                                                                                    Full caption
                                          1.10                                                                                                                                      Half caption
RMG


      0.45
                                    L2I


                                                                                                                      1.0                                                  50
                                                                                                                                                                                    Quarter caption
                                          1.05
                                                                                                                      0.5                                                  25
      0.40

             0   10       20   30                0    10                 20                 30                              0            10        20   30                      0     10        20      30
                      Epoch                                 Epoch                                                                              Epoch                                    Epoch



Figure 14: Complete version of Figure 7c. Training with “full” captions leads to a smaller modality
gap (RMG, L2I), lower validation loss (though, “full” and “half” are very similar at the end of
training), and higher temperature (i.e., more peaky distribution/less uncertainty).


Additional results. In addition to Figure 7c in the main paper, Figure 14 shows the L2-instance
(L2I) modality gap metric and temperature. L2I could be an alternative to RMG, which is a compro-
mise between RMG and L2M. In contrast to L2M, it computes the distance only where it matters,
i.e., between the matching pairs. However, in comparison to RMG, it does not take into account the
fraction of the embedding space used by the model. L2I is given by

                                                       \text {L2I}\coloneqq \frac {1}{N}\sum _{i=1}^{N} || \mathbf {x}_i - \mathbf {y}_i||,                                                           (10)

where xi is the i-th L2-normalized image embedding and yi the i-th text embedding. Note that in
contrast to RMG, L2I misses the drop of the relative gap (approx. epoch 25 in Figure 14), as the
distance between the positives keeps increasing.
Figure 15 shows results for a different vision encoder (ViT-S in (a)), an alternative information-
dropping scheme (sentence-dropping in (b)), and another dataset (CC3M in (c)). For all these vari-
ations, we find that the modality gap is smaller with less information imbalance (“full” caption)
similar to our findings in Figures 7c and 14.

F.2          F URTHER EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS FOR S ECTION 6.2

We used the pre-trained “full” caption model from Appendix F.1. Next, we fine-tuned this model
using the same hyperparameters, but with “quarter” captions, i.e., keeping a contiguous quarter of


                                                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  Validation loss
                                  0.6                                               2
                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                 Full caption
RMG
      0.45


                                                                                                               R@1
                          L2M
                                  0.4                                               1
                                                                                                                     20                          Quarter caption
      0.40
                                                                                                                      0
             0     20                    0         20                                     0          20                   0         20
                 Epoch                          Epoch                                            Epoch                            Epoch

                                                            (a) ViT-S vision encoder.


                                                              Validation loss
                                0.7                                                 1.0
      0.45
                                                                                                                     40                          Full caption
RMG


                                                                                                               R@1
                          L2M
                                0.6

                                0.5
                                                                                    0.5                                                          Quarter caption
                                                                                                                     20
      0.40

             0      20                   0         20                                      0              20              0           20
                 Epoch                          Epoch                                            Epoch                            Epoch

                                                (b) Dropping sentences instead of words.


                                                                  Validation loss
                                  0.8
      0.55                                                                                                           10
                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                 Full caption
RMG


                                                                                                               R@1
                          L2M


      0.50                        0.6

                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                      5                          Quarter caption
      0.45                        0.4


             0       20                  0          20                                    0            20                 0          20
                 Epoch                          Epoch                                            Epoch                            Epoch

                                                           (c) Other dataset: CC3M.

Figure 15: Further evidence for the effect of information imbalance on the modality gap
on real data. This figure supports the findings of Figures 7c and 14 with experiments using (a)
a different vision encoder backbone, (b) sentence-wise information-dropping scheme, and (c)
training on a different dataset (note that CC3M is not a subset of CC12M). In all settings, “full”
captions (i.e., less information imbalance) also leads to a smaller modality gap (RMG, L2M).

                                                         Perfect pairs                                          Imperfect pairs
                                        1.0


                                        0.5
                                                                                x1
                          dim 2


                                                                                y1
                                        0.0
                                                                                x2
                                                                                y2
                                  −0.5


                                  −1.0

                                              −1.0 −0.5      0.0                          0.5    1.0      −1.0 −0.5        0.0     0.5     1.0
                                                            dim 1                                                         dim 1

Figure 16: Visualization of the global minima of the contrastive loss under perfect or imperfect
pairs in our toy 2D example. For perfect pairs (left), matching pairs are aligned and uniformly
distributed. For imperfect pairs (right), the global minimum exhibits a modality gap. Here, xi
denotes i-th sample from modality 1, e.g., images, and yi i-th sample from modality 2, e.g., text.


the words in the captions. For the “frozen temperature” model we freeze the temperature to the value
learned in pre-training (i.e., ∼80).

F.3          C AN THE MODALITY GAP EVEN APPEAR IN THE GLOBAL OPTIMUM ?

We show below that the modality gap can even be present in the global optimum under certain data
properties. Under perfect image-text pairs, it is straightforward to see that the global minimum of the
CLIP loss does not exhibit a modality gap. I.e., all matching image-text pairs are perfectly aligned
and the pairs are uniformly distributed on the unit hypersphere. But what happens when alignment
is bounded, e.g., due to miscaptioning, focus on other factors, or missing information?


                                                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Effect of information imbalance in the “idealized” experimental setting of Fahim et al.
(2024). It is apparent that information imbalance has a large impact on the modality gap.

         information imbalance                                                            training time                                                      L2M                                                RMG                                              I2I
                                                                                   after initialization                                                         0.0                                             0.007                                            1.0
                                       ✗                                                                                                           0.058                                              0.006                                               1.0
                                                                                   after 1200 epochs
                                       ✓                                                                                                       0.265 (+0.207)                                     0.149 (+0.143)                                      1.0 (±0.0)


To illustrate the effect of such bounded alignment on the final image and text embeddings, we
designed a 2D toy example. We generated two sets of points on the unit circle and directly opti-
mized their positions. The points represent the embeddings of both modalities: {x1 , x2 } = X and
{y1 , y2 } = Y, where x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 ∈ {[a, b]T | a2 + b2 = 1; a, b ∈ [0, 1]}. Further, we spec-
ified which point of set X matches to which point in set Y. For the perfect matching setting, we
considered the following pairs:
                                         \{(\mathbf {x}_1, \mathbf {y}_1),(\mathbf {x}_2, \mathbf {y}_2)\} \quad .  (11)
Trivially, the global minimum (up to rotations) is: x1 = y1 = [1, 0]T , x2 = y2 = [−1, 0]T ; see
Figure 16 for a visualization.
However, what happens when the alignment is bounded, e.g., due to mismatches? For image-text
pairs, this can happen if a human annotator miscaptions an image. It could also stem from differing
focuses among human annotators on distinct aspects of the image. We considered the following
pairs:
                     \label {eq:toy_mismatches} \{(\mathbf {x}_1, \mathbf {y}_1),(\mathbf {x}_1, \mathbf {y}_1),(\mathbf {x}_2, \mathbf {y}_2),(\mathbf {x}_2, \mathbf {y}_2),\underbrace {(\mathbf {x}_1, \mathbf {y}_2),(\mathbf {x}_2, \mathbf {y}_1)}_{\text {mismatches}}\} \quad ,  (12)


where we need the additional matching pairs (x1 , y1 ) and (x2 , y2 ) to avoid the degenerated global
minimum x1 = y1 = x2 = y2 .
To search for the globally optimal embeddings for the points in Equation 12, we ran a grid search
with an angular resolution of 6◦ . We found the following global minimum (again up to rotations):
x1 = [1, 0]T , y1 = [cos 276◦ , sin 276◦ ]T , x2 = [cos 42◦ , sin 42◦ ]T , y2 = [cos 126◦ , sin 126◦ ]T ; see
Figure 16 for a visualization. It is apparent that the global minimum exhibits a modality gap.
We recognize that identification and removal of the mismatches in Equation 12 may be straight-
forward in practice. However, our goal is to illustrate the impact of such in a simplistic setting to
provide an intuition on the behavior of the contrastive multi-modal loss.

F.4              I S THE GAP PRIMARILY CAUSED BY THE CONTRASTIVE LOSS INSTEAD OF THE
                 INFORMATION IMBALANCE ?

Recently, Fahim et al. (2024) proposed that the modality gap is inherent to the two-encoder con-
strastive loss. However, how does this relate to our explanation that the modality gap stems from an
information imbalance in the data (Section 6)? To answer this, we replicated their “idealized experi-
ment” (with minor differences that are highlighted below) and show that information imbalance has
a substantially larger effect than the “contrastive gap”.
Experimental setup. Following Fahim et al. (2024), we trained the CLIP model on image-image
pairs. Note that this is in contrast to standard CLIP models that are trained on image-text pairs.
However, it removes the differences that may stem from modality-specific properties. Further, since
we can use the identical image, it also eliminates mismatches and, more importantly, information
imbalance. To train the CLIP model, we replaced the text encoder with a copy of the image encoder.
Fahim et al. (2024) initially closed the modality gap using a translation vector (i.e., similar to the
post-hoc approach tested by Liang et al. (2022)). While this closes the gap in terms of L2, it does
not close the gap in terms of RMG, as the cone size might still be different and representations might
be rotated (or have completely different neighborhood relations). To address these issues, we closed
the gap at initialization by simply initializing both image encoders with the same weights.
We considered two settings:


                                                                                                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      Table 9: The contrastive loss almost closes the gap. We directly optimize the embeddings.
                                        Step     Loss     RMG
                                         0      7.3789    0.4987
                                       1000     0.0060    0.0061
                                       2000     0.0014    0.0060


         • Without information imbalance: we ran experiments as described above. This is equiva-
           lent (except for the different initialization) to the setting of Fahim et al. (2024).
         • With information imbalance: we randomly resized and cropped (using the default param-
           eters) the second image half of the time and the other half leave the image untouched (i.e.,
           no information imbalance). Otherwise, we ran experiments as described above.

Note that evaluation was always conducted without information imbalance.
Training details. We followed the experimental setting of Fahim et al. (2024). We used 2048
randomly selected images from the MS COCO validation set (they used the training set). We also
trained the CLIP models with a batch size of 64 for 1200 epochs. Both image encoders use the
ViT-B/32 architecture with a 512-dimensional embedding dimensionality. We used a learning rate
of 1e-4 with AdamW (with weight decay of 0.1, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98, and ϵ = 1e-6) and cosine
annealing learning rate scheduling. The maximum temperature was set to 100.0. We repeated
trainings for five random seeds.
Results. Table 8 shows that we can replicate the result of Fahim et al. (2024): even though the model
is initialized without a modality gap and achieves perfect performance, there is a small gap after
training. However, we also find that an information imbalance leads to substantially larger modality
gaps measured with RMG (same results for L2M). This validates that information imbalance is the
main driving factor for the modality gap.

F.5     C AN THE CONTRASTIVE LOSS CLOSE THE MODALITY GAP ?

To further understand whether the contrastive loss is capable to close the modality gap, we created a
simplified example and stripped away all unnecessary factors, i.e., the encoder networks, similar to
Appendix F.3. We randomly drew 1000 L2-normalized image embeddings and their matching text
embeddings with 8 dimensions each. We directly optimized the embeddings using the CLIP loss.
We trained for 2000 steps with a learning rate of 0.01 using Adam.
Table 9 shows that the contrastive loss can indeed narrow the gap and does not preserve it.

F.6     C AN THE MODALITY GAP BE REDUCED IN PRE - TRAINED MODELS ?

To show that the modality gap can also be reduced for pre-trained contrastive VLMs, we fine-tuned
OpenAI’s CLIP ViT-B/16 (Radford et al., 2021) and SigLIP ViT-B/16 (Zhai et al., 2023) on the
Densely Captioned Images (DCI) dataset (Urbanek et al., 2024). DCI consists of 7805 dense and
highly-aligned image-text pairs. Thus, DCI has reduced information imbalance and, consequently,
the modality gap should reduce as we fine-tune.
Training details. We fine-tuned both pre-trained VLMs for ten epochs with global batch size of
256 (distributed across four NVIDIA RTX 2080 GPUs) with a warm-up of 100 steps, and a learning
rate of 1e-5 with AdamW (with weight decay of 0.1, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.09, and ϵ = 1e-6) and cosine
annealing learning rate scheduling. The maximum temperature was kept at 100.0.
Results. Table 10 shows that training on the image-text pairs of DCI indeed reduces the modality
gap, as expected by our arguments in Section 6.1. Note that fine-tuning led to slightly worse zero-
shot transfer accuracy on ImageNet. This is not in conflict with our claims, as other factors such as
the distributional shift between the fine-tuning and test datasets play a larger role for performance.
For example, we do not expect better performance when fine-tuning on an image-text flower dataset
and then evaluate on an image-text animal dataset. We suspect that DCI similarly may not be best
suited for such object-centric benchmarks (ImageNet & MS COCO).


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            MS COCO
                               CLIP ViT-B/16                           SigLIP ViT-B/16
                    before fine-tuning   after fine-tuning   before fine-tuning   after fine-tuning
 L2M                      0.816                0.700               1.046                0.958
 RMG                      0.572                0.499               0.623                0.562
 R@1                      52.84                59.24               67.68                67.58

                                             ImageNet
 L2M                      0.864                0.747               1.116                1.04
 RMG                      0.606                0.531               0.683                0.63
 Top-1 accuracy           66.75                65.13               75.61                73.87

Table 10: Fine-tuning on the image-text pairs of DCI (Urbanek et al., 2024) reduces the modality
gap (lower L2M & RMG).


G    L IMITATIONS
We validated our main hypotheses on small- (MAD, CC3M) and medium-sized (CC12M) datasets.
While additional experiments on large-scale datasets like LAION would be valuable, they are be-
yond our computational resources, unfortunately. Nevertheless, our analysis of pre-trained large-
scale CLIP models aligns with our findings on smaller datasets, suggesting consistency across scales.
Additionally, our method of reducing the information imbalance on real data (keeping only a con-
tiguous sequence of words) may not be optimal. For instance, dropping 50% of words should, on
average, remove 50% of information, but the variance may be large. A more refined method could
produce even clearer results.
Lastly, the results in Tables 1 and 3 are correlation-based. Due to the small number of comparable
models, the findings in Table 3 lack statistical significance. Expanding our current analysis would
require prohibitively large compute resources, which we unfortunately have not.

H    C ONNECTION TO PARTIAL MULTI - LABEL LEARNING
Information imbalance highlights the learning difficulties that arise from incomplete or partial in-
formation. In our case, a modality gap and object bias. This issue is also present in more classical
multi-label learning. Specifically, the field of partial multi-label learning (Xie & Huang, 2018;
Struski et al., 2023; Hang & Zhang, 2023) handles scenarios where an unknown number of ground
truth labels are missing while irrelevant or adulterated ground truth labels are provided.
In this work, we showed that CLIP-like models face analogous challenges that stem from infor-
mation imbalance. For example, information is missing from the captions, or captions entail mis-
matches. We believe that future work could study the similarities and potentially transfer ideas from
partial multi-label learning to CLIP-like models, or vice versa.


                                                 29
