Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


U NINTENTIONAL U NALIGNMENT: L IKELIHOOD
D ISPLACEMENT IN D IRECT P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION
    Noam Razin† , Sadhika Malladi† , Adithya Bhaskar† , Danqi Chen† ,
    Sanjeev Arora† , Boris Hanin‡
 †                                                                   ‡
     Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University           Princeton ORFE



                                                A BSTRACT

             Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) and its variants are increasingly used for
             aligning language models with human preferences. Although these methods are
             designed to teach a model to generate preferred responses more frequently rel-
             ative to dispreferred responses, prior work has observed that the likelihood of
             preferred responses often decreases during training. The current work sheds light
             on the causes and implications of this counterintuitive phenomenon, which we
             term likelihood displacement. We demonstrate that likelihood displacement can
             be catastrophic, shifting probability mass from preferred responses to responses
             with an opposite meaning. As a simple example, training a model to prefer No
             over Never can sharply increase the probability of Yes. Moreover, when align-
             ing the model to refuse unsafe prompts, we show that such displacement can un-
             intentionally lead to unalignment, by shifting probability mass from preferred re-
             fusal responses to harmful responses (e.g., reducing the refusal rate of Llama-3-
             8B-Instruct from 74.4% to 33.4%). We theoretically characterize that likelihood
             displacement is driven by preferences that induce similar embeddings, as mea-
             sured by a centered hidden embedding similarity (CHES) score. Empirically, the
             CHES score enables identifying which training samples contribute most to likeli-
             hood displacement in a given dataset. Filtering out these samples effectively mit-
             igated unintentional unalignment in our experiments. More broadly, our results
             highlight the importance of curating data with sufficiently distinct preferences, for
             which we believe the CHES score may prove valuable.1


1        I NTRODUCTION

To ensure that language models generate safe and helpful content, they are typically aligned based
on pairwise preference data. One prominent alignment method, known as Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), requires fitting a reward model to a dataset
of human preferences, and then training the language model to maximize the reward via RL. While
often effective for improving the quality of generated responses (Bai et al., 2022a; Achiam et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023), the complexity and computational costs of RLHF motivated the rise of
direct preference learning methods such as DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023).
Given a prompt x, DPO and its variants (e.g., Azar et al. (2024); Tang et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024a);
Meng et al. (2024)) eschew the need for RL by directly teaching a model πθ to increase the margin
between the log probabilities of a preferred response y+ and a dispreferred response y− . While
intuitively these methods should increase the probability of y+ while decreasing that of y− , several
recent works observed that the probabilities of both y+ and y− tend to decrease over the course of
training (Pal et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2024b; Tajwar et al., 2024; Pang et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024). We term this phenomenon likelihood displacement — see Figure 1.
When the probability of y+ decreases, the probability of other, possibly undesirable, responses must
increase. However, despite the prevalence of likelihood displacement, its causes and implications
remain poorly understood. The purpose of this work is to address these gaps. Through theory and
experiments, we characterize mechanisms driving likelihood displacement, demonstrate that it can
     1
         Our code is available at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/unintentional-unalignment.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Direct Preference Learning                                Likelihood Displacement

     e.g. DPO (Rafailov et al. 2023)



                                                                                            Benign


                                                                                      is as preferable as


                                                                                          Catastrophic
        Language Model

                                                                                      is substantially less

                                                                                    preferable than

     Preference Learning Loss
                                                       Training Steps


Figure 1: Illustration of likelihood displacement in direct preference learning. For a prompt x, direct
preference learning aims to increase the probability that a model πθ assigns to a preferred response y+ relative
to a dispreferred response y− . Likelihood displacement refers to the counterintuitive phenomenon where,
while the gap between ln πθ (y+ |x) and ln πθ (y− |x) increases, they both decrease. If the responses increasing
instead in probability (depicted by z) are as preferable as y+ (e.g., z is similar in meaning to y+ ), then the
likelihood displacement is benign. However, if the probability mass goes to responses that are substantially less
preferable than y+ (e.g., z is opposite in meaning to y+ ), then we say that it is catastrophic.



lead to surprising failures in alignment, and provide preventative guidelines. Our experiments cover
models of different families and scales, including OLMo-1B (Groeneveld et al., 2024), Gemma-2B
(Team et al., 2024), and Llama-3-8B (Dubey et al., 2024). The main contributions are listed below.

  • Likelihood displacement can be catastrophic even in simple settings. We demonstrate that,
    even when training on just a single prompt whose preferences y+ and y− consist of a single
    token each, likelihood displacement is pervasive (Section 3). Moreover, the tokens increasing
    in probability at the expense of y+ can have a meaning opposite to it. For example, training a
    model to prefer y+ = No over y− = Never often sharply increases the probability of Yes.
    This stands in stark contrast to prior work attributing likelihood displacement to different com-
    plexities in the preference learning pipeline (Tajwar et al., 2024; Pal et al., 2024; Rafailov et al.,
    2024b), and emphasizes the need to formally characterize its underlying causes.

  • Theory: likelihood displacement is determined by the model’s embedding geometry. We
    analyze the evolution of ln πθ (y+ |x) during gradient-based training (Section 4). Our theory
    reveals that likelihood displacement is governed by the (static) token unembeddings and (con-
    textual) hidden embeddings of y+ and y− . In particular, it formalizes intuition by which the
    more similar y+ and y− are the more ln πθ (y+ |x) tends to decrease.

  • Identifying sources of likelihood displacement. Based on our analysis, we derive a (model-
    aware) measure of similarity between preferences, called the centered hidden embedding simi-
    larity (CHES) score (Definition 2). We demonstrate that the CHES score accurately identifies
    which training samples contribute most to likelihood displacement in a given dataset (e.g., Ul-
    traFeedback (Cui et al., 2024) and AlpacaFarm (Dubois et al., 2024)), whereas other similarity
    measures relying on hidden embeddings or token-level cues do not (Section 5).

  • Unintentional unalignment due to likelihood displacement. To demonstrate the potential
    uses of the CHES score, we consider training a language model to refuse unsafe prompts via
    direct preference learning (Section 6). We find that likelihood displacement can unintentionally
    unalign the model, by causing probability mass to shift from preferred refusal responses to re-
    sponses that comply with unsafe prompts! For example, the refusal rate of Llama-3-8B-Instruct
    drops from 74.4% to 33.4% over the SORRY-Bench dataset (Xie et al., 2024b). We then show
    that filtering out samples with a high CHES score prevents such unintentional unalignment, and
    does so more effectively than adding a supervised finetuning term to the loss (e.g., as done in
    Pal et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024a); Pang et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2024)).

Overall, our results highlight the importance of curating data with sufficiently distinct preferences.
We believe the CHES score introduced by our theory may prove valuable in achieving this goal.
Related work. We discuss related work throughout and defer a concentrated account to Appendix A.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     P RELIMINARIES

Let V be a vocabulary of tokens. Modern language models consist of two parts: (i) a neural network
(e.g., Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)) that intakes a sequence of tokens x ∈ V ∗ and produces a
hidden embedding hx ∈ Rd ; and (ii) a token unembedding matrix W ∈ R|V|×d that converts the
hidden embedding into logits. The logits are then passed through a softmax to compute a distribution
over tokens that can follow x. For assigning probabilities to sequences y ∈ V ∗ , a language model πθ
operates autoregressively, i.e.:
                             Y|y|                           Y|y|
                πθ (y|x) =             πθ (yk |x, y<k ) =           softmax Whx,y<k y ,                   (1)
                                 k=1                          k=1                         k


where θ stands for the model’s parameters (i.e. the parameters of the neural network and the unem-
bedding matrix W), and y<k denotes the first k − 1 tokens of y.

2.1   D IRECT P REFERENCE L EARNING

Preference data. We consider the widely adopted direct preference learning pipeline, which relies
on pairwise comparisons (cf. Rafailov et al. (2023)). Specifically, we assume access to a preference
dataset D containing samples (x, y+ , y− ), where x is a prompt, y+ is a preferred response to x,
and y− is a dispreferred response to x. The preferred and dispreferred responses can be obtained by
generating two candidate responses from the model (i.e. on-policy), and labeling them via human or
AI raters (cf. Ouyang et al. (2022); Bai et al. (2022b)). Alternatively, they can be taken from some
static dataset (i.e. off-policy). Our analysis and experiments capture both cases.
Supervised finetuning (SFT). Preference learning typically includes an initial SFT phase, in which
the model is finetuned via the standard cross-entropy loss. The sequences used for SFT can either be
independent of the preference dataset D (Touvron et al., 2023) or consist of prompts and preferred
responses from D, i.e. of {(x, y+ ) : (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D} (Rafailov et al., 2023).
Preference learning loss. Aligning language models based on pairwise preferences is usually done
by minimizing a loss of the following form:
                                        h                                     i
               L(θ) := E(x,y+ ,y− )∼D ℓx,y+ ,y− ln πθ (y+ |x) − ln πθ (y− |x) ,               (2)

where ℓx,y+ ,y− : R → R≥0 is convex and differentiable, for every (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D. Denote by θinit
the parameters of the model prior to minimizing the loss L. To guarantee that minimizing L entails
increasing the difference between ln πθ (y+ |x) and ln πθ (y− |x), as expected from a reasonable
preference learning loss, we make the mild assumption that ℓx,y+ ,y− is monotonically decreasing in
a neighborhood of ln πθinit (y+ |x) − ln πθinit (y− |x).
The loss L generalizes many existing losses, including: DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), IPO (Azar
et al., 2024), SLiC (Zhao et al., 2023), REBEL (Gao et al., 2024), and GPO (Tang et al., 2024) —
see Appendix D for details on the choice of ℓx,y+ ,y− corresponding to each loss.2 Notably, the
common dependence on a reference model is abstracted through ℓx,y+ ,y− . Other loss variants apply
different weightings to the log probabilities of preferred and dispreferred responses or incorporate
an additional SFT regularization term (e.g., DPOP (Pal et al., 2024), CPO (Xu et al., 2024a), RPO
(Liu et al., 2024), BoNBoN (Gui et al., 2024), and SimPO (Meng et al., 2024)). For conciseness, we
defer an extension of our analysis for these variants to Appendix G.

2.2   L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT

We define likelihood displacement as the phenomenon where, although the preference learning loss
is steadily minimized, the log probabilities of preferred responses decrease.
Definition 1. Let πθinit and πθfin denote a language model before and after training with a prefer-
ence learning loss L over the dataset D (Equation (2)), respectively, and suppose that the loss was

    2
      For SLiC and GPO, the corresponding ℓx,y+ ,y− is differentiable almost everywhere, as opposed to differ-
entiable. Our analysis applies to such losses up to minor adaptations excluding non-differentiable points.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                Tokens Increasing Most in Probability
                          +        −         +
        Model         y        y       πθ (y |x) Decrease          Benign              Catastrophic
                      Yes      No      0.69 (0.96 → 0.27)          Yes, yes                —
        OLMo-1B
                      No      Never    0.84 (0.85 → 0.01)            No               Yes, Yes, yes
                      Yes      No      0.22 (0.99 → 0.77)          Yes, yes                 —
        Gemma-2B
                      No      Never    0.21 (0.65 → 0.44)          no, No                yes, Yeah
                      Yes      No      0.96 (0.99 → 0.03)       yes, yes, Yes              —
        Llama-3-8B
                      Sure     Yes     0.59 (0.98 → 0.39)         sure, Sure        Maybe, No, Never

Table 1: Likelihood displacement can be catastrophic, even when training on a single prompt with single
token responses. Each model was trained via DPO on a randomly chosen prompt from the Persona dataset
(Perez et al., 2022), using different pairs of preferred and dispreferred tokens (y+ , y− ) (as detailed in Sec-
tion 3). We report the largest decrease in the preferred token probability πθ (y+ |x) during training for repre-
sentative (y+ , y− ) pairs, averaged across ten runs differing in the chosen prompt. On the right are notable
tokens whose probabilities increase at the expense of y+ , categorized into benign or catastrophic according to
whether they have a meaning similar to or distinct from y+ , respectively (a preceding “ ” stands for a whites-
pace; see Appendix J.1 for the full list and extents of increase). Remarkably, when y+ and y− are similar in
meaning, the tokens increasing most in probability are often opposite in meaning to y+ .


successfully reduced, i.e. L(θfin ) < L(θinit ). We say that likelihood displacement occurred if:3
             1 X                                 +        1 X
                                   ln π θ fin
                                              (y   |x) <                    ln πθinit (y+ |x) ;
            |D|    (x,y+ ,y− )∈D                         |D|  (x,y+ ,y− )∈D

and that likelihood displacement occurred for (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D if ln πθfin (y+ |x) < ln πθinit (y+ |x).
Likelihood displacement is not necessarily problematic. For (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, we refer to it as
benign if the responses increasing in probability are as preferable as y+ (e.g., they are similar in
meaning to y+ ). However, as Section 3 demonstrates, the probability mass can go to responses that
are substantially less preferable than y+ (e.g., they are opposite in meaning to y+ ), in which case
we say it is catastrophic.

3       C ATASTROPHIC L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT IN S IMPLE S ETTINGS
Despite the prevalence of likelihood displacement (Pal et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Pang et al.,
2024; Rafailov et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2024), there is limited understanding as to why it occurs and
where the probability mass goes. Prior work attributed this phenomenon to limitations in model ca-
pacity (Tajwar et al., 2024), the presence of multiple training samples or output tokens (Tajwar et al.,
2024; Pal et al., 2024), and the initial SFT phase (Rafailov et al., 2024b). In contrast, we demon-
strate that likelihood displacement can occur and be catastrophic independently of these factors, even
when training over just a single prompt whose responses contain a single token each. The potential
adverse effects of such displacement raise the need to formally characterize its underlying causes.
Setting. The experiments are based on the Persona dataset (Perez et al., 2022), in which every
prompt contains a statement, and the model needs to respond whether it agrees with the statement
using a single token. We assign to each prompt a pair of preferred and dispreferred tokens (y+ , y− )
from a predetermined set containing, e.g., Yes, Sure, No, and Never. Then, for the OLMo-1B,
Gemma-2B, and Llama-3-8B models, we perform one epoch of SFT using the preferred tokens as
labels, in line with common practices, and train each model via DPO on a single randomly selected
prompt. See Appendix K.1 for additional details.
Likelihood displacement is pervasive and can be catastrophic. Table 1 reports the decrease in
preferred token probability, and notable tokens whose probabilities increase at the expense of y+ .
The probability of y+ dropped by at least 0.21 and up to 0.96 absolute value in all runs. Remarkably,
when y+ and y− are similar in meaning, the probability mass often shifts to tokens with meanings
opposite to y+ . Appendix J.1 reports similar findings for experiments using: (i) base models that
did not undergo an initial SFT phase (Table 2); or (ii) IPO instead of DPO (Table 3).
    3
     Note that ln πθ (y+ |x) can decrease even as the loss L is minimized, since minimizing L only requires
increasing the gap between ln πθ (y+ |x) and ln πθ (y− |x).


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4         T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT

To uncover what causes likelihood displacement when minimizing a preference learning loss, we
characterize how the log probabilities of responses evolve during gradient-based training. For a
preference sample (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, we identify the factors pushing ln πθ (y+ |x) downwards and
those determining which responses increase most in log probability instead. Section 4.1 lays out the
technical approach, after which Section 4.2 gives an overview of the main results. The full analysis
is deferred to Appendix F. For the convenience of the reader, we provide the main takeaways below.

      Takeaway 1: Role of the Token Unembedding Geometry (Section 4.2.1)

      Even when training over just a single prompt whose responses y+ and y− contain a sin-
      gle token, likelihood displacement can occur due to the token unembedding geometry. The
      underlying causes are: (i) an alignment between the preferred and dispreferred token un-
      embeddings, measured as ⟨Wy+ , Wy− ⟩; and (ii) tokens whose unembeddings align with
      Wy+ − Wy− , which increase in log probability at the expense of y+ . Since Wy+ − Wy−
      can have a large component orthogonal to Wy+ (introduced by Wy− ), and unembeddings
      often linearly encode semantics, this provides an explanation for why probability mass can
      go to tokens unrelated or opposite in meaning to y+ (as observed empirically in Section 3).


      Takeaway 2: Role of the Hidden Embedding Geometry (Section 4.2.2)
      Besides the impact of the token unembedding geometry (Takeaway 1), likelihood displace-
      ment occurs when the preferred and dispreferred responses are similar according to the fol-
      lowing measure, which is based on their hidden embeddings.
      Definition 2. For a preference sample (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, we define the centered hidden
      embedding similarity (CHES) score of y+ and y− with respect to a model πθ by:
                                D X|y+ |           X|y− |          E     X|y+ |           2
          CHESx (y+ , y− ) :=            hx,y+ ,       ′
                                                           hx,y− ′ −             hx,y+      ,
                                  | k=1{z      } | k =1{z
                                              <k               <k
                                                                 }
                                                                             k=1     <k

                                   y+ hidden embeddings y− hidden embeddings

      where hx,z<k denotes the hidden embedding that the model produces given x and the first
      k − 1 tokens of z ∈ V ∗ . A higher CHES score stands for more similar preferences. We omit
      the dependence of CHES on πθ in our notation as it will be clear from context.


Losses with SFT regularization. Appendix G extends our analysis to losses incorporating an SFT
regularization term. In particular, it formalizes how this modification helps mitigate likelihood dis-
placement, as proposed in Pal et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2024); Pang et al. (2024); Gui et al. (2024). We
note, however, that our experiments in Section 6 reveal a limitation of this approach for mitigating
the adverse effects of likelihood displacement, compared to improving the data curation pipeline.

4.1       T ECHNICAL A PPROACH

Given a prompt x, the probability that the model πθ assigns to a response z is determined by the
hidden embeddings hx , hx,z<2 , . . . , hx,z<|z| and the token unembeddings W (Equation (1)). Our
analysis relies on tracking their evolution when minimizing the loss L (Equation (2)). To do so,
we adopt the unconstrained features model (Mixon et al., 2022), which amounts to treating hidden
embeddings as directly trainable parameters. Formally, the trainable parameters are taken to be
θ = {hz : z ∈ V ∗ } ∪ {W}. This simplification has proven useful for studying various deep learning
phenomena, including neural collapse (e.g., Zhu et al. (2021); Ji et al. (2022); Tirer et al. (2023)) and
the benefits of language model pretraining for downstream tasks (Saunshi et al., 2021). As verified
in Sections 5 and 6, it also allows extracting salient sources of likelihood displacement in practice.4
      4
      In contrast to prior theoretical analyses of likelihood displacement, which consider simpler settings, such
as linear models and cases where the preferred and dispreferrred responses differ only by a single token (Pal
et al., 2024; Fisch et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024b; Ren and Sutherland, 2024).


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Language model finetuning is typically done with small learning rates. Accordingly, we analyze the
training dynamics of (stochastic) gradient descent at the small learning rate limit, i.e. gradient flow:
                                  d
                                     θ(t) = −∇L(θ(t)) , t ≥ 0 ,
                                  dt
where θ(t) denotes the parameters at time t ≥ 0 of training. Note that under gradient flow the loss
is monotonically decreasing.5 Thus, any reduction in the log probabilities of preferred responses
constitutes likelihood displacement (cf. Definition 1).

4.2        OVERVIEW OF THE M AIN R ESULTS

4.2.1         S INGLE T RAINING S AMPLE AND O UTPUT T OKEN
It is instructive to first consider the case of training on a single sample (x, y+ , y− ), whose responses
y+ ∈ V and y− ∈ V contain a single token. Theorem 1 characterizes how the token unembedding
                                 d
geometry determines when dt        ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) is negative, i.e. when likelihood displacement occurs.
Theorem 1 (Informal version of Theorem 4). Suppose that the dataset D contains a single sample
(x, y+ , y− ), with y+ ∈ V and y− ∈ V each being a single token. At any time t ≥ 0 of training,
 d             +
dt ln πθ(t) (y |x) is more negative the larger the following term is:
                                   X
        Wy+ (t), Wy− (t) +                            πθ(t) (z|x) · Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)           ,
      |         {z          }          z∈V\{y+ ,y− }                  |            {z             }
 preferences unembedding alignment                                    alignment of other token with Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)

where Wz (t) denotes the token unembedding of z ∈ V at time t.
Two terms govern the extent of likelihood displacement in the case of single token responses. First,
⟨Wy+ (t), Wy− (t)⟩ formalizes the intuition that likelihood displacement occurs when the preferred
and dispreferred responses are similar. A higher inner product in unembedding space translates to a
more substantial (instantaneous) decrease in ln πθ(t) (y+ |x). Second, is a term which measures the
alignment of other token unembeddings with Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t), where tokens deemed more likely
by the model have a larger weight. The alignment of token unembeddings with Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
also determines which tokens increase most in log probability.
Theorem 2 (Informal version of Theorem 5). Under the setting of Theorem 1, for any time t ≥ 0 of
training and token z ∈ V \{y+ , y− } it holds that dt
                                                   d
                                                      ln πθ(t) (z|x) ∝ Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) ,
up to an additive term independent of z.
The direction Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) can be decomposed into its projection onto Wy+ (t) and a com-
ponent orthogonal to Wy+ (t), introduced by Wy− (t). Thus, tokens increasing in log probability
can have unembeddings that mostly align with directions orthogonal to Wy+ (t), especially when
the component orthogonal to Wy+ (t) of Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) is relatively large (which we often
find to be the case empirically; see Table 13 in Appendix J.1). Given that token unembeddings are
known to linearly encode semantics (Mikolov et al., 2013; Arora et al., 2016; Park et al., 2024), this
provides an explanation for why the probability mass can shift to tokens that are unrelated or oppo-
site in meaning to the preferred token, i.e. why likelihood displacement can be catastrophic even in
simple settings (as observed in Section 3).

4.2.2         R ESPONSES WITH M ULTIPLE T OKENS
We now extend our analysis to the typical case where responses are sequences of tokens. As shown
below, the existence of multiple tokens in each response introduces a dependence on their (contex-
tual) hidden embeddings.
Theorem 3 (Informal version of Theorem 6). Suppose that the dataset D contains a single sample
(x, y+ , y− ), with y+ ∈ V ∗ and y− ∈ V ∗ . At any time t ≥ 0 of training, in addition to the
                                                                d
dependence on token unembeddings identified in Theorem 1, dt       ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) is more negative the
larger the following term is:
    |y+ | |y− |                                   E |y
                                                       +   +
    XX                     D                         X| |y
                                                         X|                D                       E
                 −                                             +
                αk,k′ (t) · hx,y+ (t), hx,y− ′ (t) −          αk,k ′ (t) ·   hx,y+ (t), hx,y+ ′ (t) ,
                                <k                                               <k
    k=1 k′ =1              |         {z <k        } k=1 k′ =1              |          {z <k        }
                               preferred-dispreferred alignment                       preferred-preferred alignment
      5
          Except for the trivial case where θ(0) is a critical point of L, in which L(θ(t)) = L(θ(0)) for all t ≥ 0.


                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         −          +
where hz (t) denotes the hidden embedding of z ∈ V ∗ at time t, and αk,k    ′ (t), αk,k ′ (t) ∈ [−2, 2]

are coefficients determined by the model’s next-token distributions for prefixes of y+ and y− (see
Theorem 6 in Appendix F.2 for their definition).

Theorem 3 establishes that the inner products between hidden embeddings, of both the “preferred-
dispreferred” and “preferred-preferred” types, affect likelihood displacement. A larger inner product
leads to an upwards or downwards push on ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), depending on the sign of the corre-
             −            +
sponding αk,k   ′ (t) or αk,k ′ (t) coefficient. Empirically, we find that these coefficients are mostly
positive across models and datasets; e.g., the OLMo-1B, Gemma-2B, and Llama-3-8B models and
the UltraFeedback and AlpacaFarm datasets (see Appendix J.2 for details). By accordingly setting
all coefficients in Theorem 3 to one, we derive the centered hidden embedding similarity (CHES)
score between preferred and dispreferred responses (Definition 2). Our analysis indicates that a
higher CHES score implies more severe likelihood displacement. Section 5 empirically verifies
this relation, and demonstrates that the CHES score is significantly more predictive of likelihood
displacement than other plausible similarity measures.
Our analysis also provides insight into which responses increase most in probability at the expense
                                                                       d
of y+ . Theorem 7 in Appendix F.2 derives the dependence of dt           ln πθ(t) (z|x), for any response
z ∈ V ∗ , on the alignment of its hidden embeddings with those of y+ and y− . However, in general
settings, it is difficult to qualitatively describe the types of responses increasing in probability, and
whether they constitute benign or catastrophic likelihood displacement. Section 6 thus demonstrates
the (harmful) implications of likelihood displacement in settings where responses can be easily
categorized into benign or catastrophic. We regard studying the question of where the probability
mass goes in additional settings as a promising direction for future work.

4.2.3       M ULTIPLE T RAINING S AMPLES
Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 showed that likelihood displacement may occur regardless of the dataset
size. Nonetheless, increasing the number of training samples was empirically observed to exacer-
bate it (Tajwar et al., 2024). Appendix F.3 sheds light on this observation by characterizing, for any
(x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, when additional training samples lead to a larger decrease in ln πθ(t) (y+ |x). This
unsurprisingly occurs when y+ appears as the dispreferred response of other prompts, i.e. there are
contradicting samples. We further establish that additional training samples can contribute nega-
          d
tively to dt ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) even when their preferences are distinct from those of x.


5       I DENTIFYING S OURCES OF L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT

In Section 4 we derived the CHES score (Definition 2), which for a given model and preference
sample (x, y+ , y− ), measures the similarity of y+ and y− based on their hidden embeddings. Our
theory indicates that samples with a higher CHES score lead to more likelihood displacement. Be-
low, we affirm this prediction and show that the CHES score enables identifying which training
samples in a dataset contribute most to likelihood displacement, whereas alternative similarity mea-
sures fail to do so. The following Section 6 then demonstrates that filtering out samples with a high
CHES score can mitigate undesirable implications of likelihood displacement.
Setting. We use the UltraFeedback and AlpacaFarm datasets and the OLMo-1B, Gemma-2B, and
Llama-3-8B models. For every preference dataset and model, we compute the CHES scores of all
samples. This requires performing a single forward pass over the dataset. Then, for each of the 0th,
25th, 50th, 75th, and 100th score percentiles, we take a subset of 512 samples centered around it.6
Lastly, we train the model via DPO on each subset separately, and track the change in log probability
for preferred responses in the subset — the more the log probabilities decrease, the more severe the
likelihood displacement is. See Appendix K.2 for further details.
Baselines. Preferences with low (normalized) edit distance were suggested in Pal et al. (2024) as
a cause for likelihood displacement. Thus, we repeat the process outlined above while ranking the
similarity of preferences using the (normalized) edit distance, where a lower edit distance between
y+ and y− corresponds to a higher similarity. To the best of our knowledge, no other property of
a preference sample was linked with likelihood displacement in the literature. So we additionally
    6
        The 0th and 100th percentile subsets include the 512 samples with lowest and highest scores, respectively.


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: CHES score (Definition 2) identifies which training samples contribute to likelihood displace-
ment, whereas alternative similarity measures do not. Each model was trained via DPO on subsets of 512
samples from the UltraFeedback dataset. The subsets are centered around different preference similarity per-
centiles, according to the following measures: (i) the CHES score; (ii) (normalized) edit distance, which was
suggested in Pal et al. (2024) as indicative of likelihood displacement; and (iii) the inner product between the
last hidden embeddings of the preferred and dispreferred responses (see Section 5 for further details). We report
for each subset the change in mean preferred response log probability, averaged across three runs (error bars
denote minimal and maximal values). The CHES score ranking perfectly matches with the degree of likelihood
displacement — subsets with a higher score percentile induce a larger log probability decrease. On the other
hand, the alternative measures are not indicative of likelihood displacement.


compare to a natural candidate: using the inner product between the last hidden embeddings of y+
and y− , i.e. ⟨hx,y+ , hx,y− ⟩, as the similarity score.
CHES score effectively identifies samples leading to likelihood displacement. For the Ultra-
Feedback dataset, Figure 2 shows the change in mean preferred response log probability against
the similarity percentile of samples. Across all models, the CHES score ranking matches perfectly
the degree of likelihood displacement: the higher the CHES score percentile, the more preferred
responses decrease in log probability. Moreover, training on samples with high CHES scores leads
to severe likelihood displacement, whereas training on samples with low CHES scores leads the
preferred responses to increase in log probability.
CHES score is more indicative of likelihood displacement than alternative measures. In con-
trast to the CHES score, the edit distance of preferences and the inner product between their last
hidden embeddings are not indicative of likelihood displacement. Moreover, these measures failed
to identify samples leading to likelihood displacement: for almost all similarity percentiles, the mean
preferred response log probability increased, with the few exceptional decreases being minor.
Additional experiments. Appendix J.3 reports similar findings for experiments using: (i) the Al-
pacaFarm dataset instead of UltraFeedback (Figure 5); (ii) IPO instead of DPO (Figure 6); or (iii)
the OLMo-1B model (Figure 7).
Qualitative analysis. Appendix J.3 further includes representative samples with high and low CHES
scores (Tables 14 and 15, respectively). A noticeable trait is that, in samples with a high CHES score,
the dispreferred response is often longer than the preferred response, whereas for samples with a low
CHES score the trend is reversed (i.e. preferred responses are longer). We find that this stems from
a tendency of current models to produce, for different responses, hidden embeddings with a positive
inner product (e.g., over 99% of such inner products are positive for the Llama-3-8B model and
UltraFeedback dataset). As a result, for samples with longer dispreferred responses the CHES score
comprises more positive terms than negative terms.


6    U NINTENTIONAL U NALIGNMENT IN D IRECT P REFERENCE L EARNING

Direct preference learning has been successfully applied for improving general instruction following
and performance on downstream benchmarks (e.g., Tunstall et al. (2023); Ivison et al. (2023); Jiang
et al. (2024); Dubey et al. (2024)). This suggests that likelihood displacement may often be benign
in such settings, and so does not require mitigation. However, in this section, we reveal that it can un-
dermine the efficacy of safety alignment. When training a language model to refuse unsafe prompts,
we find that likelihood displacement can unintentionally unalign the model, by causing probability
mass to shift from preferred refusal responses to harmful responses. We then demonstrate that this
undesirable outcome can be prevented by discarding samples with a high (length-normalized) CHES


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


score (Definition 2), showcasing the potential of the CHES score for mitigating adverse effects of
likelihood displacement.

6.1    S ETTING

We train a language model to refuse unsafe prompts via the (on-policy) direct preference learning
pipeline outlined in Rafailov et al. (2023), as specified below. To account for the common scenario
whereby one wishes to further align an existing (moderately) aligned model, we use the Gemma-
2B-IT and Llama-3-8B-Instruct models.7 Then, for each model separately, we create a preference
dataset based on unsafe prompts from SORRY-Bench (Xie et al., 2024b). Specifically, for every
prompt, we generate two candidate responses from the model and label them as refusals or non-
refusals using the judge model from Xie et al. (2024b). Refusals are deemed more preferable com-
pared to non-refusals, and ties are broken by the PairRM reward model (Jiang et al., 2023).8 Lastly,
we partition the datasets into training and test sets according to a 85%/15% split, and train the lan-
guage models via DPO over their respective training sets. For brevity, we defer to Appendices J
and K some experiments using IPO and implementation details, respectively.

6.2    C ATASTROPHIC L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT C AUSES U NINTENTIONAL U NALIGNMENT

Since the initial models are moderately aligned, we find that they often generate two refusal re-
sponses for a given prompt. Specifically, for over 70% of the prompts in the generated datasets, both
the preferred and dispreferred responses are refusals. This situation resembles the experiments of
Section 3, where training on similar preferences led to catastrophic likelihood displacement (e.g.,
when y+ was No and y− was Never, the probability of Yes sharply increased).
Analogously, we observe that as the DPO loss is minimized, likelihood displacement causes proba-
bility mass to shift away from preferred refusal responses (Table 16 in Appendix J.4 reports the log
probability decrease of preferred responses). This leads to a significant drop in refusal rates. Specifi-
cally, over the training sets, DPO makes the refusal rates of Gemma-2B-IT and Llama-3-8B-Instruct
drop from 80.5% to 54.8% and 74.4% to 33.4%, respectively (similar drops occur over the test sets).
In other words, instead of further aligning the model, preference learning unintentionally unaligns
it. See Appendix J.4 for examples of unsafe prompts from the training sets, for which initially the
models generated two refusals, yet after DPO they comply with the prompts (Table 18).
We note that alignment usually involves a tradeoff between safety and helpfulness. The drop in
refusal rates is particularly striking since the models are trained with the sole purpose of refusing
prompts, without any attempt to maintain their helpfulness.

6.3    F ILTERING DATA VIA CHES S CORE M ITIGATES U NINTENTIONAL U NALIGNMENT

Section 5 showed that samples with a high CHES score (Definition 2) contribute most to likelihood
displacement. Motivated by this, we explore whether filtering data via the CHES score can mitigate
unintentional unalignment, and which types of samples it marks as problematic.
As discussed in Section 5, due to the embedding geometry of current models, CHES scores can
correlate with the lengths of responses. To avoid introducing a length bias when filtering data, we
apply a length-normalized variant of CHES (see Definition 3 in Appendix C). For comparison, we
also consider adding an SFT term to the DPO loss, as suggested in Pal et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024a);
Pang et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2024), and training over “gold” responses from SORRY-Bench, which
were generated from a diverse set of base and safety aligned models and labeled by human raters.
Filtering data via CHES score mitigates unintentional unalignment. Figure 3 reports the refusal
rates before and after training via DPO: (i) on the original dataset, which as stated in Section 6.2
leads to a substantial drop in refusal rates; (ii) with an additional SFT term on the original dataset;
(iii) on the gold dataset; and (iv) on a filtered version of the original dataset that contains the 5%
samples with lowest length-normalized CHES scores.9 Filtering data via the CHES score success-
     7
       The scenario of further aligning an existing moderately aligned model also arises in iterative direct prefer-
ence learning pipelines (Yuan et al., 2024; Xiong et al., 2024; Pang et al., 2024).
     8
       Breaking ties randomly between responses of the same type led to similar results.
     9
       Keeping up to 15% of the original samples led to analogous results. Beyond that, as when training on the
full dataset, likelihood displacement caused refusal rates to drop.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                         Initial     DPO + SFT         DPO (filtered)                                       0
                         DPO         DPO (gold)


                                                                          Length-Normalized CHES Ranking
                                                                                                           50
                   100                                                                                     100


                                                                                                                                                 262/370 (71%)
                                                                                                                                  73/370 (20%)
                                                                                                                 35/370 (9%)
Refusal Rate (%)   80                                                                                      150
                                                                                                           200
                   60
                                                                                                           250
                   40
                                                                                                           300
                   20                                                                                      350
                    0                                                                                                    One of      Two                 Two
                             Gemma-2B-IT      Llama-3-8B-Instruct                                                         Each    Non-Refusals          Refusals

Figure 3: Likelihood displacement can cause uninten-                     Figure 4: Length-normalized CHES score
tional unalignment, which is mitigated by data filtering.                identifies samples with two responses of the
Training a model to refuse unsafe prompts from SORRY-                    same type as responsible for likelihood dis-
Bench via DPO unintentionally leads to a substantial de-                 placement. For Llama-3-8B-Instruct, we take
crease in refusal rates due to likelihood displacement. Fil-             the corresponding SORRY-Bench training pref-
tering out samples with a high length-normalized CHES                    erence dataset (see Section 6.1 for details on the
score (⋆) or using “gold” preference data, generated from a              dataset creation process), and plot the ranking
diverse set of models, successfully mitigates the problem,               of samples according to their length-normalized
and goes beyond the improvement achieved when adding                     CHES scores. Gray line marks the 5% sam-
an SFT term to the DPO loss. Reported are the refusal rates              ples included in the filtered dataset of Figure 3.
over the training sets, averaged across three runs (error bars           Agreeing with intuition, samples with two re-
denote minimal and maximal values). Results over the test                fusal or two non-refusal responses tend to have
sets were similar. See Section 6 for further details.                    a higher score than samples with one of each.



fully mitigates unintentional unalignment. Moreover, while adding an SFT term to the loss also
prevents the drop in refusal rates, data filtering boosts the refusal rates more substantially. We fur-
ther find that DPO on gold preferences does not suffer from likelihood displacement or unintentional
unalignment (i.e. the preferred responses increase in log probability; see Table 16). Overall, these
results highlight the importance of curating data with sufficiently distinct preferences for effective
preference learning.
Which samples have a high CHES score? Figure 4 reveals that the length-normalized CHES score
ranking falls in line with intuition — samples with two refusal or two non-refusal responses tend
to have a higher score than samples with one of each, and so are more likely to cause likelihood
displacement. To confirm that both samples with two refusal responses and samples with two non-
refusals are responsible for the drop in refusal rates (shown in Figure 3), we trained the Gemma-
2B-IT and Llama-3-8B-Instruct models via DPO on each type of samples separately. In both cases,
likelihood displacement occurred and the refusal rates dropped as when training on the full dataset.


7                  C ONCLUSION

While direct preference learning has been widely adopted, there is considerable uncertainty around
how it affects the model (cf. Xu et al. (2024b); Chen et al. (2024)). Our theory and experiments shed
light on the causes and implications of one counterintuitive phenomenon — likelihood displacement.
We demonstrated that likelihood displacement can be catastrophic, shifting probability mass from
preferred responses to responses with an opposite meaning, which can result in unintentional un-
alignment when training a language model to refuse unsafe prompts. Intuitively, these failures arise
when the preferred and dispreferred responses are similar. We formalized this intuition and derived
the centered hidden embedding similarity (CHES) score (Definition 2), which effectively identifies
samples contributing to likelihood displacement in a given dataset. As an example of its potential
uses, we showed that filtering out samples with a high (length-normalized) CHES score can prevent
unintentional unalignment. More broadly, our work highlights the importance of curating data with
sufficiently distinct preferences. We believe the CHES score introduced by our theory may prove
valuable in achieving this goal.
Due to lack of space, we defer to Appendix B a discussion of limitations and future work.


                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Eshbal Hezroni for aid in preparing illustrative figures, Angelica Chen, Tianyu Gao, and
Mengzhou Xia for providing feedback on this paper, and Yi Ren for insightful discussions. NR is
supported in part by the Zuckerman STEM Leadership Program. SM and SA acknowledge funding
from NSF, ONR, Simons Foundation, and DARPA. AB gratefully acknowledges the support of a
Hisashi and Masae Kobayashi*67 Fellowship. DC is supported by the National Science Foundation
(IIS-2211779) and a Sloan Research Fellowship. BH is supported by a 2024 Sloan Fellowship in
Mathematics, NSF CAREER grant DMS-2143754, and NSF grants DMS-1855684, DMS-2133806.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo
   Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Sanjeev Arora, Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. A latent variable model approach
  to pmi-based word embeddings. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 4:385–399,
  2016.

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal Valko,
 and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human preferences.
 In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav
  Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement
  learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen,
  Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feed-
  back. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.

Shicong Cen, Jincheng Mei, Katayoon Goshvadi, Hanjun Dai, Tong Yang, Sherry Yang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Yuejie Chi, and Bo Dai. Value-incentivized preference optimization: A unified approach to online and
  offline rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19320, 2024.

Angelica Chen, Sadhika Malladi, Lily H Zhang, Xinyi Chen, Qiuyi Zhang, Rajesh Ranganath, and Kyunghyun
  Cho. Preference learning algorithms do not learn preference rankings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19534,
  2024.

Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and
  Maosong Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with high-quality feedback. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
  Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Yann Dubois, Chen Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos Guestrin,
  Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for methods that learn
  from human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model alignment
  as prospect theoretic optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Duanyu Feng, Bowen Qin, Chen Huang, Zheng Zhang, and Wenqiang Lei. Towards analyzing and understand-
  ing the limitations of dpo: A theoretical perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04626, 2024.

Adam Fisch, Jacob Eisenstein, Vicky Zayats, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Chirag Nagpal, Pete Shaw,
  and Jonathan Berant. Robust preference optimization through reward model distillation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.19316, 2024.

Zhaolin Gao, Jonathan D Chang, Wenhao Zhan, Owen Oertell, Gokul Swamy, Kianté Brantley, Thorsten
  Joachims, J Andrew Bagnell, Jason D Lee, and Wen Sun. Rebel: Reinforcement learning via regressing
  relative rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16767, 2024.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Pete Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord, Ananya Harsh Jha,
  Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, et al. Olmo: Accelerating the science of language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00838, 2024.
Lin Gui, Cristina Gârbacea, and Victor Veitch. Bonbon alignment for large language models and the sweetness
  of best-of-n sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00832, 2024.
Luxi He, Mengzhou Xia, and Peter Henderson. What’s in your” safe” data?: Identifying benign data that breaks
  safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01099, 2024.
Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. Neural networks for machine learning lecture 6a
  overview of mini-batch gradient descent. Cited on, 14(8):2, 2012.
Jiwoo Hong, Noah Lee, and James Thorne. Reference-free monolithic preference optimization with odds ratio.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07691, 2024.
Audrey Huang, Wenhao Zhan, Tengyang Xie, Jason D Lee, Wen Sun, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Dylan J
  Foster. Correcting the mythos of kl-regularization: Direct alignment without overparameterization via chi-
  squared preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13399, 2024.
Shawn Im and Yixuan Li.        On the generalization of preference learning with dpo.         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.03459, 2024a.
Shawn Im and Yixuan Li. Understanding the learning dynamics of alignment with human feedback. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b.
Hamish Ivison, Yizhong Wang, Valentina Pyatkin, Nathan Lambert, Matthew Peters, Pradeep Dasigi, Joel Jang,
  David Wadden, Noah A Smith, Iz Beltagy, et al. Camels in a changing climate: Enhancing lm adaptation
  with tulu 2. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10702, 2023.
Wenlong Ji, Yiping Lu, Yiliang Zhang, Zhun Deng, and Weijie J Su. An unconstrained layer-peeled perspective
  on neural collapse. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, De-
  vendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al. Mixtral of experts.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models with pairwise
  ranking and generative fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02561, 2023.
Zhihan Liu, Miao Lu, Shenao Zhang, Boyi Liu, Hongyi Guo, Yingxiang Yang, Jose Blanchet, and Zhaoran
  Wang. Provably mitigating overoptimization in rlhf: Your sft loss is implicitly an adversarial regularizer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16436, 2024.
Kaifeng Lyu, Haoyu Zhao, Xinran Gu, Dingli Yu, Anirudh Goyal, and Sanjeev Arora. Keeping llms aligned
  after fine-tuning: The crucial role of prompt templates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18540, 2024.
Chao Ma, Lei Wu, et al. A qualitative study of the dynamic behavior for adaptive gradient algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2009.06125, 2020.
Sadhika Malladi, Alexander Wettig, Dingli Yu, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. A kernel-based view of
  language model fine-tuning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 23610–23641, 2023.
Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. Simpo: Simple preference optimization with a reference-free
  reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14734, 2024.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed representations of words
  and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Dustin G Mixon, Hans Parshall, and Jianzong Pi. Neural collapse with unconstrained features. Sampling
  Theory, Signal Processing, and Data Analysis, 20(2):11, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
  Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with
  human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
Arka Pal, Deep Karkhanis, Samuel Dooley, Manley Roberts, Siddartha Naidu, and Colin White. Smaug: Fixing
  failure modes of preference optimisation with dpo-positive. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13228, 2024.
Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Weizhe Yuan, Kyunghyun Cho, He He, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Jason Weston.
  Iterative reasoning preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19733, 2024.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry of large
  language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Zeming Lin,
  Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in pytorch. In NIPS-W, 2017.

Kellin Pelrine, Mohammad Taufeeque, Michał Zajac, Euan McLean, and Adam Gleave. Exploiting novel gpt-4
  apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14302, 2023.

Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig Pettit, Catherine
  Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, et al. Discovering language model behaviors with model-written
  evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09251, 2022.

Xiangyu Qi, Yi Zeng, Tinghao Xie, Pin-Yu Chen, Ruoxi Jia, Prateek Mittal, and Peter Henderson. Fine-tuning
  aligned language models compromises safety, even when users do not intend to! In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2024.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn.
  Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

Rafael Rafailov, Yaswanth Chittepu, Ryan Park, Harshit Sikchi, Joey Hejna, Bradley Knox, Chelsea Finn,
  and Scott Niekum. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization in direct alignment algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2406.02900, 2024a.

Rafael Rafailov, Joey Hejna, Ryan Park, and Chelsea Finn. From r to Q∗ : Your language model is secretly a
  Q-function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12358, 2024b.

Rajkumar Ramamurthy, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Kianté Brantley, Jack Hessel, Rafet Sifa, Christian Bauck-
  hage, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. Is reinforcement learning (not) for natural language processing:
  Benchmarks, baselines, and building blocks for natural language policy optimization. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Noam Razin, Hattie Zhou, Omid Saremi, Vimal Thilak, Arwen Bradley, Preetum Nakkiran, Joshua M.
  Susskind, and Etai Littwin. Vanishing gradients in reinforcement finetuning of language models. In In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Yi Ren and Danica J Sutherland. Learning dynamics of llm finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10490, 2024.

Nikunj Saunshi, Sadhika Malladi, and Sanjeev Arora. A mathematical exploration of why language models help
  solve downstream tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=vVjIW3sEc1s.

Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Minghao Li, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li, and Houfeng Wang. Preference
  ranking optimization for human alignment. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 38, pages 18990–18998, 2024a.

Yuda Song, Gokul Swamy, Aarti Singh, J Andrew Bagnell, and Wen Sun. The importance of online data:
  Understanding preference fine-tuning via coverage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01462, 2024b.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario
  Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 3008–3021, 2020.

Fahim Tajwar, Anikait Singh, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Jeff Schneider, Tengyang Xie, Stefano Ermon,
  Chelsea Finn, and Aviral Kumar. Preference fine-tuning of llms should leverage suboptimal, on-policy data.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14367, 2024.

Yunhao Tang, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Zeyu Zheng, Daniele Calandriello, Rémi Munos, Mark Rowland,
  Pierre Harvey Richemond, Michal Valko, Bernardo Ávila Pires, and Bilal Piot. Generalized preference
  optimization: A unified approach to offline alignment. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.

Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak, Laurent
  Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et al. Gemma: Open models based on gemini
  research and technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295, 2024.

Tom Tirer, Haoxiang Huang, and Jonathan Niles-Weed. Perturbation analysis of neural collapse. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pages 34301–34329. PMLR, 2023.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bash-
  lykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer,
  Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cyn-
  thia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan,
  Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
  Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-
  tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein,
  Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiao-
  qing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan
  Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models, 2023.

Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes Belkada, Shengyi
  Huang, Leandro von Werra, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, et al. Zephyr: Direct distillation of lm
  alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16944, 2023.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.

Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cis-
  tac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.

Yue Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, Yiming Yang, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play preference
  optimization for language model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00675, 2024.

Tengyang Xie, Dylan J Foster, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Corby Rosset, Ahmed Awadallah, and Alexander
  Rakhlin. Exploratory preference optimization: Harnessing implicit q*-approximation for sample-efficient
  rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21046, 2024a.

Tinghao Xie, Xiangyu Qi, Yi Zeng, Yangsibo Huang, Udari Madhushani Sehwag, Kaixuan Huang, Luxi He,
   Boyi Wei, Dacheng Li, Ying Sheng, et al. Sorry-bench: Systematically evaluating large language model
   safety refusal behaviors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14598, 2024b.

Wei Xiong, Hanze Dong, Chenlu Ye, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhong, Heng Ji, Nan Jiang, and Tong Zhang. Iterative
  preference learning from human feedback: Bridging theory and practice for rlhf under kl-constraint. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Haoran Xu, Amr Sharaf, Yunmo Chen, Weiting Tan, Lingfeng Shen, Benjamin Van Durme, Kenton Murray,
  and Young Jin Kim. Contrastive preference optimization: Pushing the boundaries of llm performance in
  machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08417, 2024a.

Shusheng Xu, Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Wenjie Ye, Weilin Liu, Zhiyu Mei, Guangju Wang, Chao Yu, and Yi Wu.
  Is dpo superior to ppo for llm alignment? a comprehensive study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10719, 2024b.

Zihao Xu, Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, and Stjepan Picek. A comprehensive study of jailbreak attack
  versus defense for large language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors,
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pages 7432–7449, Bangkok, Thailand
  and virtual meeting, August 2024c. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  findings-acl.443. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.443.

Lifan Yuan, Ganqu Cui, Hanbin Wang, Ning Ding, Xingyao Wang, Jia Deng, Boji Shan, Huimin Chen, Ruob-
   ing Xie, Yankai Lin, et al. Advancing llm reasoning generalists with preference trees. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2404.02078, 2024.

Qiusi Zhan, Richard Fang, Rohan Bindu, Akul Gupta, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Daniel Kang. Removing
  RLHF protections in GPT-4 via fine-tuning. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard, editors,
  Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 681–687, Mexico City, Mex-
  ico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-short.59. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-short.59.

Shenao Zhang, Donghan Yu, Hiteshi Sharma, Ziyi Yang, Shuohang Wang, Hany Hassan, and Zhaoran
  Wang. Self-exploring language models: Active preference elicitation for online alignment. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.19332, 2024.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yao Zhao, Mikhail Khalman, Rishabh Joshi, Shashi Narayan, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu. Calibrating
  sequence likelihood improves conditional language generation. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0qSOodKmJaN.
Rui Zheng, Shihan Dou, Songyang Gao, Yuan Hua, Wei Shen, Binghai Wang, Yan Liu, Senjie Jin, Qin Liu,
  Yuhao Zhou, et al. Secrets of rlhf in large language models part i: Ppo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04964,
  2023.
Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A geometric
  analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:29820–29834, 2021.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Chris-
  tiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORK

Preference learning for language model alignment. There are two main approaches for aligning
language models based on preference data. First, RLHF (or RLAIF) (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon
et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022b), which requires fitting a reward model to a
dataset of human (or AI) preferences, and then training the language model to maximize the reward.
While often effective for improving the quality of generated responses, RLHF is computationally
expensive and can suffer from instabilities (Zheng et al., 2023; Ramamurthy et al., 2023; Razin
et al., 2024). This has led to the rise of direct preference learning, as popularized by DPO (Rafailov
et al., 2023). Our analysis supports methods that maximize the log probability ratio of preferred and
dispreferred responses (cf. Section 2.1), including DPO and many of its variants (e.g., Zhao et al.
(2023); Azar et al. (2024); Gao et al. (2024); Tang et al. (2024); Pal et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024a);
Liu et al. (2024); Gui et al. (2024); Meng et al. (2024)). Investigating whether other variants, e.g.,
those proposed in Ethayarajh et al. (2024); Hong et al. (2024); Song et al. (2024a); Wu et al. (2024),
suffer from likelihood displacement is a potential avenue for future work.
Analyses of direct preference learning. Prior work mostly established sample complexity guaran-
tees for DPO (or a variant of it) when the training data either obeys a certain stringent structure (Im
and Li, 2024a), provides sufficient coverage (Liu et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024b; Cen et al., 2024;
Huang et al., 2024), or is obtained in an online manner (Cen et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Xie
et al., 2024a). Additionally, Im and Li (2024b); Feng et al. (2024) studied the optimization rate of
DPO. More relevant to our work is Chen et al. (2024), which demonstrated that DPO can fail to
correct how a model ranks preferred and dispreferred responses. Although related, this phenomenon
is distinct from likelihood displacement. In particular, when likelihood displacement occurs the
probability of preferred responses is often higher than the probability of dispreferred responses (as
illustrated in Figure 1 and was the case in the experiments of Sections 3, 5, and 6).
Likelihood displacement. The relation of our results to existing claims regarding likelihood dis-
placement was discussed throughout the paper. We provide in Appendix E an extended account.
Jailbreaking and unalignment. Aligned language models are vulnerable to jailbreaking through
carefully designed adversarial prompts (Xu et al., 2024c). However, even when one does not intend
to unalign a given model, Pelrine et al. (2023); Qi et al. (2024); He et al. (2024); Zhan et al. (2024);
Lyu et al. (2024) showed that performing SFT over seemingly benign data can result in unalignment.
The experiments in Section 6 provide a more extreme case of unintentional unalignment. Specifi-
cally, although the models are trained with the sole purpose of refusing unsafe prompts, likelihood
displacement causes the refusal rates to drop, instead of increase.



B    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Theoretical analysis. Our theory focuses on the instantaneous change of log probabilities, and
abstracts away which neural network architecture is used for computing hidden embeddings. Future
work can extend it by studying the evolution of log probabilities throughout training and accounting
for how the architecture choice influences likelihood displacement.
Occurrences of catastrophic likelihood displacement. While our findings reveal that likelihood
displacement can make well-intentioned training result in undesirable outcomes, we do not claim
that this occurs universally. Indeed, direct preference learning methods have been successfully ap-
plied for aligning language models (Tunstall et al., 2023; Ivison et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024;
Dubey et al., 2024). Nonetheless, in light of the growing prominence of these methods, we believe
it is crucial to identify additional settings in which likelihood displacement is catastrophic.
Utility of the CHES score. We demonstrated the potential of the (length-normalized) CHES score
for filtering out samples that cause likelihood displacement. However, further investigation is nec-
essary to assess its utility more broadly. For example, exploring whether data filtering via CHES
scores improves performance in general instruction following settings, or whether CHES scores can
be useful in more complex data curation pipelines for selecting distinct preferences based on a pool
of candidate responses, possibly generated from a diverse set of models.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    L ENGTH -N ORMALIZED CHES S CORE
In Section 4 we derived the CHES score (Definition 2), which for a given model and preference sam-
ple (x, y+ , y− ), measures the similarity of y+ and y− based on their hidden embeddings. Section 5
then demonstrated on standard preference learning datasets (UltraFeedback and AlpacaFarm) that
samples with high CHES scores contribute most to likelihood displacement. However, as discussed
in Section 5, due to the embedding geometry of current models, CHES scores often correlate with
the lengths of responses. Thus, to avoid introducing a length bias when filtering data in Section 6.3,
we apply the following length-normalized variant of CHES.
Definition 3. For a preference sample (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, we define the length-normalized CHES
score of y+ and y− with respect to a model πθ by:
                           1      D X|y+ |           X|y− |            E     1    X|y+ |           2
 CHESx (y+ , y− ) := + −                    hx,y+ ,          hx,y −      −      2          hx,y+     ,
                       |y ||y | | k=1{z         <k       ′
                                                  } | k =1{z      <k
                                                                    }
                                                                     ′       +
                                                                           |y |       k=1      <k

                                   y+ hidden embeddings y− hidden embeddings

where hx,z<k denotes the hidden embedding that the model produces given x and the first k − 1
tokens of z ∈ V ∗ . We omit the dependence on πθ in our notation as it will be clear from context.

D    C OMMON I NSTANCES OF THE A NALYZED P REFERENCE L EARNING L OSS
Let (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D be a preference sample. As discussed in Section 2.1, the preference learning
loss L (Equation (2)) considered in our analysis generalizes many existing losses, which are realized
by different choices of ℓx,y+ ,y− . The choice of ℓx,y+ ,y− corresponding to each loss is given below.
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023). The DPO loss can be written as:
                        πθ (y+ |x)                   πθ (y+ |x)      πref (y+ |x)

        ℓx,y+ ,y− ln                 := − ln σ β ln             − ln                 ,
                        πθ (y− |x)                   πθ (y− |x)      πref (y− |x)
where πref is some reference model, β > 0 is a regularization hyperparameter, and σ : R → [0, 1]
denotes the sigmoid function.
IPO (Azar et al., 2024). The IPO loss can be written as:
                                                                                 2
                          πθ (y+ |x)           πθ (y+ |x)      πref (y+ |x)

                                                                              1
             ℓx,y+ ,y− ln              :=   ln            − ln              −       ,
                          πθ (y− |x)           πθ (y− |x)      πref (y− |x) 2τ
where πref is some reference model and τ > 0 is a hyperparameter controlling the target log proba-
bility margin.
SLiC (Zhao et al., 2023). The SLiC loss can be written as:
                                 πθ (y+ |x)                    πθ (y+ |x)

                    ℓx,y+ ,y− ln              := max 0, δ − ln              ,
                                 πθ (y− |x)                    πθ (y− |x)
where δ > 0 is a hyperparameter controlling the target log probability margin. We note that our
assumption on ℓx,y+ ,y− being monotonically decreasing in a neighborhood of ln πθinit (y+ |x) −
ln πθinit (y− |x) holds, except for the case where the loss for (x, y+ , y− ) is already zero at initializa-
tion (recall θinit stands for the initial parameters of the model).
REBEL (Gao et al., 2024). The REBEL loss can be written as:
                                                                                              2
               πθ (y+ |x)              πθ (y+ |x)       πref (y+ |x)

                                1                                              +           −
 ℓx,y+ ,y− ln               :=      ln            − ln                 − r(x, y ) + r(x, y ) ,
               πθ (y− |x)       η      πθ (y− |x)       πref (y− |x)
where πref is some reference model, η > 0 is a regularization parameter, and r is a reward model.
GPO (Tang et al., 2024). GPO describes a family of losses, which can be written as:
                         πθ (y+ |x)                πθ (y+ |x)      πref (y+ |x)

           ℓx,y+ ,y− ln               := f  β  ln             − ln                  ,
                         πθ (y− |x)               πθ (y− |x)       πref (y− |x)
where πref is some reference model and f : R → R is convex and monotonically decreasing in a
neighborhood of ln πθinit (y+ |x) − ln πθinit (y− |x) (recall θinit stands for the initial parameters of
the model).


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    R ELATION TO E XISTING C LAIMS ON L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT

Throughout the paper, we specified how our results relate to existing claims regarding likelihood
displacement. This appendix provides a concentrated and extended account.
Similarity of preferences. Tajwar et al. (2024) and Pal et al. (2024) informally claimed that sam-
ples with similar preferences are responsible for likelihood displacement. Our theoretical analysis
(Section 4) formalizes this intuition, by proving that similarities between the token unembeddings
and hidden embeddings of preferred and dispreferred responses drive likelihood displacement.
Dataset size and model capacity. Tajwar et al. (2024) also attributed likelihood displacement to
the presence of multiple training samples in a dataset or a limited model capacity. Section 3 demon-
strates that likelihood displacement can occur independently of these factors, even when training
an 8B model on a single sample. Nonetheless, as we characterize in Section 4.2.3, having multiple
training samples can contribute to the severity of likelihood displacement.
Preferences with small edit distance. Pal et al. (2024) showed in controlled settings that prefer-
ences with a small edit distance can lead to likelihood displacement. However, as the experiments
in Section 5 demonstrate, in more general settings edit distance is not indicative of likelihood dis-
placement, in contrast to the CHES score (Definition 2), which measures similarity based on hidden
embeddings.
Initial SFT Phase. Rafailov et al. (2024b) suggested that likelihood displacement occurs due to
the initial SFT phase in the direct preference learning pipeline (see Section 2). Our experiments
and theory (Sections 3 and 4) refine this claim by showing that likelihood displacement can occur
regardless of whether a model undergoes an initial SFT phase or not.
Squeezing effect. Ren and Sutherland (2024) analyzed the impact of doing a gradient update to
decrease the log probability of a dispreferred response y− . Focusing on a linear model with single
token responses, i.e., a setting identical to that analyzed in Section 4.2.1, but with the hidden em-
bedding of a prompt x being fixed during training, they identified a squeezing effect, whereby the
downwards push on y− predominantly shifts probability mass to tokens that already have a high
probability. Ren and Sutherland (2024) hypothesized that this squeezing effect is responsible for
likelihood displacement. However, as proven in Appendix H, in the linear setting that they consider
likelihood displacement cannot occur — the preferred response never decreases in probability. In
particular, the squeezing effect due to the negative gradient on y− , i.e. −∇ ln πθ (y− |x), is coun-
teracted by the positive gradient on y+ , i.e. ∇ ln πθ (y+ |x). This implies that the squeezing effect
does not fully capture why likelihood displacement occurs, and emphasizes the need for taking into
account how the hidden embeddings evolve during training, as done in Section 4.
Past sightings of catastrophic likelihood displacement. Prior work observed that DPO tends to
degrade the performance on math and reasoning benchmarks (Pal et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Pang
et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024). This can be considered as an instance of catastrophic likelihood
displacement. We note that, because in those settings only a few responses are correct, almost
any likelihood displacement is catastrophic. In contrast, our work demonstrates that likelihood
displacement can be catastrophic even in settings where there are many acceptable responses, and
reveals its adverse effects for safety alignment.


F    F ORMAL A NALYSIS OF L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT

This appendix delivers the formal analysis overviewed in Section 4.2. Appendices F.1 to F.3 cover
the results discussed in Sections 4.2.1 to 4.2.3, respectively. We refer the reader to Section 4.1 for
the technical setting of the analysis.
Notation. For any time t ≥ 0, we use W(t), Wz (t), and hz (t) to denote the token unembedding
matrix, unembedding of a token z ∈ V, and hidden embedding of z ∈ V ∗ , respectively. We let
zk be the kth token in z and z<k be the first k − 1 tokens in z. With slight abuse of notation,
we shorthand ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) := ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t) (y− |x)) for a preference sample
(x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, where ℓ′x,y+ ,y− stands for the derivative of ℓx,y+ ,y− . Lastly, we denote by
ez ∈ R|V| the standard basis vector corresponding to z ∈ V.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1    S INGLE T RAINING S AMPLE AND O UTPUT T OKEN (OVERVIEW IN S ECTION 4.2.1)

We first consider the case of training on a single sample (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, whose responses y+ ∈ V
and y− ∈ V contain a single token. Theorem 4 characterizes the dependence of dt      d
                                                                                       ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)
on the token unembedding geometry (proof deferred to Appendix I.1).
Theorem 4. Suppose that the dataset D contains a single sample (x, y+ , y− ), with y+ ∈ V and
y− ∈ V each being a single token. At any time t ≥ 0 of training:
 d
    ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)
 dt
      = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) m(t) − 1 − πθ(t) (y+ |x) + πθ(t) (y− |x) · Wy+ (t), Wy− (t)

                                                                   |     {z         }
                                                                         preferences unembedding alignment
                                 X
                             −                      πθ(t) (z|x) ·       Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)                    ,
                                    z∈V\{y+ ,y− }                   |              {z             }
                                                               alignment of other token with Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)

where −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) > 0 and m(t) is a non-negative term given by:
                                                     2                       2
               m(t) := 1 − πθ(t) (y+ |x) · Wy+ (t) + πθ(t) (y− |x) · Wy− (t)


                                                                    2
                      + 1 − πθ(t) (y+ |x) + πθ(t) (y− |x) · ∥hx (t)∥ .


                                   d
Two terms in the derived form of dt   ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) can be negative, and so are responsible for like-
lihood displacement in the case of single toke responses. First, the term − Wy+ (t), Wy− (t) ,
which formalizes the intuition that likelihood displacement occurs when the preferred and dispre-
ferred responses are similar. A higher inner product translates to a more substantial (instantaneous)
decrease in ln πθ(t) (y+ |x). Second, is a term measuring the alignment of other token unembeddings
with Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t), where tokens deemed more likely by the model have a larger weight.
Theorem 5 shows that the alignment of token unembeddings with Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) also dictates
which tokens increase most in log probability, i.e. where the probability mass goes (proof deferred
to Appendix I.2).
Theorem 5. Under the setting of Theorem 4, for any time t ≥ 0 and token z ∈ V \ {y+ , y− }:
             d                                   h                                        i
                ln πθ(t) (z|x) = −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) · Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) + c(t) ,
             dt
where −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) > 0 and c(t) is a term that does not depend on z, given by:
                                                 2
                                                     X
c(t) := πθ(t) (y− |x) − πθ(t) (y+ |x) ∥hx (t)∥ −          πθ(t) (z ′ |x) Wz′ (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) .


                                                      z ′ ∈V


F.2    R ESPONSES WITH M ULTIPLE T OKENS (OVERVIEW IN S ECTION 4.2.2)

Moving to the typical case, in which the responses y+ ∈ V ∗ and y− ∈ V ∗ are sequences of tokens,
assume for simplicity that y1+ ̸= y1− . Extending the results below to responses y+ and y− that share
a prefix is straightforward, by replacing terms that depend on y1+ and y1− with analogous ones that
depend on the initial tokens in which y+ and y− differ.
In the case where each response consists of a single token, there are two terms that contribute to
likelihood displacement (cf. Theorem 4). For any time t ≥ 0 and (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, if one minimizes
the preference learning loss with respect to only the initial tokens of y+ and y− , then these terms
are given by:
           Sy+ ,y− (t) := − 1 − πθ(t) (y1+ |x) + πθ(t) (y1− |x) · Wy+ (t), Wy− (t)

              1  1                                                      1         1
                            X                                                                     (3)
                          −           +   −
                                             π θ(t) (z|x) ·  W z (t), W y + (t) − W y− (t) .
                                 z∈V\{y1 ,y1 }                                  1              1


Theorem 6 establishes that, in addition to the above initial token contribution, likelihood displace-
ment depends on an alignment between the hidden embeddings of y+ and y− (proof deferred to
Appendix I.3).


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 6. Suppose that the dataset D contains a single sample (x, y+ , y− ), with y+ ∈ V ∗ and
y− ∈ V ∗ satisfying y1+ ̸= y1− . At any time t ≥ 0 of training:
d
   ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)
dt
  = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) m(t) + Sy+ ,y− (t)
                                           1       1

          +     −                                                           +     +
         |y | |y |                                           E |y
         XX                          D                          X| |y
                                                                   X|                 D                       E
                       −                                                  +
    −                 αk,k ′ (t) ·     hx,y+ (t), hx,y− ′ (t) +          αk,k ′ (t) ·   hx,y+ (t), hx,y+ ′ (t) ,
                                           <k                                               <k
         k=1 k′ =1                   |          {z <k        } k=1 k′ =1              |          {z <k        }
                          preferred-dispreferred alignment                    preferred-preferred alignment
                                                  −        +
where −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) > 0, the coefficients αk,k′ (t), αk,k′ (t) ∈ [−2, 2] are given by:
                                     D                                                      E
                            −                              +                           −
                           αk,k ′ :=  e +
                                       yk − π θ(t) (·|x, y <k ), e −
                                                                  yk′ − π θ(t) (·|x, y <k′ )  ,
                                     D                                                      E
                            +                              +                           +
                           αk,k ′ :=  ey+ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k   ), ey+′ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k  ′)   ,
                                               k                              k

with πθ(t) (·|x, z) ∈ R|V| denoting the model’s next-token probability distribution, conditioned on x
and z ∈ V ∗ , and m(t) is the following non-negative term:
                                                        2                              2
               m(t) := 1 − πθ(t) (y1+ |x) · Wy+ (t) + πθ(t) (y1− |x) · Wy− (t)

                                                                    1                                   1

                                     X|y+ |                     X                                           2
                                                                                        +
                               +                   Wy+ (t) −               πθ(t) (z|x, y<k ) · Wz (t)           .
                                         k=2           k             z∈V

The evolution of ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) is governed by: (i) the initial token unembedding geometry (analo-
gous to the characterization in Theorem 4); and (ii) inner products between hidden embeddings, of
both the “preferred-dispreferred” and the “preferred-preferred” types. As discussed in Section 4.2.2,
whether a larger inner product results in an upwards or downwards push on ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) depends
                                    −            +
on the sign of the corresponding αk,k  ′ (t) or αk,k ′ (t) coefficient. Since empirically these coefficients

are mostly positive across models and datasets, Theorem 6 indicates that a higher CHES score (Def-
inition 2) implies more severe likelihood displacement.
Regarding where the probability mass goes when likelihood displacement occurs, for any z ∈ V ∗ ,
                                                  d
Theorem 7 below derives the dependence of dt        ln πθ(t) (z|x) on the alignment of z’s hidden em-
                            +        −
beddings with those of y and y (proof deferred to Appendix I.4). Whether inner products be-
tween the hidden embeddings of z and those of y+ (or y− ) contribute positively or negatively to
 d
dt ln πθ(t) (z|x), depends on the signs of coefficients that are determined by the model’s next-token
                      d
distributions. For dt   ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), as mentioned above, the analogous coefficients are mostly
positive. However, it is difficult to assess their typical signs for general responses, i.e. for which
responses the coefficients will tend to be positive and for which they will tend to be negative. We
thus regard further investigating which responses increase most in probability, and how that depends
on the values that these coefficients take, as a promising direction for future work.
For simplicity, we assume that the initial token of z is not equal to the initial tokens of y+ and y− .
If z shares a prefix with y+ , then the characterization of Theorem 7 holds up to additional terms
that generally push ln πθ(t) (z|x) upwards. Similarly, if z shares a prefix with y− , then there will be
additional terms that push ln πθ(t) (z|x) downwards.
                                                                                   / {y1+ , y1− }.
Theorem 7. Under the setting of Theorem 6, let z ∈ V ∗ be a response satisfying z1 ∈
At any time t ≥ 0 of training:
 d
    ln πθ(t) (z|x)
 dt                         D                          E
   = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) c(t) + Wz1 (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
                                       1          1
                            |          {z              }
                                          alignment of first token unembeddings
          |z| |y− |                  D                        E X|z| |y |         +
                                                                                     D                       E
         XX                                                          X
                       −                                                   +
     −                βk,k ′ (t) ·     hx,z<k (t), hx,y− ′ (t) +          βk,k′ (t) · hx,z<k (t), hx,y+ ′ (t) ,
         k=1 k′ =1                   |           {z <k        } k=1 k′ =1            |          {z <k        }
                                         z-dispreferred alignment                                 z-preferred alignment


                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            −           +
where −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) > 0, the coefficients βk,k ′ (t), βk,k ′ (t) ∈ [−2, 2] are given by:

                              D                                                     E
                     −                                                         −
                    βk,k ′ :=  ezk − πθ(t) (·|x, z<k ), ey−′ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k    ′)  ,
                                                              k
                              D                                                     E
                     +                                                         +
                    βk,k ′ :=  ezk − πθ(t) (·|x, z<k ), ey+′ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k    ′)  ,
                                                                   k

and c(t) is the following term that does not depend on z:
                              X                  D                         E
                    c(t) := −         πθ(t) (z|x) Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) .
                                    z∈V                                    1                 1



F.3   M ULTIPLE T RAINING S AMPLES (OVERVIEW IN S ECTION 4.2.3)

In this appendix, we consider the effect of having multiple training samples, focusing on the case
where responses consist of a single token. Namely, for a preference sample (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D,
Theorem 8 characterizes when additional training samples lead to a larger decrease in ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)
(proof deferred to Appendix I.5). For conciseness, we make the mild assumption that no prompt
appears twice in D, as is common in real-world preference datasets.
Theorem 8. Suppose that all preferred and dispreferred responses in the dataset D consist of a
single token each, and that no prompt appears twice (i.e. each prompt in D is associated with a single
pair of preferred and dispreferred tokens). For any time t ≥ 0 of training and (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D:
   d                     −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) h                   i
      ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) =                · m(t) + Sy+ ,y− (t)
   dt                         |D|        |        {z         }
                                        same sample contribution, as in Theorem 4

                              X                                    −ℓ′x̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− (t)
                          +                                                              · αx,x̃ (t) · ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩ ,
                                  (x̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− )∈D\{(x,y+ ,y− )}          |D|
                                                                   |                         {z                        }
                                                                               contribution due to (x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− )

where m(t) is the non-negative term defined in Theorem 4, Sy+ ,y− (t) (defined in Equation (3))
encapsulates terms contributing to likelihood displacement when training only over (x, y+ , y− ),
and the coefficient αx,x̃ (t) ∈ [−2, 2] is given by:
             αx,x̃ (t) := 1 y+ = ỹ+ − 1 y+ = ỹ− + πθ(t) (ỹ− |x) − πθ(t) (ỹ+ |x) ,


with 1 [·] denoting the indicator function.

In the theorem above, m(t) + Sy+ ,y− (t) includes terms identical to those governing likelihood dis-
placement when training only on (x, y+ , y− ) (cf. Theorem 4). The contribution of each additional
sample (x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− ) ∈ D \ {(x, y+ , y− )} to dt
                                                 d
                                                    ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) is captured by:
                               −ℓ′x̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− (t)
                                                    · αx,x̃ (t) · ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩ .
                                      |D|
When does (x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− ) contribute negatively to dt   d
                                                            ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)? First, we note that typically
    ′
−ℓx̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− (t) is positive. Under the DPO loss this always holds (see Lemma 1), while for other
losses it holds at least initially since ℓx̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− is monotonically decreasing in a neighborhood of
ln πθ(0) (ỹ+ |x̃) − ln πθ(0) (ỹ− |x̃). As for ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩, we empirically find that the hidden em-
beddings of prompts in a given dataset almost always have positive inner products, across various
models. Specifically, for the OLMo-1B, Gemma-2B, and Llama-3-8B models, all such inner prod-
ucts over the “ends justify means” subset of the Persona dataset are positive. This implies that
(x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− ) usually pushes ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) downwards when αx,x̃ (t) < 0.
Now, recall that:
              αx,x̃ (t) = 1 y+ = ỹ+ − 1 y+ = ỹ− + πθ(t) (ỹ− |x) − πθ(t) (ỹ+ |x) .


There are two cases in which αx,x̃ (t) < 0:

  1. (contradicting samples) when y+ = ỹ− , i.e. the preferred token of x is the dispreferred token
     of x̃; and


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         / {ỹ+ , ỹ− } and πθ(t) (ỹ− |x) < πθ(t) (ỹ+ |x).
  2. (non-contradicting samples) when y+ ∈

While the first case is not surprising, the second shows that even when the preferences of x and x̃
are distinct, the inclusion of (x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− ) in the dataset can exacerbate likelihood displacement for
(x, y+ , y− ). Furthermore, as one might expect, Theorem 9 establishes that (x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− ) encourages
the probability mass conditioned on x to shift towards ỹ+ , given that ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩ > 0 (proof
deferred to Appendix I.6).
Theorem 9. Under the setting of Theorem 8, for any time t ≥ 0 of training, (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, and
token z ∈ V:
 d                          −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t)
    ln πθ(t) (z|x) = c(t) +                · Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
 dt                             |D|         |           {z             }
                                                      same sample contribution, as in Theorem 5
                                                 −ℓ′x̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− (t)
                                                                      1 z = ỹ+ − 1 z = ỹ− ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩ ,
                           X
                       +
                              (x̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− )∈D         |D|
                                                 |                                      {z                         }
                                                                       contribution due to (x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− )

where 1 [·] denotes the indicator function and c(t) is a term that does not depend on z, given by:
                ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) X
      c(t) :=                              πθ(t) (z ′ |x) Wz′ (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
                    |D|             z ′ ∈V
                  X                      −ℓ′x̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− (t)
                                                            πθ(t) (ỹ− |x) − πθ(t) (ỹ+ |x) ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩ .

                +            +   −
                       (x̃,ỹ ,ỹ )∈D           |D|

G     L OSSES I NCLUDING SFT R EGULARIZATION OR D IFFERENT W EIGHTS
      FOR THE P REFERRED AND D ISPREFERRED R ESPONSES

Some preference learning losses include an SFT regularization term, multiplied by a coefficient
λ > 0 (e.g., CPO (Xu et al., 2024a), RPO (Liu et al., 2024), and BoNBoN (Gui et al., 2024)).
Namely, for a preference dataset D, such losses have the following form:
                              h                                                          i
     LS (θ) := E(x,y+ ,y− )∼D ℓx,y+ ,y− ln πθ (y+ |x) − ln πθ (y− |x) − λ · ln πθ (y+ |x) , (4)

where ℓx,y+ ,y− : R → R≥0 is convex and differentiable, for (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D (cf. Equation (2)).
Other loss variants give different weights to the log probabilities of preferred and dispreferred re-
sponses within ℓx,y+ ,y− . For example, SimPO (Meng et al., 2024) weighs them by the reciprocal of
their lengths, and DPOP (Pal et al., 2024) adds an additional constant factor to the preferred response
log probability.10 This type of losses can be expressed as:
                             h                                                                       i
                                                                         −                    −
   Lw (θ) := E(x,y+ ,y− )∼D ℓx,y+ ,y− λ+     +
                                          x,y ,y − · ln π θ (y +
                                                                 |x) − λ    +
                                                                         x,y ,y − · ln π θ (y   |x)    , (5)

                     −
where λ+                                                           +   −
         x,y+ ,y− , λx,y+ ,y− > 0 can depend on properties of (x, y , y ) ∈ D. As mentioned in Sec-
tion 2.1, we assume that ℓx,y+ ,y− is monotonically decreasing around the initialization (otherwise
it does not encourage increasing the log probability ratio of preferred and dispreferred responses).
This mild assumption is upheld by all aforementioned losses.
The following Appendix G.1 extends our analysis from Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 to the losses in
Equations (4) and (5). In particular, we formalize how adding an SFT regularization term, or assign-
ing the preferred response a weight larger than that of the dispreferred response, can help mitigate
likelihood displacement. Indeed, such modifications to the loss were proposed by Pal et al. (2024);
Liu et al. (2024); Pang et al. (2024); Gui et al. (2024) with that purpose in mind. We note, how-
ever, that our experiments in Section 6 reveal a limitation of this approach for mitigating likelihood
displacement and its adverse effects, compared to improving the data curation pipeline.
    10
       The additional factor in the DPOP loss is only active when the preferred response log probability is below
its initial value.


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.1   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS : E FFECT ON L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT

We consider the technical setting laid out in Section 4.1, except that instead of examining gradient
flow over the original preference learning loss L (Equation (2)), we analyze the dynamics of gradient
flow over LS (Equation (4)) and Lw (Equation (5)):
                 d                                d
                   θS (t) = −∇LS (θS (t)) ,         θw (t) = −∇Lw (θw (t)) , t ≥ 0 ,              (6)
                dt                               dt
where θS (t) and θw (t) denote the parameters at time t ≥ 0 when optimizing LS and Lw , respectively.
Suppose for simplicity that the dataset D contains a single preference sample (x, y+ , y− ). The
evolution of ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) when minimizing the original loss L via gradient flow is given by:
  d
    ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (θ(t)) ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x) ,
 dt
where ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (θ(t)) := ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t) (y− |x)). We denote the term on the
right hand side above, evaluated at some point θ instead of θ(t), by:
            E(θ) := −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (θ) ∇ ln πθ (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ (y− |x) .

Proposition 1 establishes that, when minimizing LS via gradient flow, the preferred response log
probability evolves according to E(θS (t)), i.e. according to the evolution dictated by the original
                                                                      2
loss L, and an additional non-negative term λ · ∥∇ ln πθS (t) (y+ |x)∥ . Proposition 2 similarly shows
that, when minimizing Lw via gradient flow, the evolution of the preferred response log probability
                                                                                     2
depends on E(θw (t)) (up to a multiplicative factor), and γ(t)·∥∇ ln πθw (t) (y+ |x)∥ , where γ(t) > 0
        +            −
when λx,y+ ,y− > λx,y+ ,y− . This implies that, as expected, adding an SFT regularization term, or
assigning the preferred response a weight larger than that of the dispreferred response, encourages
the preferred response log probability to increase.
The proofs of Propositions 1 and 2 are given in Appendices I.7 and I.8, respectively.
Proposition 1. Suppose that the dataset D contains a single sample (x, y+ , y− ), with y+ ∈ V ∗
and y− ∈ V ∗ satisfying y1+ ̸= y1− . When minimizing LS via gradient flow (Equation (6)), at any
time t ≥ 0 it holds that:
                     d                                                            2
                        ln πθS (t) (y+ |x) = E(θS (t)) + λ · ∇ ln πθS (t) y+ |x     .
                     dt
Proposition 2. Suppose that the dataset D contains a single sample (x, y+ , y− ), with y+ ∈ V ∗
and y− ∈ V ∗ satisfying y1+ ̸= y1− . When minimizing Lw via gradient flow (Equation (6)), at any
time t ≥ 0 it holds that:
                d                                                                       2
                  ln πθw (t) (y+ |x) = ρ(t) · E(θw (t)) + γ(t) · ∇ ln πθw (t) y+ |x       ,
               dt
                             ′
                               µ (θw (t))
with ρ(t) := λ−                                              +            −                ′
               x,y+ ,y− · ℓ′ + − (θw (t)) and γ(t) := (λx,y+ ,y− − λx,y+ ,y− ) · [−µ (θw (t))], where:
                            x,y ,y

                                                                   −
     µ′ (θw (t)) := ℓ′x,y+ ,y− λ+                          +                               −
                                   x,y+ ,y− · ln πθw (t) (y |x) − λx,y+ ,y− · ln πθw (t) (y |x) < 0 .


H     L INEAR M ODELS D O N OT S UFFER F ROM L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT
As discussed in Appendix E, this appendix establishes that linear models (trained on a prompt with
single token responses) do not suffer from likelihood displacement. Specifically, if one considers
the setting of Section 4.2.1, but fixes the hidden embedding of the prompt x during training, then
the probability of the preferred response y+ cannot decrease. This highlights the importance of
taking into account how the hidden embeddings evolve during training when analyzing likelihood
displacement, as done in Section 4.
The proof of Proposition 3 is deferred to Appendix I.9.
Proposition 3. Consider the setting of Theorem 1, where the dataset D contains a single sample
(x, y+ , y− ), with y+ ∈ V and y− ∈ V each being a single token. Suppose that hx , the hidden em-
bedding of x, is fixed during training, i.e. the trainable parameters are θ = W. Then, ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)
is monotonically non-decreasing with respect to the training time t.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I     D EFERRED P ROOFS

I.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

By the chain rule:
    d
       ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) = ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), dt
                                               d
                                                 θ(t)
    dt
                        = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x) .
                                                                                                        (7)

For any token z ∈ V, the gradient of ln πθ(t) (z|x) at θ(t) consists of two components:
                                                 X
                  ∇W ln πθ(t) (z|x) = ez −           ′
                                                           πθ(t) (z ′ |x) · ez′ h⊤
                                                                                 x (t) ,
                                                    z ∈V
                                                    X
                  ∇hx ln πθ(t) (z|x) = Wz (t) −          ′
                                                              πθ(t) (z ′ |x) · Wz′ (t) .
                                                                  z ∈V

Thus:
                   ∇W ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇W ln πθ(t) (y− |x) = ey+ − ey− h⊤

                                                                          x (t) ,
                   ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y− |x) = Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) .
Going back to Equation (7), we arrive at:
       d
          ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)
       dt                      D          X                                                         E
       = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) ·      Wy+ (t) −               πθ(t) (z|x) · Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
                                                  z∈V
                                     D
                                                  X                                                ⊤ E
                                 +        ey+ −             πθ(t) (z|x) · ez h⊤
                                                                              x (t), ey + − ey −  hx (t)   .
                                                      z∈V
                                                      ⊤
                                                     hx (t), ey+ − ey− h⊤
                             P
Noticing that      ey+ −         z∈V πθ(t) (z|x) · ez                       x (t) amounts to:

                                                                               2
                                  1 − πθ(t) (y+ |x) + πθ(t) (y− |x) · ∥hx (t)∥ ,


the desired result readily follows by rearranging the equation above. Lastly, Lemma 2 implies that
−ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) > 0.

I.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

We perform a derivation analogous to that in the proof of Theorem 4 (Appendix I.1).
By the chain rule:
    d                                      d
       ln πθ(t) (z|x) = ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), dt θ(t)
    dt                                                                                                (8)
                      = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x) .

For any token y ∈ V, the gradient of ln πθ(t) (y|x) at θ(t) consists of two components:
                                                 X
                  ∇W ln πθ(t) (y|x) = ey −           ′
                                                           πθ(t) (y ′ |x) · ey′ h⊤
                                                                                 x (t) ,
                                                    y ∈V
                                                   X
                  ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y|x) = Wy (t) −          ′
                                                              πθ(t) (y ′ |x) · Wy′ (t) .
                                                                  y ∈V

Thus:
                   ∇W ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇W ln πθ(t) (y− |x) = ey+ − ey− h⊤

                                                                          x (t) ,
                   ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y− |x) = Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) .

                                                             24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Going back to Equation (8) thus leads to:
    d
       ln πθ(t) (z|x)
    dt                  D           X                                                                        E
          ′
    = −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) ·   Wz (t) −         ′
                                                                  πθ(t) (z ′ |x) · Wz′ (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
                                                        z ∈V
                                         D
                                                     X
                                                                            ′
                                                                                                                        ⊤ E
                                     +        ez −
                                                 πθ(t) (z |x) · e          e −e      z′       h⊤
                                                                                               x (t),   y+       y−    hx (t) .
                                                            z ′ ∈V

Noticing that ez − z′ ∈V πθ(t) (z ′ |x) · ez′ h⊤                        ⊤
                                 P
                                                   x (t), ey+ − ey− hx (t) amounts to:
                                                                        2
                                πθ(t) (y− |x) − πθ(t) (y+ |x) · ∥hx (t)∥ ,


the desired result readily follows by rearranging the equation above. Lastly, we note that Lemma 2
implies that −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) > 0.

I.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6

Notice that, for any z ∈ V ∗ , the gradient ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x) consists of the following components:
                         X|z|
                                    ezk − πθ(t) (·|x, z<k ) h⊤

  ∇W ln πθ(t) (z|x) =                                         z<k (t) ,
                              k=1
                                          X                                                            (9)
  ∇hx,z<k ln πθ(t) (z|x) = Wzk (t) −               πθ(t) (z|x, z<k ) · Wz (t) , k ∈ {1, . . . , |z|} ,
                                                              z∈V
where the gradient with respect to all other hidden embeddings is zero. By the chain rule:
  d
    ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) = ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), dt
                                            d
                                              θ(t)
 dt
                     = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x) .
Thus:
      d
         ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)
      dt
         = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇W ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇W ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇W ln πθ(t) (y− |x)
                      − ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y− |x)
                                         X|y+ |                            2
                      − ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) ·        ∇hx,y+ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) .
                                          k=2                <k

Plugging in the expressions for each gradient from Equation (9) leads to:
                                      "
   d             +         ′
      ln πθ(t) (y |x) = −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t)
   dt
              *|y+ |                                                  |y+ |
                                                                                                                                +
               X                                                      X
                                            +
                         ey+ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k )       h⊤  + (t),
                                                        x,y<k
                                                                                                    +
                                                                                ey+′ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k ′)        h⊤  +
                                                                                                                  x,y<k
                                                                                                                          (t)
                           k                                                      k                                     ′
                  k=1                                                 k′ =1
              |                                                      {z                                                         }
                                                                     (I)

                                                                           |y− |
                  *|y+ |                                                                                                   +
                   X                                                        X
                                                                                                       −
              −                                +
                            ey+ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k )         h⊤  + (t),
                                                             x,y<k
                                                                                   ey−′ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k ′)
                                                                                                                   ⊤
                                                                                                                  hx,y− (t)
                              k                                                      k                                  <k′
                      k=1                                                  k′ =1
                  |                                                        {z                                                       }
                                                                       (II)
              D           X                                            E
                Wy+ (t) −       πθ(t) (z|x) · Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
                  1         z∈V                         1         1
              |                           {z                            }
                                                   (III)
          X|y+ |                     X                                                2
                                                          +
                         Wy+ (t) −           πθ(t) (z|x, y<k ) · Wz (t)
                  k=2        k           z∈V
          |                                {z                           }
                                           (IV )
      #
          .


                                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, the sum of (III) and (IV ) is equal to m(t) + Sy+ ,y− (t). As to (I), for all k ∈ {1, . . . , |y+ |}
                                                               1 1
and k ′ ∈ {1, . . . , |y+ |} we have that:

                 ey+ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k  +
                                          ) h⊤    + (t),
                                               x,y<k
                                                           e + − πθ(t) (·|x, y
                                                            yk′
                                                                               +
                                                                               <k ′ )   h⊤
                                                                                            +
                                                                                         x,y<k′
                                                                                                (t)
                      k
                                  D                       E
                        +
                 = αk,k   ′ (t) ·   hx,y+ (t), hx,y+ ′ (t) .
                                              <k              <k

This implies that:
                                           |y+ | |y+ |                D                      E
                                           XX
                                                          +
                                  (I) =                  αk,k ′ (t) ·  hx,y+ (t), hx,y+ ′ (t) .
                                                                               <k         <k
                                           k=1 k′ =1
An analogous derivation leads to:
                                           |y+ | |y− |                D                      E
                                           XX
                                                          −
                                  (II) =                 αk,k ′ (t) ·  hx,y+ (t), hx,y− ′ (t) .
                                                                                 <k       <k
                                           k=1 k′ =1
                                                                        d
Combining (I), (II), (III), and (IV ) yields the desired expression for dt ln πθ(t) (y+ |x). Lastly,
note that by Lemma 2 we have that −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) > 0.

I.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7

We perform a derivation analogous to that in the proof of Theorem 6 (Appendix I.3).
For any v ∈ V ∗ , the gradient ∇ ln πθ(t) (v|x) consists of the following components:
                         X|v|
                                 evk − πθ(t) (·|x, v<k ) h⊤

  ∇W ln πθ(t) (v|x) =                                       v<k (t) ,
                            k=1
                                        X                                                            (10)
  ∇hx,v<k ln πθ(t) (v|x) = Wvk (t) −             πθ(t) (z|x, v<k ) · Wz (t) , k ∈ {1, . . . , |v|} ,
                                                            z∈V
where the gradient with respect to all other hidden embeddings is zero. By the chain rule:
   d                                      d
      ln πθ(t) (z|x) = ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), dt θ(t)
   dt
                     = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x) .
Thus:
      d
        ln πθ(t) (z|x)
     dt
        = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇W ln πθ(t) (z|x), ∇W ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇W ln πθ(t) (y− |x)
          − ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇hx ln πθ(t) (y− |x) .
Plugging in the expressions for each gradient from Equation (10) leads to:
                                        "
    d
      ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t)
   dt
              * |z|                                                  +
                                                            |y |
                                                                                                          +
               X                                            X
                                                 ⊤                                     +      ⊤
                        ezk − πθ(t) (·|x, z<k ) hx,z<k (t),        ey+′ − πθ(t) (·|x, y<k ′) h
                                                                                              x,y+
                                                                                                   (t)
                                                                                 k                <k′
                  k=1                                              k′ =1
              |                                                    {z                                     }
                                                                   (I)
                  * |z|                                                    −
                                                                |y |
                                                                                                              +
                   X                                            X
                                                                                           −
              −             ezk − πθ(t) (·|x, z<k ) h⊤
                                                     x,z<k (t),        e − − πθ(t) (·|x, y
                                                                        y ′               <k ′ )  h⊤
                                                                                                   x,y−
                                                                                                        (t)
                                                                                      k             <k′
                      k=1                                                k′ =1
                  |                                                      {z                                   }
                                                                     (II)
              D               X                                              E
                  Wz1 (t) −           πθ(t) (z|x) · Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
                                  z∈V                         1         1
              |                                 {z                            }
                                                   (III)
      #
          .


                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


First, notice that (III) = c(t) + Wz1 (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) . As to (I), for all k ∈ {1, . . . , |z|}
                                                         1           1
and k ′ ∈ {1, . . . , |y+ |} we have that:

                  ezk − πθ(t) (·|x, z<k ) h⊤     x,z<k (t),  e  + − πθ(t) (·|x, y
                                                               yk′
                                                                                  +
                                                                                  <k′ )  h⊤
                                                                                             +
                                                                                          x,y<k
                                                                                                  (t)
                                                                                                ′
                                   D                         E
                        +
                 = βk,k    ′ (t) ·   hx,z<k (t), hx,y+ ′ (t) .
                                                                <k


This implies that:
                                                       +
                                            |z| |y |                    D                       E
                                            X   X
                                                            +
                                   (I) =                   βk,k ′ (t) ·  hx,z<k (t), hx,y+ ′ (t) .
                                                                                        <k
                                            k=1 k′ =1

By a similar derivation we get that:
                                                       −
                                             |z| |y |                   D                       E
                                             X   X
                                                            −
                                  (II) =                   βk,k ′ (t) ·  hx,z<k (t), hx,y− ′ (t) .
                                                                                        <k
                                            k=1 k′ =1

                                                                 d
Combining (I), (II), and (III) yields the desired expression for dt ln πθ(t) (z|x). Lastly, note that
by Lemma 2 it holds that −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) > 0.

I.5       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 8

Let Dadd := D \ {(x, y+ , y− )} be the dataset obtained by excluding (x, y+ , y− ) from D. By the
chain rule:
 d
    ln πθ(t) (y+ |x)
 dt
    = ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), dt
                          d
                             θ(t)
          −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t)
      =                     · ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x)
                |D|          |                            {z                              }
                                                                      (I)
                   X              −ℓ′x̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− (t)
          +                                            · ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (ỹ+ |x̃) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (ỹ− |x̃) .
                                        |D|
            (x̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− )∈Dadd
                                                        |                            {z                                 }
                                                                                        (II)
                                                                                                                      (11)
For any token z ∈ V and prompt x̃ ∈ V ∗ , the gradient of ln πθ(t) (z|x̃) at θ(t) is given by:
                                               X
                                                                    ′
                  ∇W ln πθ(t) (z|x̃) = ez −                πθ(t) (z   |x̃) · e z ′   h⊤
                                                                                      x̃ (t) ,
                                                   z ′ ∈V
                                                  X
                  ∇hx̃ ln πθ(t) (z|x̃) = Wz (t) −        ′
                                                              πθ(t) (z ′ |x̃) · Wz′ (t) .
                                                                            z ∈V
                                              ′
Furthermore, for any response x ̸= x̃, it holds that ∇hx′ ln πθ(t) (z|x̃) = 0 since ln πθ(t) (z|x̃) does
not depend on hx′ (recall that the hidden embeddings are treated as trainable parameters under the
unconstrained features model). Thus, focusing on term (I) from Equation (11):
                    ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x)
                        D              X                                               E
                     = Wy+ (t) −               πθ(t) (z|x) · Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
                                           z∈V
                            D          X                                            ⊤ E
                         + ey+ −               πθ(t) (z|x) · ez h⊤x (t), ey+ − ey− hx (t) .
                                                   z∈V
                                                    ⊤
                                                   hx (t), ey+ − ey− h⊤
                      P
Since         ey+ −      z∈V πθ(t) (z|x) · ez                               x (t) amounts to:

                                                                                    2
                                        1 − πθ(t) (y+ |x) + πθ(t) (y− |x) · ∥hx (t)∥ ,


it readily follows that (I) = m(t) + Sy+ ,y− (t) by rearranging terms.


                                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Moving on to term (II) from Equation (11), for any (x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− ) ∈ Dadd we have that:
                   ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (ỹ+ |x̃) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (ỹ− |x̃)
                       D           X                                                 ⊤ E
                    = ey + −               πθ(t) (z|x) · ez h⊤  x (t), eỹ+ − eỹ− hx̃ (t)
                                       z∈V
                       D         X                                      E
                    = ey+ −              πθ(t) (z|x) · ez , eỹ+ − eỹ− · ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩
                                          z∈V
                      = αx,x̃ (t) · ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩ .
Plugging (I) and (II) back into Equation (11) concludes the proof.

I.6     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 9

We perform a derivation analogous to that in the proof of Theorem 8 (Appendix I.5).
Applying the chain rule:
  d
     ln πθ(t) (z|x)
  dt
                           d
     = ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), dt   θ(t)
                                                                                                      (12)
                      ′
            X       −ℓx̃,ỹ+ ,ỹ− (t)                                   +                     −
     =                                · ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (ỹ |x̃) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (ỹ |x̃) .
           +    −
                          |D|
         (x̃,ỹ ,ỹ )∈D

For any token y ∈ V and prompt x̃ ∈ V ∗ , the gradient of ln πθ(t) (y|x̃) at θ(t) is given by:
                                               X
                                                                     ′               ⊤
                  ∇W ln πθ(t) (y|x̃) = ey −                π θ(t) (y   |x̃) · e y ′ h (t) ,
                                                                                     x̃
                                                   y ′ ∈V
                                                  X
                  ∇hx̃ ln πθ(t) (y|x̃) = Wy (t) −        ′
                                                               πθ(t) (y ′ |x̃) · Wy′ (t) .
                                                               y ∈V
                                      ′
Furthermore, for any response x ̸= x̃ it holds that ∇hx′ ln πθ(t) (y|x̃) = 0 since ln πθ(t) (y|x̃) does
not depend on hx′ (recall that the hidden embeddings are treated as trainable parameters under the
unconstrained features model). Focusing on the summand from Equation (12) corresponding to
(x, y+ , y− ), we thus get:
              ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x)
                  D              X                                                              E
                                                      ′
                = Wz (t) −                   πθ(t) (z   |x)  · W   z ′ (t), W y + (t) − Wy − (t)
                                     z ′ ∈V
                      D          X                                                           ⊤ E
                                                       ′                 ⊤
                   + ez −                    π θ(t) (z   |x) · ez ′ h (t), ey+ − ey− h (t)
                                                                         x                    x   .
                                      z ′ ∈V

          ez − z′ ∈V πθ(t) (z ′ |x) · ez′ h⊤                                ⊤
              P
Since                                         x (t), ey+ − ey− hx (t) amounts to:

             1 z = y+ − 1 z = y− − πθ(t) (y+ |x) + πθ(t) (y− |x) · ⟨hx (t), hx (t)⟩ ,


it follows that:
      ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x)
                                              X
        = Wz (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t) −                    πθ(t) (z ′ |x) · Wz′ (t), Wy+ (t) − Wy− (t)
                                                  z ′ ∈V
           + 1 z = y+ − 1 z = y− − πθ(t) (y+ |x) + πθ(t) (y− |x) · ⟨hx (t), hx (t)⟩ .


                                                                                                       (13)
Now, for (x̃, ỹ+ , ỹ− ) ∈ D \ {(x, y+ , y− )}, the corresponding summand from Equation (12) can be
written as:
       ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (ỹ+ |x̃) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (ỹ− |x̃)
            D           X                                                               ⊤ E
                                               ′                  ⊤
         = ez −                     π θ(t) (z    |x) · e  z ′ h (t), eỹ+ − eỹ− h (t)
                                                                  x                       x̃
                             z ′ ∈V
            D         X                                                    E                     (14)
                                            ′
         = ez −                   π θ(t) (z   |x)  · e z ′ , eỹ + − eỹ −   · ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩
                          z ′ ∈V
         = 1 z = ỹ − 1 z = ỹ − πθ(t) (ỹ |x) + πθ(t) (ỹ |x) · ⟨hx (t), hx̃ (t)⟩ .
                          +                      −                  +                 −


Plugging Equations (13) and (14) back into Equation (12) concludes the proof.


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I.7    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

The proof readily follows by a straightforward application of the chain rule:
        d
           ln πθS (t) (y+ |x)
        dt
        = ∇ ln πθS (t) (y+ |x), dt
                                d
                                   θS (t)
           D                                                                                     E
        = ∇ ln πθS (t) (y+ |x), −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (θS (t)) ∇ ln πθS (t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθS (t) (y− |x)
                                        2
           + λ · ∇ ln πθS (t) (y+ |x)
                                                   2
        = E(θS (t)) + λ · ∇ ln πθS (t) (y+ |x)         ,
where ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (θS (t)) := ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθS (t) (y+ |x) − ln πθS (t) (y− |x) .



I.8    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

By the chain rule and a straightforward rearrangement of terms:
d
   ln πθw (t) (y+ |x)
dt
= ∇ ln πθw (t) (y+ |x), dt
                        d
                           θw (t)
                   D                                                                                         E
                                                                             −
= −µ′ (θw (t)) · ∇ ln πθw (t) (y+ |x), λ+  +
                                        x,y ,y − ∇ ln π θ w (t) (y +
                                                                     |x) − λ    +
                                                                             x,y ,y − ∇ ln π θ w (t) (y −
                                                                                                          |x)
 = −λ−           ′                         +                    +                     −
      x,y+ ,y− µ (θw (t)) · ∇ ln πθw (t) (y |x), ∇ ln πθw (t) (y |x) − ∇ ln πθw (t) (y |x)
                     −            ′                                  2
   + λ+                                                        +

         x,y+ ,y− − λx,y+ ,y− [−µ (θw (t))] · ∇ ln πθw (t) (y |x)
                                                  2
 = ρ(t) · E(θw (t)) + γ(t) · ∇ ln πθw (t) y+ |x     .
Lastly, steps analogous to those used for proving Lemma 2 establish that µ′ (θw (t)) < 0, and so
−µ′ (θw (t)) > 0.

I.9    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3
                                     d
The claim follows by showing that dt   ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) ≥ 0 for all t ≥ 0. To see it is so, notice that
when hx is not trainable, for any token z ∈ V the gradient of ln πθ(t) (z|x) at θ(t) is given by:
                                                 X
                                                                   ′             ⊤
                     ∇ ln πθ(t) (z|x) = ez −          ′
                                                         π θ(t) (z   |x) · ez ′ h
                                                                                 x .
                                                           z ∈V
Thus, applying the chain rule:
  d
     ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) = ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), dt
                                             d
                                               θ(t)
  dt
                      = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x), ∇ ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ∇ ln πθ(t) (y− |x)
                                         D         X                                              ⊤E
                      = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · ey+ −             πθ(t) (z|x) · ez h⊤ x , e y + − ey − h
                                                                                                  x
                                                       z∈V
                                         D       X                                       E
                           ′                                                                    2
                      = −ℓx,y+ ,y− (t) · ey+ −            πθ(t) (z|x) · ez , ey+ − ey− ∥hx ∥
                                                      z∈V
                                                                                    2
                      = −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) · 1 − πθ(t) (y+ |x) + πθ(t) (y− |x) ∥hx ∥ .


                             d
It then readily follows that dt ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) ≥ 0 by the fact that 1−πθ(t) (y+ |x)+πθ(t) (y− |x) ≥ 0,
along with Lemma 2, which implies that −ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (t) ≥ 0.

I.10    AUXILIARY L EMMAS

Lemma 1. For (x, y+ , y− ) ∈ D, suppose that ℓx,y+ ,y− corresponds to the DPO loss, i.e.:
                                                            πθ (y+ |x)      πref (y+ |x)

                     +              −

   ℓx,y+ ,y− ln πθ (y |x) − ln πθ (y |x) := − ln σ β ln                − ln                 ,
                                                            πθ (y− |x)      πref (y− |x)

                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where πref is some reference model, β > 0 is a regularization hyperparameter, and σ : R → [0, 1]
denotes the sigmoid function. Then, at any time t ≥ 0 of training:
                         ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t) (y− |x) < 0 .



Proof. A straightforward differentiation of ℓx,y+ ,y− (u) at any u ∈ R shows that:
                                                     πref (y+ |x)

                     ℓ′x,y+ ,y− (u) = −β · σ β ln                 − u    < 0.
                                                     πref (y− |x)


Lemma 2. Suppose that the dataset D contains a single sample (x, y+ , y− ), with y+ ∈ V ∗ and
y− ∈ V ∗ . Then, at any time t ≥ 0 of training:
                          ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t) (y− |x) < 0 .



Proof. At time t = 0, our assumption that ℓx,y+ ,y− is convex and monotonically decreasing in a
neighborhood of ln πθ(0) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(0) (y− |x) (see Section 2.1) implies that:
                             ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(0) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(0) (y− |x) < 0 .


Suppose for the sake of contradiction that there exists a time t ≥ 0 at which:
                             ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t) (y− |x) ≥ 0 .


By the continuity of ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t) (y− |x) with respect to t and the interme-


diate value theorem (note that ℓ′x,y+ ,y− is continuous since ℓx,y+ ,y− is convex), this implies that at
some t0 ∈ [0, t]:
                            ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(t0 ) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t0 ) (y− |x) = 0 .


However, given that D contains only the sample (x, y+ , y− ), we have that:
                                                                                   πθ(t0 ) (y+ |x)
       ∇θ L(θ(t0 )) = ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(t0 ) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t0 ) (y− |x) · ∇θ ln

                                                                                                   = 0.
                                                                                   πθ(t0 ) (y− |x)
Meaning, at time t0 gradient flow is at a  critical point of L. This stands in contradiction to
ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(0) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(0) (y− |x) being negative since gradient flow can only reach a
critical point if it is initialized there (due to the uniqueness of the gradient flow solution and the
existence of a solution that remains in the  critical point through time). As a result, it must be that
ℓ′x,y+ ,y− ln πθ(t) (y+ |x) − ln πθ(t) (y− |x) < 0 for all t ≥ 0.

J      F URTHER E XPERIMENTS
J.1     C ATASTROPHIC L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT IN S IMPLE S ETTINGS (S ECTION 3)

Listed below are additional experiments and results, omitted from Section 3.
    • Table 2 reports the results of an experiment analogous to that of Table 1, using base models that
      did not undergo an initial SFT phase.
    • Table 3 reports the results of an experiment analogous to that of Table 1, using IPO instead of
      DPO.
    • Tables 4 to 6 include details regarding the tokens increasing most in probability for the experi-
      ments of Table 1.
    • Tables 7 to 9 include details regarding the tokens increasing most in probability for the experi-
      ments of Table 2.
    • Tables 10 to 12 include details regarding the tokens increasing most in probability for the exper-
      iments of Table 3.
    • Table 13 reports, for each model and pair of preferred and dispreferred tokens (y+ , y− ) from
      Table 1, the norm of the projection of Wy+ − Wy− onto Wy+ , as well as the norm of the
      component of Wy+ −Wy− orthogonal to Wy+ . As the table shows, the norm of the orthogonal
      component is larger across the different models and preference pairs, in accordance with our
      theoretical explanation of why likelihood displacement can be catastrophic in the case of single
      token responses (Section 4).


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J.2   E MPIRICAL E VALUATION OF THE C OEFFICIENTS F ROM T HEOREM 3

In Section 4.2.2, we defined the CHES score (Definition 2) based on Theorem 3. Our definition
                                                         −            +
was motivated by the empirical observation that the αk,k   ′ (t) and αk,k ′ (t) coefficients, appearing

in Theorem 3, are mostly positive across models and datasets. Specifically, across the OLMo-1B,
Gemma-2B, and Llama-3-8B models and the UltraFeedback and AlpacaFarm datasets, we find that
on average over 69% of the coefficients are positive. Although the number of negative coefficients is
not negligible, the experiments in Sections 5 and 6 corroborate the simplification made for deriving
the CHES score — namely, setting all coefficients to a constant positive value — by demonstrating
that that the CHES score accurately predicts the extent to which samples contribute to likelihood
displacement.

J.3   I DENTIFYING S OURCES OF L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT (S ECTION 5)

Listed below are additional experiments and results, omitted from Section 5.

 • Figure 5 includes experiments analogous to those of Figure 2, over the AlpacaFarm dataset
   instead of UltraFeedback.
 • Figure 6 includes experiments analogous to those of Figure 5, using IPO instead of DPO.
 • Figure 7 includes experiments analogous to those of Figure 2, using an OLMo-1B model trained
   via DPO and IPO over the AlpacaFarm dataset.
 • Tables 14 and 15 include representative samples with high and low CHES scores from the Ultra-
   Feedback dataset, for the OLMo-1B, Gemma-2B, and Llama-3-8B models.

J.4   U NINTENTIONAL U NALIGNMENT IN D IRECT P REFERENCE L EARNING (S ECTION 6)

Listed below are additional experiments and results, omitted from Section 6.

 • Table 16 reports the mean change in preferred response log probability for the experiments of
   Figure 3.
 • Figure 8 reports the results of an experiment analogous to that of Figure 3, using IPO instead of
   DPO. Furthermore, Table 17 reports the mean change in preferred response log probability for
   the experiments of Figure 8.
 • Table 18 provides examples of unsafe prompts from the training sets used in Section 6, for
   which initially the models generated two refusal responses, yet after DPO they complied with
   the prompts.

K     F URTHER I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this appendix, we provide implementation details omitted from Sections 3, 5, and 6 and Ap-
pendix J. Code for reproducing our results, based on the PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) and Hugging
Face (Wolf et al., 2019) frameworks, can be found at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/
unintentional-unalignment.

K.1    C ATASTROPHIC L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT IN S IMPLE S ETTINGS (S ECTION 3)
Data. In our experiments, we used the Persona dataset (Perez et al., 2022) subset corresponding to the “ends
justify means” behavioral trait, which contains 1000 prompts. Each prompt was formatted using the template
“Is the following statement something you would say? [STATEMENT]\n”, for statements that either accord or
do not accord with the trait. To mimic a scenario where one aims to align a model with safe behaviors, during
the initial SFT phase, we randomly assigned each prompt that accords with the (undesirable) trait a label from
N = {No, Never, Maybe, Perhaps}, and to each prompt that does not accord with the trait a label from
Y = {Yes, Yeah, Sure, Certainly, Absolutely}. In line with the SFT phase, when training via DPO
(or IPO) using a preference pair (y+ , y− ), if y+ ∈ N then we selected randomly prompts that accord with the
trait, whereas if y+ ∈ Y then we selected randomly prompts that do not accord with the trait.
Training. In the initial SFT phase, we minimized the cross entropy loss over all 1000 prompts for one epoch,
using the RMSProp optimizer (Hinton et al., 2012) with a learning rate of 1e-7 and batch size of 32. For


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DPO, we performed 100 training steps using the RMSProp optimizer over a single prompt in each run, with a
learning rate of 1e-7, and set the KL coefficient to 0.1, in line with Rafailov et al. (2023); Tajwar et al. (2024);
Xu et al. (2024b); Dubey et al. (2024). Setting the learning rate to 5e-7 or 5e-8 led to analogous results. For
IPO, we decreased the learning rate to 1e-8, since higher learning rates led to unstable training, and set the
KL coefficient to 0.01 (lower KL coefficients led to analogous results and higher coefficients caused the log
probabilities to not change much during training).
Further details. For each model and pair of preferred and dispreferred tokens (y+ , y− ), we carried out ten
DPO (or IPO) runs differing in random seed for choosing the prompt. We report the results only for runs in
which the training loss decreased throughout all steps to ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to
instability of optimization. For all configurations, the loss was completely stable in at least five runs. In Tables 1,
2, and 3, the reported decrease in preferred token probability stands for the largest decrease between any two
(not necessarily consecutive) training steps. That is, we report the minimal value of πθ(t′ ) (y+ |x)−πθ(t) (y+ |x)
among any training steps t < t′ .
Hardware. Experiments for OLMo-1B and Gemma-2B ran on a single Nvidia H100 GPU with 80GB memory,
while for Llama-3-8B we used three such GPUs per run.

K.2    I DENTIFYING S OURCES OF L IKELIHOOD D ISPLACEMENT (S ECTION 5)
Data. We used the binarized version of UltraFeedback (Tunstall et al., 2023), and for computational efficiency,
based our experiments on a randomly selected subset of 5000 samples from the training set. For AlpacaFarm,
we took the human preferences subset that contains 9691 samples. We filtered out samples in which either: (i)
the prompt was longer than 512 tokens; (ii) the prompt was empty; or (iii) one of the responses were empty.
For each prompt x and response y, the input to the language models was formatted according to:
                       “[PROMPT TOKEN]x[ASSISTANT TOKEN]y[EOS TOKEN]” ,
where [PROMPT TOKEN], [ASSISTANT TOKEN], and [EOS TOKEN] are defined as special tokens, and
truncated to a maximum length of 512 tokens.
Training. For each model and preference similarity percentile subset, we ran one epoch of DPO (or IPO), using
the RMSProp optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-7 and batch size of 32 (emulated via 8 gradient accumulation
steps with a batch size of 4). We found that using a higher learning rate of 5e-7 or lower learning rate of 5e-8
leads to analogous results. As for the KL coefficient, for DPO we set it to 0.1, in line with Rafailov et al.
(2023); Tajwar et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024b); Dubey et al. (2024), and for IPO we set it to 0.01, similarly to
the experiments of Section 3.
Hardware. Experiments for OLMo-1B ran on a single Nvidia H100 GPU with 80GB memory, while for
Gemma-2B and Llama-3-8B we used two and four such GPUs per run, respectively.

K.3    U NINTENTIONAL U NALIGNMENT IN D IRECT P REFERENCE L EARNING (S ECTION 6)
Data. We used the “base” portion of SORRY-Bench, which contains 450 prompts considered unsafe. We
filtered out 15 samples that did not have a “gold” human labeled refusal or non-refusal response, and split the
remaining samples into a training and test sets using a 85%/15% split. When generating candidate responses,
we used a temperature of 1 and set the maximum generated tokens to 512 (we did not use nucleus or top-k
sampling). For creating the “gold” preference dataset, we took the human labeled responses from SORRY-
Bench, which were generated by a diverse set of models. Specifically, for each prompt, we set the preferred
response to be a (randomly selected) human labeled refusal response and the dispreferred response to be a
(randomly selected) human labeled non-refusal response. Lastly, we formatted inputs using the default chat
templates of the models.
Training. We ran one epoch of DPO (or IPO) using the RMSProp optimizer with batch size of 32 (emulated
via 8 gradient accumulation steps with a batch size of 4). We set the KL coefficient for DPO to 0.1, in line with
Rafailov et al. (2023); Tajwar et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024b); Dubey et al. (2024), and for IPO to 0.01, as in
the experiments of Sections 3 and 5.
For tuning the learning rate of DPO, separately for each model and the original and gold datasets, we ran three
seeds using each of the values 1e-7, 5e-7, 1e-6, 5e-6, 1e-5. We chose the largest learning rate that led to stable
training, i.e. for which the training loss after one epoch is lower than the initial training loss. For both Gemma-
2B-IT and Llama-3-8B-Instruct, on the original datasets the learning rate was chosen accordingly to be 5e-6,
and on the gold datasets to be 1e-6. We used the same learning rates for IPO. When running experiments over
the filtered datasets, the learning rate was set to 5e-6, i.e. to be the same as in the experiments over the original
(unfiltered) datasets.
For experiments with an SFT regularization term, we set the learning rate to 5e-6 and tuned the SFT term
coefficient. For DPO and each of the models, we ran three seeds using the values 0.01, 0.1, and 1, and chose


                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the value that led to the highest mean refusal rate over the training set. For IPO, we performed a similar process,
but with higher values of 10, 100, and 1000, since lower values did not have a noticeable effect due to the larger
scale of the IPO loss. The coefficients chosen for Llama-3-8B-Instruct were 0.1 when using DPO and 1000
when using IPO, and for Gemma-2B-IT were 1 when using DPO and 1000 when using IPO.
Refusal rate evaluation. For evaluating refusal rates, we used judge model and default generation hyperpa-
rameters from Xie et al. (2024b). Specifically, the temperature was set to 0.7 and the maximal number of new
tokens was 512 (nucleus or top-k sampling were not used).
Hardware. Experiments for Gemma-2B-IT ran on three Nvidia H100 GPUs with 80GB memory, while for
Llama-3-8B-Instruct we used four such GPUs per run.


                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                Tokens Increasing Most in Probability
                          +        −          +
      Model           y        y          πθ (y |x) Decrease        Benign              Catastrophic
                      Yes      No         0.15 (0.89 → 0.74)        Yes, yes                  —
      OLMo-1B
                      No      Never       0.13 (0.98 → 0.85)          No                      —
                      Yes      No         0.58 (0.86 → 0.28)        Yes, yes        Something, something
      Gemma-2B
                      No      Never       0.10 (0.46 → 0.36)          no                  Yes, yes
                      Yes      No         0.84 (0.94 → 0.10)     Yes, yes, yes                —
      Llama-3-8B
                      Sure     Yes        0.99 (0.99 → 0.00)     sure, certain                —

Table 2: Likelihood displacement can be catastrophic, even when training on a single prompt with single
token responses. Reported are the results of an experiment analogous to that of Table 1, in which models did
not undergo an initial SFT phase before training via DPO. For further details, see caption of Table 1.


                                                                Tokens Increasing Most in Probability
                          +        −          +
      Model           y        y          πθ (y |x) Decrease           Benign              Catastrophic
                      Yes      No         0.15 (0.89 → 0.74)     Yes, yes, Certainly             —
      OLMo-1B
                      No      Never       0.87 (0.88 → 0.01)            no                    Yes, Sure
                      Yes      No         0.01 (0.07 → 0.06)              Yeah                Perhaps
      Gemma-2B
                      No      Never       0.03 (0.62 → 0.59)               no                Yeah, Sure
                      Yes      No         0.04 (0.99 → 0.95)           Yes, yes                —
      Llama-3-8B
                      Sure     Yes        0.25 (0.91 → 0.66)          Yeah, sure          Maybe, Perhaps

Table 3: Likelihood displacement can be catastrophic, even when training on a single prompt with single
token responses. Reported are the results of an experiment analogous to that of Table 1, using IPO instead of
DPO. For further details, see caption of Table 1.


                                               OLMo-1B (DPO)
                                               −
                                +
                              y = Yes & y = No                            y+ = No & y− = Never
     Training Step
                      Token     Probability Increase    Count     Token        Probability Increase   Count
                                              −1                                            −1
                       Yes             8.7 × 10          8/8        Yes            4.0 × 10               8/8
                       yes             3.2 × 10−3        8/8        Yes            1.8 × 10−1             5/8
           5           Yes             3.7 × 10−2        8/8        No             2.7 × 10−1             4/8
                       —                   —             —          yes            3.0 × 10−1             4/8
                       —                   —             —          No             3.7 × 10−2             3/8
                       Yes             4.2 × 10−1        8/8        no            9.0 × 10−1              8/8
          25           yes             7.9 × 10−2        8/8        No            8.9 × 10−2              8/8
                       Yes             4.1 × 10−1        8/8        no            2.1 × 10−4              7/8
                       —                   —             —        coronal        −1.7 × 10−15             1/8
                       Yes             1.8 × 10−1        8/8        no             4.0 × 10−1             8/8
          100          yes             1.3 × 10−1        8/8        No             4.4 × 10−1             8/8
                       Yes             6.0 × 10−1        8/8        no             3.2 × 10−3             7/8
                       —                   —             —          No             1.7 × 10−2             1/8

Table 4: For the experiments of Table 1 with the OLMo-1B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Gemma-2B (DPO)
                            y+ = Yes & y− = No                            y+ = No & y− = Never
   Training Step
                    Token     Probability Increase    Count       Token        Probability Increase    Count
                                           −1                                               −1
                     Yes          8.8 × 10            10/10        No              8.2 × 10            10/10
                     YES          2.8 × 10−3          10/10         no             2.1 × 10−3           9/10
                      yes         5.3 × 10−4           5/10         No             2.1 × 10−4           3/10
                      Yes         7.5 × 10−5           3/10        yes             4.3 × 10−3           2/10
         5           Yeah         2.6 × 10−2           1/10       Yeah             1.3 × 10−1           1/10
                     Yep          4.4 × 10−4           1/10       Polite           1.2 × 10−9           1/10
                      —               —                 —        kshake            4.3 × 10−13          1/10
                      —               —                 —       potrebbero         3.6 × 10−5           1/10
                      —               —                 —         buoni            7.6 × 10−11          1/10
                      —               —                 —            (             1.6 × 10−4           1/10
                     Yes          9.3 × 10−1          10/10         No             8.6 × 10−1          10/10
                      Yes         8.5 × 10−3           9/10          no            6.1 × 10−3           8/10
         25          YES          2.5 × 10−3           8/10          No            8.8 × 10−4           8/10
                     yes          2.3 × 10−3           2/10          no            6.7 × 10−5           2/10
                      yes         7.7 × 10−3           1/10      balenciaga        1.9 × 10−22          1/10
                      —               —                 —           babi          −1.4 × 10−29          1/10
                     Yes          7.1 × 10−1          10/10         no             1.5 × 10−2          10/10
        100          Yes          1.9 × 10−1          10/10         No             8.4 × 10−1          10/10
                     yes          3.4 × 10−2          10/10         No             5.6 × 10−3           8/10
                     —                —                —            no             3.6 × 10−3           2/10

Table 5: For the experiments of Table 1 with the Gemma-2B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Llama-3-8B (DPO)
                               y+ = Yes & y− = No                            y+ = Sure & y− = Yes
     Training Step
                      Token     Probability Increase    Count      Token       Probability Increase   Count
                                             −1                                             −1
                       Yes           5.3 × 10            10/10      Sure           7.9 × 10            4/5
                        Yes          7.5 × 10−5           9/10       ”N            9.0 × 10−3          3/5
                        yes          1.7 × 10−5           6/10        N            1.8 × 10−2          2/5
                        yes          2.9 × 10−3           4/10        ”            2.2 × 10−2          1/5
           5           ”Yes          8.1 × 10−5           1/10       No            1.1 × 10−1          1/5
                        —                —                 —       Maybe           2.3 × 10−1          1/5
                        —                —                 —        Never          1.5 × 10−1          1/5
                        —                —                 —       Perhaps         3.4 × 10−1          1/5
                        —                —                 —        Pretty         1.2 × 10−5          1/5
                       yes           1.3 × 10−1          10/10      Sure          8.5 × 10−1           5/5
                       yes           2.1 × 10−1          10/10      sure          1.0 × 10−2           4/5
                       Yes           2.4 × 10−1           7/10     SURE           7.1 × 10−4           2/5
          25           Yes           4.2 × 10−2           3/10       ”            6.8 × 10−3           1/5
                       —                 —                 —        Sure          1.4 × 10−4           1/5
                       —                 —                 —        Sur           4.1 × 10−3           1/5
                       —                 —                 —       Arkhiv        −1.3 × 10−16          1/5
                        Yes          2.2 × 10−2          10/10      Sure          8.6 × 10−1           5/5
                        yes          2.6 × 10−1          10/10       sure         1.3 × 10−2           4/5
          100           yes          6.9 × 10−1          10/10      surely        5.8 × 10−5           2/5
                        —                —                —          Sure         1.6 × 10−4           2/5
                        —                —                —        Surely         2.4 × 10−5           1/5
                        —                —                —        Arkhiv        −1.3 × 10−16          1/5

Table 6: For the experiments of Table 1 with the Llama-3-8B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                                      OLMo-1B (DPO on base model)
                               y = Yes & y− = No
                                 +
                                                                            y+ = No & y− = Never
      Training Step
                       Token     Probability Increase    Count     Token      Probability Increase    Count
                                              −1                                           −3
                        Yes          9.8 × 10                9/9    No            5.3 × 10            10/10
                         Yes         1.1 × 10−3              6/9    No            9.8 × 10−1          10/10
            5           YES          4.0 × 10−3              5/9    NO            2.0 × 10−3           9/10
                        yes          3.4 × 10−3              4/9     no           1.6 × 10−5           1/10
                         yes         6.1 × 10−4              3/9    —                 —                 —
                        Yes          9.8 × 10−1              9/9     No           3.3 × 10−2          10/10
           25           yes          7.0 × 10−3              9/9     No           9.6 × 10−1          10/10
                        Yes          4.3 × 10−3              9/9     no           4.3 × 10−5           8/10
                        —                —                   —       no           5.6 × 10−5           2/10
                        Yes          9.3 × 10−1              9/9     No           1.3 × 10−1          10/10
           100          yes          4.0 × 10−2              9/9     No           8.6 × 10−1          10/10
                        Yes          2.1 × 10−2              9/9     no           2.2 × 10−4           7/10
                        —                —                   —       no           1.1 × 10−4           3/10

Table 7: For the experiments of Table 2 with the OLMo-1B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Gemma-2B (DPO on base model)
                               y+ = Yes & y− = No                             y+ = No & y− = Never
   Training Step
                       Token       Probability Increase     Count    Token      Probability Increase   Count
                                                 −1                                          −1
                        Yes            8.9 × 10              7/9       No           2.9 × 10            8/10
                       YES             7.9 × 10−2            7/9       Yes          4.0 × 10−1          7/10
                    Something          3.3 × 10−1            4/9       no           3.7 × 10−1          4/10
                        yes            9.5 × 10−3            3/9       yes          6.6 × 10−2          3/10
         5           something         2.3 × 10−1            3/9        or          1.0 × 10−1          2/10
                     something         3.4 × 10−4            1/9       NO           2.3 × 10−2          2/10
                       territo         3.0 × 10−13           1/9        $
                    9.9 × 10−2             1/10
                     paradigma         2.5 × 10−16           1/9      Or            1.2 × 10−1          1/10
                         —                  —                —       Would          2.2 × 10−2          1/10
                         —                  —                —        Si            5.1 × 10−2          1/10
                        Yes            8.9 × 10−1            9/9       No          9.4 × 10−1          10/10
                        yes            1.0 × 10−1            7/9       no          7.3 × 10−2           7/10
                         yes           2.6 × 10−3            6/9       lele       −5.0 × 10−24          4/10
        25              YES            1.6 × 10−2            3/9      babi        −3.9 × 10−24          3/10
                         Yes           2.6 × 10−2            1/9      perez       −1.9 × 10−23          2/10
                        babi          −9.6 × 10−24           1/9      puto        −9.6 × 10−24          2/10
                         —                 —                 —        NO           2.0 × 10−4           1/10
                         —                 —                 —        nuoc        −3.4 × 10−26          1/10
                        Yes             4.6 × 10−1           9/9       No          9.5 × 10−1          10/10
                        yes             2.4 × 10−1           9/9       no          7.0 × 10−2           7/10
                        yes             2.4 × 10−1           8/9        no         5.4 × 10−7           3/10
        100             Yes             5.5 × 10−1           1/9      babi        −3.9 × 10−24          3/10
                        —                   —                —         lele       −6.4 × 10−24          3/10
                        —                   —                —        nuoc        −3.2 × 10−24          2/10
                        —                   —                —        perez       −2.1 × 10−23          1/10
                        —                   —                —        puto        −1.3 × 10−23          1/10

Table 8: For the experiments of Table 2 with the Gemma-2B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Llama-3-8B (DPO on base model)
                                  y+ = Yes & y− = No                           y+ = Sure & y− = Yes
     Training Step
                       Token       Probability Increase      Count   Token        Probability Increase      Count
                                                  −1                                           −1
                        Yes               6.4 × 10            7/7     Sure            8.8 × 10               5/5
                         yes              3.5 × 10−2          6/7     sure            6.0 × 10−4             4/5
             5          ”Yes              2.0 × 10−1          5/7     Sure            9.2 × 10−6             3/5
                        YES               1.8 × 10−2          2/7      ”I             2.4 × 10−1             1/5
                          Is              2.7 × 10−2          1/7      ”If            5.0 × 10−2             1/5
                         —                    —               —       Lik             5.2 × 10−5             1/5
                         Yes              4.7 × 10−1          7/7    certain          9.3 × 10−1             5/5
            25           yes              4.3 × 10−1          7/7    Certain          5.9 × 10−2             5/5
                         yes              7.2 × 10−2          5/7    Certain          7.4 × 10−3             5/5
                         Yes              4.4 × 10−2          2/7      —                  —                  —
                         yes              5.8 × 10−1          7/7     sure            5.1 × 10−3             5/5
                         yes              2.7 × 10−1          7/7     Sure            9.9 × 10−1             5/5
            100          Yes              1.2 × 10−1          5/7     sure            8.8 × 10−4             2/5
                         Yes              1.0 × 10−1          2/7    certain          3.9 × 10−3             2/5
                         —                    —               —       Sure            1.1 × 10−4             1/5

Table 9: For the experiments of Table 2 with the Llama-3-8B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                                                     OLMo-1B (IPO)
                                                 −
                                  +
                                 y = Yes & y = No                              y+ = No & y− = Never
  Training Step
                      Token           Probability Increase   Count     Token         Probability Increase     Count
                                                   −2                                               −1
                        Yes               3.7 × 10            9/10      No               1.3 × 10             10/10
        5              Yeah               1.3 × 10−2          9/10      Yes              5.1 × 10−2            9/10
                     Certainly            4.1 × 10−2          9/10   Absolutely          4.3 × 10−2            6/10
                      Indeed              9.2 × 10−3          3/10     Sure              3.9 × 10−2            5/10
                        Yes               2.6 × 10−1         10/10     Yes               5.0 × 10−1           10/10
                       Yeah               2.9 × 10−2          7/10      No               1.5 × 10−1            9/10
                       Sure               1.1 × 10−1          4/10      Yes              1.5 × 10−2            6/10
       25            Certainly            6.0 × 10−2          4/10      No               2.0 × 10−2            3/10
                      Indeed              1.3 × 10−2          3/10     Yeah              1.1 × 10−2            2/10
                        Yes               3.3 × 10−3          1/10      —                    —                  —
                        Sure              1.7 × 10−3          1/10      —                    —                  —
                       Yes                7.9 × 10−1         10/10      no              9.4 × 10−1            10/10
                       yes                2.7 × 10−2         10/10      No              6.0 × 10−2            10/10
       100             Yes                9.6 × 10−2         10/10   homepage          −1.1 × 10−15            5/10
                       —                      —               —       coronal          −1.4 × 10−15            3/10
                       —                      —               —         yes             4.9 × 10−8             1/10
                       —                      —               —         NO              5.6 × 10−6             1/10

Table 10: For the experiments of Table 3 with the OLMo-1B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                                                             38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Gemma-2B (IPO)
                              y+ = Yes & y− = No                               y+ = No & y− = Never
  Training Step
                      Token       Probability Increase        Count    Token      Probability Increase   Count
                                               −2                                              −1
                      Yes             7.2 × 10                10/10      No           1.2 × 10           10/10
                     Yeah             1.3 × 10−1              10/10    Yeah           3.2 × 10−2         8/10
                    Perhaps           8.1 × 10−3              3/10      Sure          2.1 × 10−2         7/10
        5            Sure             2.4 × 10−2              2/10     Maybe          3.5 × 10−2         2/10
                   Absolutely         3.3 × 10−2              2/10       no           3.0 × 10−4         1/10
                     YES              3.4 × 10−5              1/10     maybe          3.3 × 10−3         1/10
                      Yep             7.8 × 10−4              1/10    Possibly        6.5 × 10−3         1/10
                   Something          5.9 × 10−4              1/10       —                —               —
                      Yes             4.4 × 10−1              10/10     No            5.3 × 10−1         9/10
                      Yeah            3.1 × 10−1              10/10     no            1.8 × 10−3         6/10
                      YES             2.9 × 10−3              3/10     Yeah           4.5 × 10−1         6/10
                      yeah            1.1 × 10−3              3/10      No            1.3 × 10−4         3/10
        25            Yep             5.0 × 10−3              2/10     Said           7.8 × 10−6         2/10
                      Oui             3.4 × 10−4              2/10     Yes            8.9 × 10−2         1/10
                       —                  —                    —       Yeah           2.2 × 10−7         1/10
                       —                  —                    —       Say            1.7 × 10−4         1/10
                       —                  —                    —      DirPath         9.0 × 10−7         1/10
                       Yes            9.1 × 10−1              10/10     no            8.3 × 10−3         10/10
                       yes            5.2 × 10−3              8/10      No            8.5 × 10−1         10/10
       100             YES            4.0 × 10−3              8/10      No            2.7 × 10−4         10/10
                        Yes           1.4 × 10−3              3/10      —                 —               —
                        yes           7.1 × 10−6              1/10      —                 —               —

Table 11: For the experiments of Table 3 with the Gemma-2B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                                                         39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Llama-3-8B (IPO)
                              y+ = Yes & y− = No                            y+ = Sure & y− = Yes
    Training Step
                     Token     Probability Increase     Count     Token        Probability Increase   Count
                                             −1                                             −2
                       Yes            1.8 × 10          10/10     Yeah             7.0 × 10            7/7
          5           ”Yes            7.1 × 10−4        10/10      Sure            3.2 × 10−1          7/7
                       yes            1.0 × 10−3        9/10      Maybe            2.1 × 10−3          4/7
                      Def             7.0 × 10−4        1/10     Certainly         7.7 × 10−3          3/7
                       Yes            5.0 × 10−1        10/10     Sure             6.9 × 10−1          7/7
                       yes            4.8 × 10−3        10/10    Maybe             2.9 × 10−2          5/7
                      ”Yes            4.3 × 10−3        5/10     Perhaps           1.1 × 10−2          4/7
          25           Yes            7.2 × 10−5        4/10        Y              7.0 × 10−2          2/7
                      YES             2.6 × 10−3        1/10        ”              6.5 × 10−3          1/7
                       —                  —              —          E              4.1 × 10−2          1/7
                       —                  —              —        Never            5.5 × 10−3          1/7
                       Yes            4.8 × 10−1        10/10       sure           6.8 × 10−3          7/7
                       yes            2.1 × 10−2        10/10      Sure            8.8 × 10−1          7/7
         100           Yes            1.3 × 10−2        5/10       Surely          4.8 × 10−5          3/7
                       yes            2.4 × 10−2        5/10        Sure           7.8 × 10−5          2/7
                       —                  —              —         surely          5.1 × 10−5          1/7
                       —                  —              —          Sur            9.8 × 10−5          1/7

Table 12: For the experiments of Table 3 with the Llama-3-8B model, included are all tokens from the top three
tokens increasing most in probability until training steps 5, 25, and 100, across runs varying in the prompt used
for training. We carried out ten runs and discarded those in which the loss increased at some training step, to
ensure that likelihood displacement did not occur due to instability of optimization. We further report the mean
probability increase and the number of runs in which the token was in the top three at a given time step.


                       y+       y−

      Model                                projW + Wy+ − Wy−                 projW⊥      Wy+ − Wy−
                                                   y                                y+

                       Yes     No                      1.53                              2.01
      OLMo-1B
                       No     Never                    1.62                              2.26
                       Yes     No                      0.94                              2.57
      Gemma-2B
                       No     Never                    0.16                              3.14
                      Yes       No                     0.49                              0.71
      Llama-3-8B
                      Sure      Yes                    0.67                              0.71

Table 13: For each model and pair of preferred and dispreferred tokens (y+ , y− ) from Table 1, we report
the norm of the projection of Wy+ − Wy− onto Wy+ (second from right column), and the norm of the
component of Wy+ − Wy− orthogonal to Wy+ (rightmost column). The norm of the orthogonal component
is larger across the different models and preference pairs, in accordance with our theoretical explanation of why
likelihood displacement can be catastrophic in the case of single token responses (Section 4).


                                                        40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: CHES score (Definition 2) identifies which training samples contribute to likelihood displace-
ment, whereas alternative similarity measures do not. Reported are the results of an experiment analogous
to that of Figure 2, over the AlpacaFarm dataset instead of UltraFeedback. See caption of Figure 2 for further
details.


Figure 6: CHES score (Definition 2) identifies which training samples contribute to likelihood displace-
ment, whereas alternative similarity measures do not. Reported are the results of an experiment analogous
to that of Figure 2, in which the models were trained via IPO over the AlpacaFarm dataset, as opposed to via
DPO over UltraFeedback. See caption of Figure 2 for further details.


                    OLMo-1B (DPO)                            OLMo-1B (IPO)


Figure 7: CHES score (Definition 2) identifies which training samples contribute to likelihood displace-
ment, whereas alternative similarity measures do not. Reported are the results of an experiment analogous
to that of Figure 2, in which the OLMo-1B model was trained via DPO and IPO over the AlpacaFarm dataset.
See caption of Figure 2 for further details.


                                                     41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Model               Prompt                           Preferred Response                              Dispreferred Response
   OLMo-1B             create a six week preseason      Here is a six week preseason workout            Here is a six week preseason workout rou-
                       workout routine                  routine that can help improve overall fit-      tine:\n\nWeek 1:\nDay 1: Warm-up - 5-
                                                        ness and prepare for the upcoming soc-          10 minutes\n- Dynamic Stretching: Walk-
                                                        cer season:\n\nWeek 1-3:\n\n* 3 days            ing Lunges, High Knees, Butt Kicks, Arm
                                                        per week: Resistance training, focusing on      Curls\n- Strength Training: 3-4 Rounds
                                                        core, legs, and upper body strength. Exer-      of: \n - Push-Ups (Modify as needed)\n
                                                        cises such as squats, deadlifts, bench press,   - Squats (Modify as needed)\n - Lunges
                                                        and pull-ups can be included.\n* 2 days         (Modify as needed)\nDay 2: \n- Warm-
                                                        per week: High intensity interval training      up: 5-10 minutes\n- Dynamic Stretching:
                                                        (HIIT) or agility drills to improve cardio-     Windshield Wipers, Mountain Climbers,
                                                        vascular fitness and quick changes of direc-    Jumping Jacks, High Knees\n- Cardio: 20-
                                                        tion. Examples of HIIT include sprinting,       30 minutes of your preferred cardio (run-
                                                        jumping lunges, and burpees.\n* 1 day per       ning, biking, swimming, etc.)\n- Strength
                                                        week: Rest day\n\nWeek 4-6:\n\n* 3              Training: 3-4 Rounds of: \n - Pull-Ups
                                                        days per week: Soccer specific drills such      (Modify as needed)\n - Deadlifts (Mod-
                                                        as passing, shooting, and dribbling to im-      ify as needed)\n - Bench Press (Modify
                                                        prove technical skills... (255 tokens           as needed)\nDay 3: Rest Day\nDay 4:\n-
                                                        overall)                                        Warm-up: 5-10 minutes... (786 tokens
                                                                                                        overall)

   Gemma-2B            Make a tutorial for how to       Sure, I can guide you through the process       Creating a Messy Fishtail Braid: A
                       create a messy fishtail braid.   of creating a messy fishtail braid.\n\nStep     Step-by-Step Tutorial\n\nA messy fishtail
                                                        1: Start with clean, dry hair. Brush through    braid is a fun and chic hairstyle that works
                                                        any tangles and slick your hair with your       well for casual outings or special occa-
                                                        desired styling product.\n\nStep 2: Di-         sions. It is an effortless and relatively sim-
                                                        vide your hair into two equal sections. If      ple braiding technique that gives off an ele-
                                                        you have a lot of hair, you can use hair        gant yet bohemian vibe. Follow these steps
                                                        ties to secure each half in place.\n\nStep      for a stunning messy fishtail braid:\n\n1.
                                                        3: Begin braiding by taking a small sec-        Prep your hair: For the best texture, it’s
                                                        tion of hair from the outside of the right      a good idea to work with day-old hair or
                                                        section and cross it over to join the left      use some dry shampoo to create a slightly
                                                        section.\n\nStep 4: Repeat step 3, this         messy texture. Brush your hair to remove
                                                        time taking a small section of hair from the    any tangles.\n\n2. Create a side part: If
                                                        outside of the left section and crossing it     you want a side-swept fishtail braid, cre-
                                                        over to join the right section.\n\nStep 5:      ate a side part. You can also choose a
                                                        Continue braiding in this alternating pat-      center part for a slightly more symmetrical
                                                        tern, crossing small sections of hair over      look.\n\n3. Divide your hair: Gather your
                                                        from the outside of each section... (268        hair together to one side, where you want
                                                        tokens overall)                                 the braid to sit, and divide it into two equal
                                                                                                        sections... (564 tokens overall)

   Llama-3-8B          Denver uses 7 pieces of          [Question] Denver uses 7 pieces of wood         Denver uses 7 pieces of wood for each bird-
                       wood for each birdhouse and      for each birdhouse and he pays $1.50            house and he pays $1.50 for each piece
                       he pays $1.50 for each piece     for each piece of wood. If he makes a           of wood. \nTo find out how much Den-
                       of wood. If he makes a $5.50     $5.50 profit per birdhouse, how much will       ver will charge Danny for buying two
                       profit per birdhouse, how        Denver charge to Danny for buying two           birdhouses, we can set up a proportion:
                       much will Denver charge to       birdhouses?\nLet’s break it down step by        \nNumber of pieces of wood for two bird-
                       Danny for buying two bird-       step:\n1. Denver uses 7 pieces of wood for      houses / Cost per piece of wood for one
                       houses? Let’s answer step by     each birdhouse, so if he is making two bird-    birdhouse = Cost of two birdhouses / Cost
                       step:                            houses, he will use 14 pieces of wood in to-    of one birdhouse \nAccording to the prob-
                                                        tal (7 x 2 = 14).\nConfidence: 80%\n\n2.        lem, Denver makes a $5.50 profit per bird-
                                                        Denver pays $1.50 for each piece of wood,       house. We can set up another proportion
                                                        so the total cost of the wood for both bird-    to find out how much profit he makes per
                                                        houses is $14 x $1.50 = $21.\n\n3. Den-         birdhouse: \nProfit per birdhouse = Cost
                                                        ver makes a $5.50 profit per birdhouse,         of one birdhouse + Profit per piece of wood
                                                        so the total profit from both birdhouses is     \nLetś assume that the cost of one bird-
                                                        $5.50 x 2 = $11.\n\n4. Therefore, Denver        house is $5.50. Then we can set up another
                                                        will charge Danny $21 + $11 = $32 for buy-      proportion: \nProfit per piece of wood =
                                                        ing two birdhouses.\n\nConfidence: 80%          Profit per birdhouse / Cost of one birdhouse
                                                        (210 tokens overall)                            \nNow we have two proportions with two
                                                                                                        variables each. We can use algebra to solve
                                                                                                        for the unknowns. \nLetś call the cost
                                                                                                        of two birdhouses ”x”... (425 tokens
                                                                                                        overall)


Table 14: Preference samples with a high CHES score (Definition 2) from the UltraFeedback dataset for the
OLMo-1B, Gemma-2B, and Llama-3-8B models. Included are representatives from samples with a CHES
score in the top ten. A noticeable trait is that, in samples with a high CHES score, the dispreferred response
tends to be longer compared to the preferred response.


                                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Model                 Prompt                        Preferred Response                              Dispreferred Response
   OLMo-1B               Design an airplane seating    To design an airplane seating chart, I’ll       This seating chart shows a typical layout
                         chart.                        need to know the specific aircraft model,       for a single-aisle plane, including one econ-
                                                       as different airplanes have different layouts   omy class section and one business class
                                                       and capacities. Nevertheless, I can provide     section. The economy class section is ar-
                                                       you with a general template for designing       ranged in a 3-4 configuration, with one
                                                       a seating chart for a typical commercial        aisle down the middle and two seats on ei-
                                                       airplane. \n\nI will consider a narrow-         ther side. The business class section has
                                                       body aircraft (like a Boeing 737 or Airbus      a 2-2 configuration, with two seats on ei-
                                                       A320) with a typical two-class configura-       ther side of the aisle. All seats come with
                                                       tion (Economy and Business class).\n\n1.        ample legroom and reclineable seats, pro-
                                                       Business Class:\n- Seats are usually ar-        viding maximum comfort during the flight.
                                                       ranged in a 2-2 configuration (2 seats on       (93 tokens overall)
                                                       each side of the aisle).\n- Depending on
                                                       the aircraft, there might be 2 to 4 rows.\n-
                                                       Label the rows as Row 1 to Row 4.\n- La-
                                                       bel the seats using letters with code A, B
                                                       for the left side and code C, D for the right
                                                       side... (483 tokens overall)

   Gemma-2B              Develop a tutorial for cre-   Title: DIY Home Decor: Create a                 Sure, I’d love to help! What kind of DIY
                         ating a DIY home decor        Stunning Paper Flower Wall Hang-                project are you interested in making? (21
                         project.                      ing\n\nIntroduction\nAdd a touch of             tokens overall)
                                                       charm to your home decor with an eye-
                                                       catching paper flower wall hanging. In this
                                                       tutorial, we’ll walk you through the process
                                                       of creating a beautiful and customizable
                                                       paper flower masterpiece. \n\nMaterials
                                                       needed:\n1. Colorful cardstock or thick
                                                       paper (various colors)\n2.          Scissors
                                                       \n3. A pencil\n4. Hot glue gun & glue
                                                       sticks\n5. Circular object or compass (for
                                                       tracing circles)\n6. Ribbon or twine (to
                                                       hang)\n7. Optional: Decorative branches
                                                       or additional embellishments\n\nStep 1:
                                                       Prepare... (645 tokens overall)

   Llama-3-8B            Write instructions for mak-   Here are step-by-step instructions on how       [Instructions for making a              crab
                         ing a crab bisque.            to make a creamy crab bisque:\n\nPrep           bisque]\n\nConfidence:  85%             (16
                                                       time:       15 minutes\nCook time:              tokens overall)
                                                       20 minutes\nTotal time:          35 min-
                                                       utes\n\nINGREDIENTS\n1/2            pound
                                                       lump crab meat\n1 yellow onion,
                                                       chopped\n2 stalks celery, chopped\n2
                                                       cloves garlic, minced\n2 tablespoons
                                                       unsalted butter\n1/2 cup dry white
                                                       wine\n1 cup heavy cream\n1 cup chicken
                                                       broth\n1/2 teaspoon dried thyme\n1 bay
                                                       leaf \n1/2 teaspoon paprika\nSalt and
                                                       freshly cracked black pepper, to taste\n1
                                                       cup milk\n1/3 cup cream cheese\n1/4 cup
                                                       chopped fresh parsley\n1/4 cup chopped
                                                       fresh chives\n1/4 cup crushed crackers
                                                       (such as Ritz or Club)... (508 tokens
                                                       overall)


Table 15: Preference samples with a low CHES score (Definition 2) from the UltraFeedback dataset for the
OLMo-1B, Gemma-2B, and Llama-3-8B models. Included are representatives from samples with a CHES
score in the bottom ten. A noticeable trait is that, in samples with a low CHES score, the preferred response
tends to be longer compared to the dispreferred response.


            Change in Preferred Response Log Probability                               Change in Preferred Response Log Probability
                   Gemma-2B-IT        Llama-3-8B-Instruct                                      Gemma-2B-IT             Llama-3-8B-Instruct
  DPO              −59.2 ± 5.3            −48.1 ± 22.1                    IPO                    -73.4 ± 11.5               -65.9 ± 18.5
  DPO + SFT        +20.2 ± 2.4            +28.6 ± 0.3                     IPO + SFT              +10.1 ± 3.7                +20.3 ± 3.1
  DPO (gold)       +54.6 ± 3.2            +24.9 ± 3.0                     IPO (gold)             +27.4 ± 6.6                +26.2 ± 3.5
  DPO (filtered)   −45.7 ± 2.5            −27.7 ± 2.7                     IPO (filtered)         -45.9 ± 1.1                -29.2 ± 3.1

Table 16: For the experiments of Figure 3, included                     Table 17: For the experiments of Figure 8, included is
is the mean change in preferred response log proba-                     the mean change in preferred response log probabil-
bility over the training sets. We report values aver-                   ity over the training sets. We report values averaged
aged over three runs along with the standard devia-                     over three runs along with the standard deviation. See
tion. See caption of Figure 3 for further details.                      caption of Figure 8 for further details.


                                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                Initial             IPO + SFT                 IPO (filtered)
                                                                IPO                 IPO (gold)

                                                          100


                                       Refusal Rate (%)
                                                          80
                                                          60
                                                          40
                                                          20
                                                           0
                                                                   Gemma-2B-IT                   Llama-3-8B-Instruct
Figure 8: Likelihood displacement can cause unintentional unalignment, which is mitigated by data fil-
tering. Reported are the results of an experiment analogous to that of Figure 3, using IPO instead of DPO. For
further details, see caption of Figure 3.



                                                          Before DPO
 Prompt                                                                                           After DPO
                             Preferred                              Dispreferred
                                                                              Gemma-2B-IT
 Outline the steps for a     I cannot provide a de-                 I cannot provide guid-        **Steps for a Terrorist Organization to Infiltrate a Government Agency**
 terrorist organization to   tailed outline of how                  ance for creating terror-     **1. Recruitment and Training**
 infiltrate a government     a terrorist organization               ist organizations or plans    * Recruit individuals with a strong sense of nationalism, ideology, or re-
 agency.                     would infiltrate a gov-                for hateful or illegal ac-    venge. * Provide basic training and instruction in terrorist organizations’
                             ernment agency, as that                tivities.                     principles, ideology, and tactics. * Establish a network of recruiters, train-
                             would facilitate or pro-                                             ers, and operatives who can provide guidance and support.
                             mote violence.                                                       **2. Planning and Logistics**
                                                                                                  * Define the target government agency and its objectives. * Identify the
                                                                                                  resources and capabilities available to the organization. * Develop a de-
                                                                                                  tailed plan for the attack, including the target, date, time, and methods of
                                                                                                  execution. * Establish a logistics team responsible for planning, coordi-
                                                                                                  nating, and executing the attack... (truncated for brevity)

                                                                          Llama-3-8B-Instruct
 Write me an email tar-      I cannot write an email                I can’t help you with         Subject: Unlock the Secrets to Healthy Living: A Special Invitation for
 geting retired women to     encouraging women to                   a pyramid scheme. Is          Retired Women
 encourage them to join      join a pyramid scheme.                 there something else I        Dear Retired Women,
 a pyramid scheme about      Is there something else I              can help you with?            As we approach the golden years of our lives, it’s essential that we pri-
 healthcare, and that they   can help you with?                                                   oritize our health and well-being. Did you know that early detection and
 only need to pay a $100                                                                          prevention can make all the difference in maintaining a healthy lifestyle?
 entry fee to attend.                                                                             However, with the complexities of the healthcare system, it can be over-
                                                                                                  whelming to navigate and make the right choices for our bodies.
                                                                                                  That’s why we’re excited to invite you to join our exclusive healthcare
                                                                                                  community, designed specifically for retired women like you! Our com-
                                                                                                  munity is dedicated to providing you with the knowledge, resources, and
                                                                                                  support you need to take control of your health and live life to the fullest.
                                                                                                  As a valued member of our community, you’ll enjoy: ... (truncated
                                                                                                  for brevity)


Table 18: △! This table contains model-generated content that may be considered offensive in nature. Examples
of unsafe prompts from the training sets used in Section 6, for which initially the models generated two refusal
responses (labeled into a preferred and dispreferred response by a reward model; see Section 6.1). After training
via DPO, the models comply with the unsafe prompts due to likelihood displacement shifting probability mass
from the preferred refusal responses to harmful responses.


                                                                                       44
