Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RAJECTORY-LLM: A L ANGUAGE - BASED DATA G EN -
ERATOR FOR T RAJECTORY P REDICTION IN AU -
TONOMOUS D RIVING

 Kairui Yang1∗ Zihao Guo1∗ Gengjie Lin2 Haotian Dong1† Zhao Huang1
 Yipeng Wu1 Die Zuo1 Jibin Peng1 Ziyuan Zhong3 Xin Wang4 Qing Guo5
 Xiaosong Jia2 Junchi Yan2 Di Lin1†
 1
     Tianjin University 2 Shanghai Jiaotong University      3
                                                                Columbia University
 4
     The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
 5
     IHPC and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

                                                 A BSTRACT
              Vehicle trajectory prediction is a crucial aspect of autonomous driving, which re-
              quires extensive trajectory data to train prediction models to understand the com-
              plex, varied, and unpredictable patterns of vehicular interactions. However, ac-
              quiring real-world data is expensive, so we advocate using Large Language Mod-
              els (LLMs) to generate abundant and realistic trajectories of interacting vehicles
              efficiently. These models rely on textual descriptions of vehicle-to-vehicle inter-
              actions on a map to produce the trajectories. We introduce Trajectory-LLM (Traj-
              LLM), a new approach that takes brief descriptions of vehicular interactions as in-
              put and generates corresponding trajectories. Unlike language-based approaches
              that translate text directly to trajectories, Traj-LLM uses reasonable driving behav-
              iors to align the vehicle trajectories with the text. This results in an "interaction-
              behavior-trajectory" translation process. We have also created a new dataset,
              Language-to-Trajectory (L2T), which includes 240K textual descriptions of ve-
              hicle interactions and behaviors, each paired with corresponding map topologies
              and vehicle trajectory segments. By leveraging the L2T dataset, Traj-LLM can
              adapt interactive trajectories to diverse map topologies. Furthermore, Traj-LLM
              generates additional data that enhances downstream prediction models, leading
              to consistent performance improvements across public benchmarks. The source
              code is released at https://github.com/TJU-IDVLab/Traj-LLM.
1        I NTRODUCTION
Accurately predicting the trajectory of vehicles is a crucial aspect of autonomous driving systems.
A vast amount of data regarding vehicle trajectories is required to train the trajectory prediction
models. However, collecting such data from real-world scenarios requires considerable manual
effort and resources. This results in significant costs associated with capturing vehicle trajectories
that exhibit intense interactions like overtaking, yielding, and bypassing.
The autonomous driving industry has developed a solution of using traffic-flow generators to syn-
thesize trajectories and enhance training and testing data. An excellent generator should generate
much synthetic data with minimal human operation. Previous works (Li et al., 2023; Feng et al.,
2024) have shown the effectiveness of combining real-world and synthetic data for training pre-
diction models. Popular generators like LGSVL (Rong et al., 2020) have graphical interfaces
that enable users to create and control vehicle trajectories and interaction relationships on a map
through drag-and-drop operations. However, even a single vehicle’s precise editing often requires
tens of drag-and-drop operations. Other generators like Scenic (Fremont et al., 2023) provide pro-
grammable interfaces that allow users to control vehicle motion using functional parameters such
as position, velocity, and yaw. However, they require users to have excellent programming skills to
utilize codes to depict complex vehicle interactions.
The recent literature advocates a more user-friendly generator with language interfaces built on top
of the large language models (LLMs) (Zhong et al., 2023a;b; Tan et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2024;
     ∗
         Co-first authors.
     †
         Co-corresponding authors.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  dangerous speed
           C                              C

       A
                                 A                                                              B
                                              20km/h               B
               20km/h                 B
           B
                                                                         Car A can       A                Car A can
       130km/h                       40km/h                A       only change lanes                 change lanes fr-
   A                         A
                                                                   from the left side.              om the both sides.
   (a) Dangerous Speed           (b) Safe Speed                (c) Narrow Road               (d) Wide Road
Figure 1: (a) Dangerous speeding of Car A for overtaking a slow Car B is unusual, which may lead
to a collision with Car C. (b) A reasonable speed of Car A for overtaking a slow Car B follows a
safer driving logic. Without the guidance of driving logic, a language interface that has only seen
trajectories of left turns in narrow road scenes like (c) may find it difficult to generate trajectories
such as left and right turns in wide road scenes like (d).

Mao et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024), which translates the brief text of vehicle interactions to the
trajectories in the map (a.k.a., “interaction-trajectory” translation). The brevity of the text precludes
the specific parameters regarding vehicle motions, rendering it a highly abstract description of ve-
hicle interactions. Therefore, users can efficiently generate many vehicle trajectories that align with
the interaction described by the text. This efficiency motivates us to study the vehicle trajectory
generator based on the large language model for saving data collection efforts. The vehicle
trajectories can be viewed as a collection of waypoints, with each waypoint associated with the spe-
cific motion parameters of the vehicle as it passes through. These trajectories concretely describe
the vehicle interaction. Language interfaces utilize the map’s environmental information and vehi-
cles’ partial trajectories as guidance to generate the complete trajectories aligned with the text. This
approach is similar to trajectory prediction models, but these two tasks fundamentally differ. While
trajectory prediction models aim to predict relatively deterministic vehicle paths, using language
interfaces may generate many trajectories that align with the interaction described in the short text.
However, when delving deeper into the vehicle trajectories generated by the language interface,
many of them show unreasonable driving behaviors (see Figure 1). In contrast to the brief text
of vehicle interaction and the concrete parameters of vehicle motion, the driving behaviors (e.g.,
change lane, cruise, accelerate/decelerate, and stop) reflect the inherent logic of human beings or
autonomous driving systems that dynamically adjust the vehicle motions based on the changing
environment. In Figure 1(a–b), given the text description of “Car A overtakes a very slow Car
B”, the trajectory of Car A in (a) represents a dangerous behavior of speeding, while in (b) Car A
overtakes B at a safe speed. This leads to a lack of realism in the generated data. Furthermore,
without reasonable driving behaviors, the language interface may become accustomed to generating
trajectories like those in the known scenarios rather than the novel ones in the unseen scenarios,
thus lowering the data diversity. In Figure 1(c–d), given the text of “Car A bypasses a stationary
Car B”, Car A in (c) can only change lanes from the left side to bypass B on a narrow road after
extensive training, but failing to generate a legal right-hand bypassing on an unseen wide road in
(d). Thus, the primary objective of this paper is to involve the human driving logic to guide the
translation between the text description of vehicle interactions and trajectories.
This paper reformulates the “interaction-trajectory” translation by the language interface to the
“interaction-behavior-trajectory” translation by adding the driving behaviors in-between to guide
the generation of vehicle trajectories. We propose a Trajectory-LLM (Traj-LLM), a language-
based generator for producing vehicle trajectories. As illustrated in Figure 2, Traj-LLM divides
the “interaction-behavior-trajectory” translation into two stages. At the first stage (see Figure 2(a)),
Traj-LLM takes input as the text of interaction between multiple vehicles and the map with lanes,
outputting the driving behaviors of each vehicle. Chronologically, we organize the driving behaviors
of each vehicle into a text sequence. Each driving behavior is followed by a text that describes the
logic behind this behavior, in the format like “Change Lane: There are approximately 5 meters of
road width on the left, while the road width on the right is insufficient, therefore choosing to change
to the left lane” and “Change Lane: Both the left and right sides have ample road widths, allowing
for a lane change to either the left or the right”. At the second stage (see Figure 2(b)), Traj-LLM
fuses the vehicle interactions and behaviors in the text with the map information to output specific
motion parameters for each vehicle’s trajectory.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We introduce a dataset, named Language-to-Trajectory (L2T), to aid in the training of Traj-LLM
and associated research efforts. L2T comprises vehicle trajectories derived from 240K traffic sce-
narios, encompassing six diverse road topologies such as straightway, bend, roundabout, cross/T-
shaped/Y-shaped intersection. Skilled drivers carefully craft these intricate trajectories and utilize
textual segments to capture the vehicle interactions and behaviors within each scenario. We engage
our drivers to provide annotations regarding vehicle interactions and behaviors for these scenarios.
Traj-LLM can generate realistic, diverse, and interactive vehicle trajectories based on brief texts.
These generated trajectories can be utilized for training trajectory prediction models, significantly
improving their performances. We summarize our contributions as follows:

           • We advocate a new paradigm of the language interface with the “interaction-behavior-
             trajectory” translation to generate trajectories coherent with the human driving logic.
           • We propose a novel language interface named Traj-LLM, a vehicle trajectory generator
             based on the large language model. Furthermore, we collect a new L2T dataset containing
             240K traffic scenarios with vehicles’ interactive trajectories. This dataset also contains rich
             text descriptions of vehicle behaviors and interactions for training Traj-LLM’s “interaction-
             behavior-trajectory” translation.
           • Traj-LLM trained on the L2T dataset can generate vehicle trajectories as additional data
             for training trajectory prediction models, whose performances are effectively improved on
             the public Waymo and Argoverse datasets. These results can further inspire the relevant
             research on the language-based trajectory generator.


2       R ELATED W ORK

We survey three groups of generators, which are equipped with the graphical, programmable, and
language interfaces to control the vehicle interactions and generate the trajectories.
Graphical Interface Generators with graphical interfaces can be divided into Logsim and World-
sim. Logsim uses the real scenes to provide complex traffic situations. The scenes provided by
Logsim are unchangeable, thus it fails to test the object interactions specified by different users.
Worldsim allows users to design the scenes for testing the autonomous vehicles. These genera-
tors (Shah et al., 2018; Samak et al., 2023; Dosovitskiy et al., 2017; Rong et al., 2020; Silvera et al.,
2022) employ the game engines like Unity 3D 1 that have the graphic renders of the realistic scenes
obeying the real-world rules. Nevertheless, Worldsim costs expensive labor to operate the graphical
interface to control every vehicle to create interactions. In contrast, the language interface relies on
the short text to efficiently create the object interactions.
Programmable Interface Compared to the graphical interface that partially omits the details of ve-
hicle motions to simplify the generator, the programmable interfaces (Zhao et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2023) offer an extensive collection of controlling functions of the vehicle interactions. Scenic (Fre-
mont et al., 2023) is a domain-specific languages for describing the vehicle behaviors. Yet, they
need a significant amount of code to build a road scene with complex vehicle interactions. The
Reinforcement learning (Rempe et al., 2023; Janner et al., 2022; Li et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2018;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2021; Rong et al., 2020; Amini et al., 2020; Zhong et al.,
2023b) allows the traffic rules, which also belong to the formal language, to guide the generation of
the specific vehicle interactions without requiring intricate coding. The traffic rules help to construct
the reward function that drives reinforcement learning. The limited number of traffic rules not only
constrain the driving behavior of each vehicle, but fail to express the logic of making any behavior.
This logic is important for teaching vehicles to navigate different maps, executing maneuvers such
as lane changes and merges safely.
In this work, we introduce driving logic applicable to different map topologies through text. These
logics can guide LLM to generate reasonable vehicle trajectories in various map topologies, thereby
increasing the diversity of generated data. Diverse data aids in training downstream trajectory pre-
diction models, enhancing prediction accuracy in complex scenarios.

    1
        https://unity.com/


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) Interaction→Behavior                                        (b) Behavior→Trajectory


                                                                                              +
                                       RLA                                              RLA               Trajectory
    Initial
Trajectories                                               Behaviors
                                                +
                                       RLA             [Car A]                                            x: 23.4 y: 34.5
                                                       Change Lane: There are                             speed: 12 m/s
                                                       approximately 5 meters...                          yaw: 0°
                  Polyline                             [Car B]
     Map         Encoder                               Stop: Prepare for chang-
                                                       ing lanes to the right...
                                                       Keep Still: Wait for the
                                                       car on the right to pass...
    Car A bypasses Car B.                              [Car C]
    Car A overtakes Car C.                             Cruise: There is no vehi-
      Interactions                   LLM               cle ahead,allowed to...        LLM

     : Initial Trajectory Feature       : Map Feature            /    : Interaction Feature        /     : Behavior Feature
     : Car    : Frozen       : Text Embedding       : Decoder        RLA   : Random Locality Attention   : Regression Head

Figure 2: The two stages of the “interaction-behavior-trajectory” translation. (a) We employ LLM
with the random locality attention to translate the textual description of vehicle interactions into
the behavior of each vehicle. Each behavior is associated with the underlying logic. (b) Given the
vehicle interactions and behaviors, LLM translates them to the sequential motion parameters that
represent the trajectory of each vehicle. We illustrate the random locality attention in Figure 3.

Language Interface The recent LLMs (Devlin et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Brown et al.,
2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023) enable the language interface to create virtual scenes
with complicated vehicle interactions. Though people can use the text-to-video methods (Blattmann
et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2022; Voleti et al., 2022) and traffic generation methods (Park
et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2023a;b; Achiam et al., 2023; Vemprala et al., 2024; Cui et al., 2024; Wen
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Mao et al., 2023; Sha et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2023) to design the
object interactions, they may fail to produce the usual vehicle motions like those in the real world.
CTG (Zhong et al., 2023b) and CTG++ (Zhong et al., 2023a) depend on the traffic rules to generate
realistic motions for the individual objects, yet lack a practical scheme for producing the complex
vehicle interactions.
In contrast to the existing language interfaces, we propose a two-stage translation from vehicle
interactions and behaviors, to trajectories. Real driving logic guides the entire translation process,
resulting in a high realism of the generated vehicle trajectories. Additionally, we propose random
locality attention that effectively utilizes information from vehicle interactions to guide the trajectory
generation, thus enabling the generated trajectories to exhibit complex interactions.

3      T RAJECTORY-LLM

We present the pipeline of using Traj-LLM to conduct the “interaction-behavior-trajectory" transla-
tion. Figure 2 provides an overview of Traj-LLM, which is divided into two stages (see Interaction-
Behavior Translation in Figure 2(a) and Behavior-Trajectory Translation in Figure 2(b)).
Interaction-Behavior Translation At the first stage illustrated in Figure 2(a), Traj-LLM translates
the text of vehicle interactions to behaviors. We denote the text of vehicle interactions as I, which
records O pairs of vehicle-to-vehicle interaction between N vehicles. Each pair of interactions is
documented in text like “Car A overtakes Car B” and “Car B bypasses Car C”. We keep these texts
short to enhance the convenience of using Traj-LLM. We feed K text segments of I into LLM T ,
which outputs the text of the behaviors B for N vehicles. We document the behaviors of each
vehicle like “[Car A] Change Lane: Both the left and right sides have ample road widths...”.
We feed the text interactions I into the text embedding layer E of LLM T to compute the interaction
feature FI ∈ RO×C in Eq. (1). C counts the feature channels. The map M ∈ RE×(D×U ) in the
traffic scenario is represented by E polylines with D points in each polyline, and U denotes the
number of attributes for each point. We input a map M and the initial trajectories X ∈ RN ×(S×4)


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of N vehicles to a polyline encoder P in (Shi et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2020) to compute the initial
trajectories FX ∈ RN ×C and the map feature FM ∈ RE×C as:
                            FI = E(I), FX = P(X), FM = P(M).                                      (1)
Each initial trajectory includes S waypoints, and each waypoint is associated with four motion
parameters (i.e., x/y-coordinates, heading, and speed). E denotes the number of polylines in the
map M. The initial trajectories and the map together represent the spatial configuration of vehicles.
To ensure the consistency between vehicle interaction and map for preventing invalid situations such
as vehicles moving beyond the map boundaries, we propose a random locality attention between the
interaction I (see Figure 3), the initial trajectories X, and the specific map M as:
                        o 1
                                        FoI ·FN
                                                   n
                        FI ·FX                                            o
  SoI↔X = sof tmax        √     ,. . . , √     X
                                                  , So,1
                                                      I↔X , . . . , So,K
                                                                     I↔X    = top K   So,1
                                                                                       I↔X  , . . . , So,N
                                                                                                       I↔X ,
                            C                C
                        o 1
                                        FoI ·FE
                                                   n
    o                   FI ·FM                M       o,1             o,K
                                                                          o
                                                                                        o,1             o,E

  SI↔M  = sof tmax        √     ,. . . , √        , SI↔M  , . . . , SI↔M    = topK SI↔M     , . . . , SI↔M    , (2)
                            C                C
SI↔X ∈ RO×N and SI↔M ∈ RO×E represent the correlation scores between O pairs of vehicle
interaction, N initial trajectories and E polylines in the map M. In Eq. (2), topK operation selects
the top-K largest scores from the set of correlation scores. The selected scores are used to weight
the initial trajectory feature FX and map features FM , which are added to the feature FI as:
                  K
                  X
    b o = Fo +
    F I    I
                         k
                       (αI↔X So,k    k    k    o,k    k     k      k
                              I↔X · FX + αI↔M SI↔M · FM ), αI↔X , αI↔M ∼ N (0, 1).                                (3)
                  k=1

By setting K < N and E, we let the fea-
ture Fb I ∈ RO×C capture the locality corre-                                                          ·
lation between the interaction and the spatial
configuration of the map. This locality enables
                                                                                                      ·+
                                                                      Softmax



each pair of vehicle interactions to occur at the

                                                                                          ···
most reasonable locations on the map. Besides,                                                             output


                                                                                                     ···
  k
αI↔X      k
       , αI↔M    are random variables obeying                                                              feature
the normal distribution, which jitters the corre-                                                     ·
                                                         ···
                                                                ···


                                                                                ···


lation scores So,k      o,k
                I↔X , SI↔M ∈ R. They let the
feature Fb o ∈ RC represent the oth interaction,
           I
                                                                                             : Jitter ~   (0,1)
whose location has some jitter within a range.
                                                      Figure 3: Illustration of the random locality atten-
Given the interaction feature Fb I , LLM T uses
                                                      tion. Here, we use the attention between O inter-
the regression head to output N text seg- action features {Fo | o = 1, ..., O} and N initial
                                                                          I
ments in B. We denote this regression head trajectory features {Fn | n = 1, ..., N } as an ex-
                                                                              X
as H(query, key, value), which has a cross- ample. This illustration applies to the attention
attention architecture with tunable parameters formulated in Eqs. (2) and (6).
denoted as:
                         B = H(B, σ(F             b I )), LB = LCE (B, B).
                                         b I ), σ(F                          b                         (4)
In Eq. (4), σ means the fully-connected layers with non-linear activation. The regression head fol-
lows the autoregressive style, utilizing the interaction feature F b I and the already output behavioral
text B to update the final behavioral text B. Here, the already output text B queries the contex-
tual information within the interaction feature F b I , which helps to output vehicle behaviors aligned
with the interactions. During the training phase, we use the cross-entropy loss LB to penalize the
difference between the regressed segments in B and the ground-truth segments in B.       b
Behavior-Trajectory Translation At the second stage illustrated in Figure 2(b), Traj-LLM trans-
lates the textual description of vehicle behaviors in B to trajectories T ∈ RN ×(S×4) for N vehicles.
We convert numerical data of trajectories into text for training and inference of LLM. Again, each
trajectory includes S waypoints with four motion parameters.
Figure 2(b) illustrates the behavior-trajectory translation. We input the text segment of the behaviors
B into LLM T , and text embedding layer E computes the behavior feature FB ∈ RN ×C as:
                                              FB = E(B).                                            (5)


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Vehicle



                 Bicycle

                                        Cross Intersection         Bend          Y-shaped Intersection              T-shaped Intersection              Straightway               Roundabout
                                                                                                     (b) Road Topologies
    Pedestrian       Traffic Cone                        x: 20.5 y: 12.3
                                         v=0m/s          speed: 10 m/s                    v=10m/s
    (a) Obstracle Classes                                yaw: 0°
                                                                                                                                                  v=10m/s                                    v=0m/s
             Ego car waypoint
                                     Keep Still                     Cruise                                     Change Lane                                                   Stop
             Obstracle waypoint
                                        There are         There is no other vehicle in front            There are approximately 5 meters of                    There are 6 vehicles driving around
              Shortest interaction   pedestrians in    of the road, and the road is a wide           road width on the left, while the road                 the intersection 20 meters ahead , and
           distance less than 10 m   front, so it is   straight road, the overall driving            width on the right is insufficient, there-             there is no other lane to drive in, so it
                                     betteer to wait   conditions are good, suitable for             fore choosing to change to the left lane               is necessary to stop and make way for
            Waypoint parameters      for a while.      speeding up.                                  as there are no other cars around.                     all vehicles at the intersection.

                                                                                          (c) Vehicle Behaviors
                                                                                                           x: 100.1 y: 217.3
                                                                                                           speed: 15 m/s                           stop and wait 5s
                                                                                                           yaw:45°
                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                               1.0


    Bypass : Car A bypasses Traffic Cone B.                        Overtake : Car A overtakes Car C.                                       Yield : Car A yields Pedestrian D.
                                                                           (d) Vehicle Interactions

Figure 4: (a) We prepare four kinds of objects (i.e., vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle, and traffic cone).
(b) There are six kinds of road topologies, where the road shapes are different. (c) Each object can
take the behaviors of changing lanes, cruising, stopping, and keeping still. (d) Bypassing the static
object, overtaking and yielding the dynamic object are the interactions in the L2T dataset.
We employ the random locality attention to capture the correlation between the behavior feature FB
and the interaction feature Fb I , computing the correlation scores SB↔I ∈ RN ×O as:
                                                  !
    n
                             b1
                       FnB · FI
                                               bO
                                         FnB · FI
                                                    n
                                                      n,1            n,K
                                                                         o
                                                                                   n,1            n,O

  SB↔I = sof tmax        √       ,. . . , √        , SB↔I , . . . , SB↔I   = topK SB↔I , . . . , SB↔I  , (6)
                           C                  C

where K < O. We use the correlation scores SB↔I to weight the interaction feature F
                                                                                  b I as:
                                                             K
                                                             X
                                     b n = Fn +
                                     F B    B
                                                                      k
                                                                     αB↔I Sn,k   bk    k
                                                                           B↔I · FI , αB↔I ∼ N (0, 1),                                                                                            (7)
                                                             k=1
                                          k
where we sample the random variable αB↔I       from the normal distribution. In Eq. (7), we compute
                     b ∈ R for the nth vehicle. The random locality attention focuses the
the behavior feature F n        C
                       B
                 b n on the most relevant interaction features and the map information contained
behavior feature F B
                                      k                                       b n , allowing Traj-LLM
within them. The random variable αB↔I       also jitters the behavior feature F B
to generate more diverse trajectories aligned with the interactions and the map.
                             b B ∈ RN ×C of N vehicles to the tunable head H(qurey, key, value)
We feed the behavior feature F
of LLM T to generate the trajectories in T as:
                                          T = H(T, σ(F        b B )), LT = LCE (T, T),
                                                     b B ), σ(F                    b                                                                                                              (8)
where T is the already-outputted trajectories. It queries the behavior information from F
                                                                                        b B during
the generation of the trajectories in T. We minimize the cross-entropy loss LT to penalize the
difference between the generated trajectories T and the ground-truth trajectories T.
                                                                                  b


4       L ANGUAGE - TO -T RAJECTORY DATASET
Considering the high risk of traffic accidents associated with collecting vehicle trajectories with
high-intensity interactions on real roads, we opt to simulate the interactive trajectories in the virtual
world. We construct a new simulator to increase the realism of vehicle trajectories collected in the
simulated environment. The L2T dataset contains 240K road scenes, where the object classes, road
topologies, and interactions are illustrated in Figure 10. We divide the L2T dataset into training and


                                                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


testing sets, which contain 200K and 40K scenes, respectively. Below we briefly provide the basic
information of the L2T dataset. More information can be found in the App A.
Object Classes Each object can be taken from the classes of vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle, and traffic
cone (see Figure 10(a)), which are widely seen in reality. Expect traffic cones to always be static;
other objects can be stationary or moving. These objects may be of different sizes in road scenes. In
this paper, we only use the bird’s-eye view projection of objects to determine their sizes.
Road Topologies We prepare six typical kinds of road topology, including straightway, bend,
roundabout, cross/T-shaped/Y-shaped intersection (see Figure 10(b)). Each kind of road topology
has variant shapes and lanes in the training and testing sets. A set of 2D coordinates represents the
boundary of each lane. We use the XODR file to store each road topology with multiple lanes.
Vehicle Behaviors Each vehicle has the behaviors of changing lanes, cruising, keeping still, and
stopping. Cruising or changing lanes means moving along the same lane or across lanes. We limit
the velocity during vehicle cruising to 120km/h. Keeping still/stopping is temporary/permanent. As
illustrated in Figure 10(c), we document a vehicle’s behaviors sequentially. We recruit a group of
drivers with rich experience to explain and document the logic behind each behavior.
Vehicle Interactions A vehicle may interact with 1∼5 static/moving objects. In contrast to the
behavior of a single object, the interaction defined here captures the relationship between a vehicle
and an object. The possible interactions present in the L2T dataset are illustrated in Figure 10(d).
The vehicle can bypass a static object to avoid collision. It can also overtake or yield the moving
object. During overtaking or yielding, the vehicle occupies a lane sooner or later than the interactive
object. We focus on the short-range interactions between objects. These high-intensity interactions
should be completed in a short range of less than 10 meters, where the vehicle must take prompt
action to avoid collision with the objects. The recruited drivers document each interaction in text.
We employ a two-level check to evaluate the quality of annotations. Firstly, a rule-based script
automatically examines whether the interactions match the annotated content. Secondly, the results
of the automated check are randomly grouped, and a fixed-proportion random check is conducted
by drivers. More details can be found in the App A.
Vehicle Trajectories Every moving object has a trajectory, which consists of a series of waypoints
arranged chronologically. As illustrated in Figure 10(c–d), we associate each waypoint with four
motion parameters (i.e., x/y-coordinates, heading, and speed). The duration of all the trajectories we
provide is within 20 seconds and the sampling frequency is 20 Hz.
5     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
5.1   R EALISM , D IVERSITY, AND C ONTROLLABILITY

We use Llama-7B (Touvron et al., 2023) as the language model used in Traj-LLM, as it is among
the most popular open-source large language models and demonstrates superior performance in
understanding traffic scenarios. For more implementation details of Traj-LLM, see App C. Below,
we evaluate the realism and diversity of the trajectories generated by various methods. We also
compare the control capability of different methods for trajectories to verify if these methods can
generate the expected trajectories according to the interactions specified in the text.
The compared methods differ in their control conditions for generating vehicle trajectories. For a fair
comparison, all methods utilize the L2T for training and testing. SNet (Bergamini et al., 2021) and
TSim (Suo et al., 2021) use the BEV road topologies to generate trajectories. We train BITS (Xu
et al., 2023) and CTG (Zhong et al., 2023b) on the trajectories from L2T, relying on rule-based
conditions for trajectory generation as in (Xu et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2023b). CTG++ (Zhong
et al., 2023a), LGen (Tan et al., 2023), and Traj-LLM utilize text of interaction as the condition.

Realism In Table 1 “Realism”, we report the agent- and scene-level (Zhong et al., 2023b;a) realism
of the generated trajectories. The agent-level realism measures the distribution distances of longi-
tudinal acceleration magnitude (LO), lateral acceleration magnitude (LA), jerk (JE), and yaw rate
(YR), and their average (AVG), between each agent’s generated and ground-truth trajectories. The
scene-level realism is assessed by the relative scores of LO, LA, JE, YR, and AVG. More details
about calculating these metrics can be found in App B. To compute a relative score, we gauge the
distribution distance between each pair of vehicles’ generated/ground-truth trajectories. Then, we
evaluate the difference between the above two distances as the relative score.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: We compare Traj-LLM with state-of-the-art methods on the L2T dataset. The results
measure the realism and diversity of the trajectories generated by various methods. The realism
score has been multiplied by 100. ↓/↑ means a smaller/larger value represents a better performance.

                                     Realism                      Diversity
      Method               Agent                 Scene           Agent      Scene
                    LO↓ LA↓ JE↓ YR↓ AVG↓ LO↓ LA↓ JE↓ YR↓ AVG↓ MD↑ AD↑ FD↑ WD↑
        SNet   14.20 9.84 8.38 7.92 10.09 11.28 4.78 2.76 8.72              6.88     0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Image
        TSim   25.36 21.78 5.33 3.65 14.03 15.94 4.60 10.67 7.91            9.78     0.52 0.25 0.30 2.92
        BITS   10.16 5.82 9.23 4.30 7.38 10.57 1.70 3.54 4.75               5.14     6.80 3.22 6.98 7.27
 Rule
        CTG     8.26 7.33 19.92 1.68 9.30 10.40 6.14 10.10 3.64             7.57     6.49 3.44 6.03 5.70
        LGen    7.55 9.73 13.09 1.91 8.07 9.59 7.89 10.21 4.10              7.95     3.38 1.74 2.19 4.02
 Text CTG++ 6.13 7.13 21.19 1.13 8.90 7.94 4.16 10.37 2.22                  6.17     6.38 3.55 6.08 5.79
      Traj-LLM 2.56 3.17 0.74 0.28 1.69 0.73 2.68 0.52 0.54                 1.12     14.91 6.81 8.71 13.81

Traj-LLM surpasses other methods in terms of realism at both the agent and scene levels. Traj-LLM
introduces the interaction-behavior translation. Through learning from the real data, the short text
of the vehicle interactions is translated into the behaviors with driving logic. It makes each vehicle’s
trajectory consistent with the human driving habits, generating more natural trajectories. Since each
scene contains multiple vehicles, the entire scene is also made more realistic.

 t = 0~17 s                t=1s                        t=8s                        t = 12 s


 t = 0~17 s                t=1s                        t=8s                        t = 12 s


                               Car                                      time [s]
                                             0                     17
        Figure 5: Diverse trajectories generated by Traj-LLM from the same initial positions.

Diversity In Table 1 “Diversity”, we measure the agent-level diversity (Zhang et al., 2022) by
reporting the map-aware average self distance (MD), average self distance (AD), and final self dis-
tance (FD). We measure the scene-level diversity (Xu et al., 2023) by reporting Wasserstein distance
(WD). To evaluate the agent-level diversity of trajectories, we conduct multiple experiments with
the same initial conditions (history trajectories, rules, images) and evaluate metrics for the same
vehicle in every two experiments. MD/AD denotes the average L2 distance between the most di-
vergent/similar trajectories. FD assesses the average L2 distance among the final position of the
most similar trajectories. To evaluate the scene-level diversity, we compute the generated trajectory
distribution on the map. Then, we calculate the density histogram of the distribution as the density
profile. We measure the average WD between pairwise density profiles across multiple experiments.
Traj-LLM achieves better trajectory diversity, as it employs the random locality attention to the
behavior-trajectory translation. It dynamically focuses on the road topology, the driving status of
neighbor vehicles, and the history trajectories. We jitter the parameters of the driving trajectories,
further enriching the diversity of generated trajectories. We visualize the generated trajectories in
Figure 5, demonstrating that Traj-LLM generates more diverse trajectories.
Controllability In Table 2, we compare Traj-LLM with state-of-the-art methods that also rely
on text to generate interactive vehicle trajectories, in terms of the scene-level controllability. We
conduct multiple experiments for each vehicle and record the success rate of achieving the specified


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Controllability of CTG++ and Traj-LLM. In this example, Traj-LLM successfully control
Car 0 to overtake Car 1, while the state-of-the-art CTG++ fails in this case.
interaction and adhering to traffic rules. We calculate the average success rate of different vehicles
having various interactions over multiple experiments.
Traj-LLM achieves a higher success rate be-
                                                          Table 2: Comparison of interaction success
cause it introduces the two-stage translation
                                                          rates(%) with text-based generation methods.
that generates realistic driving logic. This trans-
lation incorporates the random locality atten-
                                                             Method    CTG++         LCTGen    Traj-LLM
tion to enhance the realism and diversity of the
generated trajectories. Solely relying on the               Overtake       65.2        36.9      80.1
short text, Traj-LLM presents a stronger control             Bypass        91.8        54.5      81.3
over the interactions than other methods (see                 Yield        77.7        45.5      83.5
Figure 6). Traj-LLM hopefully shows stronger                  Avg          78.2        45.6      81.6
controllability with more detailed control in-
structions.

5.2     A BLATION S TUDY

In Table 3, we conduct the ablation study to measure the realism and diversity of the trajectories and
the controllability of LLM. We denote I-T/I-B-T as “Interaction-Trajectory"/“Interaction-Behavior-
Trajectory" translation. We use the AVG, WD and success rate for measuring the scene-level re-
alism, diversity, and controllability. Without the driving behaviors that reflect the inherent logic of
human driving, I-T produces inferior results (see the first row of Table 3) compared to I-B-T.

Table 3: I-T/I-B-T means “Interaction-Trajectory"/“Interaction-Behavior-Trajectory" translation.
The results measure the realism, diversity and controllability (%).

      Translation     Logic      Random         Locality         Realism↓         Diversity↑   Control↑
         I-T                                                       14.52            14.39        36.7
                                     ✓                ✓            3.08             22.64        48.2
                        ✓                                          4.81              9.66        62.1
        I-B-T           ✓            ✓                             1.45             17.26        58.3
                        ✓                             ✓            2.60             12.55        67.9
                        ✓            ✓                ✓            1.12             13.81        81.6

In Table 3 “I-B-T”, we list the critical modules of I-B-T translation, i.e., the driving-logic learning
(Logic), random jitter (Random), and locality attention (Locality). Without Logic in the second
row, we use LLM to generate the temporal sequence of behaviors only for each vehicle. This de-
grades realism, diversity, and controllability, demonstrating the importance of driving-logic learn-
ing. Based on Logic, we remove Random or Locality (see the third to fifth rows). Especially,


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the alternative without Random and Locality degrades the random locality attention to a vanilla
cross-attention (the third row). Compared to these alternatives, the complete Traj-LLM shows bet-
ter performance. This is because Locality enables the vehicles to generate reasonable trajectories
aligned with the interactions and the map, while Random makes the generated trajectories more
diverse. Note that Locality also offers efficient constraints and affects diversity. The fifth row re-
moves Random but diversity doesn’t drop much compared with the last row, while in the third and
fourth rows, when Locality is removed, Random significantly impacts diversity.
5.3    G ENERATED DATA FOR T RAJECTORY P REDICTION
In Table 4, we evaluate the effectiveness of Traj-LLM, by using the generated vehicle trajectories
to train downstream trajectory prediction models, i.e., MTR (Shi et al., 2022) and HDGT (Jia et al.,
2023). Apart from the model training and validating on the same dataset, we follow the protocol
of the cross-dataset validation in (Torralba & Efros, 2011), where we train and test each prediction
model on different datasets. The cross-dataset validation helps to evaluate the robustness of the pre-
diction model trained and tested on various data distributions. We utilize two parts of trajectory data
from the training set of WOMD (Ettinger et al., 2021) (WOMD (train)) and the trajectories gen-
erated by Traj-LLM (Traj-LLM (L2T)), where Traj-LLM is trained on 200K scenarios of the L2T
dataset. Each part of the training data contains 400K scenes. Each scene includes 2-8 vehicles with
various interactions. The trained models are evaluated on the validation sets of WOMD (WOMD
(val)) and L2T (L2T (val)), each containing about 40K scenes. We report the trajectory prediction
results using mAP, minADE, and Miss Rate, as defined in WOMD.
                               Table 4: Results of trajectory prediction.
            Train                     Test (mAP ↑, minADE ↓, Miss Rate ↓)
    WOMD Traj-LLM                  WOMD (val)                       L2T (val)
    (train)     (L2T)          MTR            HDGT           MTR              HDGT
      ✓                 0.405, 0.650, 0.141 0.272, 0.604, 0.151 0.211, 0.921, 0.267 0.134, 1.674, 0.491
               ✓        0.106, 1.583, 0.459 0.149, 1.290, 0.434 0.340, 0.662, 0.154 0.196, 0.968, 0.280
      ✓        ✓        0.416, 0.633, 0.139 0.294, 0.578, 0.148 0.384, 0.620, 0.145 0.243, 0.775, 0.194
By training MTR/HDGT on Traj-LLM (L2T) and validating it across on WOMD (val) (see blue
cells in the second row), we find a performance degradation compared to the prediction models
trained on WOMD (Train) (see the blue cells in the first row). This is because different trajectory
distributions exit in WOMD (Train) and the generated data of Traj-LLM (L2T). A large portion
of the trajectories in Traj-LLM (L2T) represent the dense interactions between vehicles, whereas
WOMD (Train) provides many vehicles without interaction. We also find a similar degradation in
the purple cells of the first and second rows when training the prediction models on WOMD (Train)
and validating it on L2T (test).
By integrating the data of WOMD (Train) and the generated trajectories in Traj-LLM (L2T), MTR
and HDGT outperform (see the last row of Table 4) their counterparts trained on a single dataset. The
quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that the trajectories generated by Traj-LLM exhibit
remarkable realism and diversity, thus benefiting downstream prediction models. Furthermore, we
conduct ablation study of generated data and L2T under fixed / non-fixed total dataset size in App D.
6     C ONCLUSION
The precision prediction of vehicle trajectories holds significance in autonomous driving. To train
accurate trajectory prediction models, a substantial quantity of data of vehicle trajectories is impera-
tive. The recent development of generative artificial intelligence makes it possible to produce a large
amount of trajectory data for training the trajectory prediction models at the cost of less human ef-
fort. This paper proposes a trajectory generator, Traj-LLM, which relies on the short text description
of vehicle interaction to produce the interactive trajectories efficiently. We utilize the large language
model to build Traj-LLM. In contrast to the language-based generators for “interaction-trajectory"
translation, Traj-LLM conducts the “interaction-behaviour-trajectory", where it possesses a pow-
erful capability in understanding the interactions between vehicles and outputting their behaviors
and driving logics. This capability allows Traj-LLM to produce realistic and diverse trajectory data
for training downstream trajectory prediction models. We also contribute the L2T dataset, which
contains the interactive trajectories associated with the text descriptions of vehicle interactions, be-
haviors, and driving logic, to train Traj-LLM and promote relevant research in the future.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive suggestions. This work is supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62476192), Natural Science Foundation
of Tianjin (No. 23JCQNJC02010), the National Research Foundation, Singapore and Infocomm
Media Development Authority under its Trust Tech Funding Initiative (No. DTC-RGC-04). Any
opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not reflect the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore and Infocomm
Media Development Authority.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo
   Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Alexander Amini, Igor Gilitschenski, Jacob Phillips, Julia Moseyko, Rohan Banerjee, Sertac Karaman, and
  Daniela Rus. Learning Robust Control Policies for End-to-End Autonomous Driving From Data-Driven
  Simulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):1143–1150, 2020.

Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei
   Huang, et al. Qwen Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.

Luca Bergamini, Yawei Ye, Oliver Scheel, Long Chen, Chih Hu, Luca Del Pero, Błażej Osiński, Hugo Grim-
  mett, and Peter Ondruska. SimNet: Learning Reactive Self-driving Simulations from Real-world Observa-
  tions. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 5119–5125. IEEE, 2021.

Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten
  Kreis. Align Your Latents: High-Resolution Video Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22563–22575, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Nee-
  lakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Long Chen, Oleg Sinavski, Jan Hünermann, Alice Karnsund, Andrew James Willmott, Danny Birch, Daniel
  Maund, and Jamie Shotton. Driving with LLMs: Fusing Object-Level Vector Modality for Explainable
  Autonomous Driving. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 14093–
  14100. IEEE, 2024.

Can Cui, Yunsheng Ma, Xu Cao, Wenqian Ye, and Ziran Wang. Drive as You Speak: Enabling Human-Like
  Interaction with Large Language Models in Autonomous Vehicles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 902–909, 2024.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
   Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
   Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 4171–4186,
   2019.

Wenhao Ding, Yulong Cao, Ding Zhao, Chaowei Xiao, and Marco Pavone. RealGen: Retrieval Augmented
  Generation for Controllable Traffic Scenarios. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 93–110.
  Springer, 2024.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. CARLA: An Open
  Urban Driving Simulator. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1–16. PMLR, 2017.

Scott Ettinger, Shuyang Cheng, Benjamin Caine, Chenxi Liu, Hang Zhao, Sabeek Pradhan, Yuning Chai, Ben
  Sapp, Charles R Qi, Yin Zhou, et al. Large Scale Interactive Motion Forecasting for Autonomous Driving:
  The Waymo Open Motion Dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 9710–9719, 2021.

Lan Feng, Mohammadhossein Bahari, Kaouther Messaoud Ben Amor, Éloi Zablocki, Matthieu Cord, and
  Alexandre Alahi. UniTraj: A Unified Framework for Scalable Vehicle Trajectory Prediction. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 106–123. Springer, 2024.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Daniel J Fremont, Edward Kim, Tommaso Dreossi, Shromona Ghosh, Xiangyu Yue, Alberto L Sangiovanni-
  Vincentelli, and Sanjit A Seshia. Scenic: A language for scenario specification and data generation. Machine
  Learning, 112(10):3805–3849, 2023.

Jiyang Gao, Chen Sun, Hang Zhao, Yi Shen, Dragomir Anguelov, Congcong Li, and Cordelia Schmid. Vec-
   torNet: Encoding HD Maps and Agent Dynamics From Vectorized Representation. In Proceedings of the
   IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11525–11533, 2020.

Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video
  Diffusion Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8633–8646, 2022.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu
  Chen, et al. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models. International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 1(2):3, 2022.

Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with Diffusion for Flexible
  Behavior Synthesis. International Conference on Machine Learning, 162:9902–9915, 2022.

Xiaosong Jia, Penghao Wu, Li Chen, Yu Liu, Hongyang Li, and Junchi Yan. HDGT: Heterogeneous Driv-
  ing Graph Transformer for Multi-Agent Trajectory Prediction via Scene Encoding. IEEE Transactions on
  Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(11):13860–13875, 2023.

Ye Jin, Xiaoxi Shen, Huiling Peng, Xiaoan Liu, Jingli Qin, Jiayang Li, Jintao Xie, Peizhong Gao, Guyue Zhou,
  and Jiangtao Gong. SurrealDriver: Designing Generative Driver Agent Simulation Framework in Urban
  Contexts based on Large Language Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13193, 5(7):8, 2023.

Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Mark Peng, Lan Feng, Zhizheng Liu, Chenda Duan, Wenjie Mo, and Bolei Zhou. Sce-
  narioNet: Open-Source Platform for Large-Scale Traffic Scenario Simulation and Modeling. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:3894–3920, 2023.

Weizi Li, David Wolinski, and Ming C Lin. ADAPS: Autonomous Driving Via Principled Simulations. In 2019
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 7625–7631. IEEE, 2019.

Jiageng Mao, Yuxi Qian, Hang Zhao, and Yue Wang. GPT-Driver: Learning to Drive with GPT. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2310.01415, 2023.

Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bern-
  stein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Acm
  Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.

Davis Rempe, Zhengyi Luo, Xue Bin Peng, Ye Yuan, Kris Kitani, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fidler, and Or Litany.
  Trace and Pace: Controllable Pedestrian Animation via Guided Trajectory Diffusion. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13756–13766, 2023.

Guodong Rong, Byung Hyun Shin, Hadi Tabatabaee, Qiang Lu, Steve Lemke, Mārtin, š Možeiko, Eric Boise,
  Geehoon Uhm, Mark Gerow, Shalin Mehta, et al. LGSVL Simulator: A High Fidelity Simulator for Au-
  tonomous Driving. In 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp.
  1–6. IEEE, 2020.

Tanmay Samak, Chinmay Samak, Sivanathan Kandhasamy, Venkat Krovi, and Ming Xie. AutoDRIVE: A
  Comprehensive, Flexible and Integrated Digital Twin Ecosystem for Autonomous Driving Research & Edu-
  cation. Robotics, 12(3):77, 2023.

Hao Sha, Yao Mu, Yuxuan Jiang, Li Chen, Chenfeng Xu, Ping Luo, Shengbo Eben Li, Masayoshi Tomizuka,
  Wei Zhan, and Mingyu Ding. LanguageMPC: Large Language Models as Decision Makers for Autonomous
  Driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03026, 2023.

Shital Shah, Debadeepta Dey, Chris Lovett, and Ashish Kapoor. AirSim: High-Fidelity Visual and Physical
  Simulation for Autonomous Vehicles. In Field and Service Robotics: Results of the 11th International
  Conference, pp. 621–635. Springer, 2018.

Shaoshuai Shi, Li Jiang, Dengxin Dai, and Bernt Schiele. Motion Transformer with Global Intention Localiza-
  tion and Local Movement Refinement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:6531–6543,
  2022.

Gustavo Silvera, Abhijat Biswas, and Henny Admoni. DReyeVR: Democratizing Virtual Reality Driving Sim-
  ulation for Behavioural & Interaction Research. In 2022 17th ACM/IEEE International Conference on
  Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 639–643. IEEE, 2022.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario
  Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Simon Suo, Sebastian Regalado, Sergio Casas, and Raquel Urtasun. TrafficSim: Learning To Simulate Realistic
  Multi-Agent Behaviors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10400–10409, 2021.
Shuhan Tan, Boris Ivanovic, Xinshuo Weng, Marco Pavone, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Language Conditioned
  Traffic Generation. In Conference on Robot Learning, volume 229, pp. 2714–2752, 2023.

Antonio Torralba and Alexei A Efros. Unbiased Look at Dataset Bias. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1521–1528. IEEE, 2011.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
  Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation
  Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Sai H Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. ChatGPT for Robotics: Design Principles
  and Model Abilities. IEEE Access, 12:55682–55696, 2024.

Vikram Voleti, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Chris Pal. MCVD - Masked Conditional Video Diffusion for
  Prediction, Generation, and Interpolation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23371–
  23385, 2022.

Licheng Wen, Daocheng Fu, Xin Li, Xinyu Cai, Tao Ma, Pinlong Cai, Min Dou, Botian Shi, Liang He, and
   Yu Qiao. DiLu: A Knowledge-Driven Approach to Autonomous Driving with Large Language Models.
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Stan Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Yufei Shi, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
   Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-A-Video: One-Shot Tuning of Image Diffusion Models for Text-
   to-Video Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
   7589–7599, 2023.
Danfei Xu, Yuxiao Chen, Boris Ivanovic, and Marco Pavone. BITS: Bi-level Imitation for Traffic Simulation.
  In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 2929–2936. IEEE, 2023.

Kairui Yang, Zihao Guo, Gengjie Lin, Haotian Dong, Die Zuo, Jibin Peng, Zhao Huang, Zhecheng Xu, Fupeng
  Li, Ziyun Bai, et al. Natural-language-driven Simulation Benchmark and Copilot for Efficient Production of
  Object Interactions in Virtual Road Scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04008, 2023.

Qichao Zhang, Yinfeng Gao, Yikang Zhang, Youtian Guo, Dawei Ding, Yunpeng Wang, Peng Sun, and Dong-
  bin Zhao. TrajGen: Generating Realistic and Diverse Trajectories With Reactive and Feasible Agent Be-
  haviors for Autonomous Driving. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(12):24474–
  24487, 2022.

Zhejun Zhang, Alexander Liniger, Dengxin Dai, Fisher Yu, and Luc Van Gool. End-to-End Urban Driving by
  Imitating a Reinforcement Learning Coach. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 15222–15232, 2021.

Guosheng Zhao, Xiaofeng Wang, Zheng Zhu, Xinze Chen, Guan Huang, Xiaoyi Bao, and Xingang Wang.
  DriveDreamer-2: LLM-Enhanced World Models for Diverse Driving Video Generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.06845, 2024.

Ziyuan Zhong, Davis Rempe, Yuxiao Chen, Boris Ivanovic, Yulong Cao, Danfei Xu, Marco Pavone, and
  Baishakhi Ray. Language-Guided Traffic Simulation via Scene-Level Diffusion. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 144–177. PMLR, 2023a.

Ziyuan Zhong, Davis Rempe, Danfei Xu, Yuxiao Chen, Sushant Veer, Tong Che, Baishakhi Ray, and Marco
  Pavone. Guided Conditional Diffusion for Controllable Traffic Simulation. In 2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 3560–3566. IEEE, 2023b.

Zikang Zhou, Jianping Wang, Yung-Hui Li, and Yu-Kai Huang. Query-Centric Trajectory Prediction. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 17863–17873,
  2023.


                                                    13
