Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FAITH E VAL : C AN YOUR L ANGUAGE M ODEL S TAY
FAITHFUL TO C ONTEXT, E VEN I F “T HE M OON IS
M ADE OF M ARSHMALLOWS ”
 Yifei Ming1∗, Senthil Purushwalkam1 , Shrey Pandit2 , Zixuan Ke1 , Xuan-Phi Nguyen1
 Caiming Xiong1 , Shafiq Joty1
 1                           2
   Salesforce AI Research      University of Texas at Austin


                                             A BSTRACT

            Ensuring faithfulness to context in large language models (LLMs) and retrieval-
            augmented generation (RAG) systems is crucial for reliable deployment in real-
            world applications, as incorrect or unsupported information can erode user trust.
            Despite advancements on standard benchmarks, faithfulness hallucination—where
            models generate responses misaligned with the provided context—remains a sig-
            nificant challenge. In this work, we introduce FaithEval, a novel and compre-
            hensive benchmark tailored to evaluate the faithfulness of LLMs in contextual
            scenarios across three diverse tasks: unanswerable, inconsistent, and counterfac-
            tual contexts. These tasks simulate real-world challenges where retrieval mecha-
            nisms may surface incomplete, contradictory, or fabricated information. FaithE-
            val comprises 4.9K high-quality problems in total, validated through a rigorous
            four-stage context construction and validation framework, employing both LLM-
            based auto-evaluation and human validation. Our extensive study across a wide
            range of open-source and proprietary models reveals that even state-of-the-art
            models often struggle to remain faithful to the given context, and that larger
            models do not necessarily exhibit improved faithfulness. Code is available at:
            https://github.com/SalesforceAIResearch/FaithEval.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The rapid development of large language models (LLMs) has significantly advanced natural language
understanding and generation tasks, enabling systems to produce fluent and coherent responses
across a variety of applications (Bubeck et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024b; Wu et al., 2024b). The
capabilities of these models have been further enhanced by integrating external information from
the Internet or knowledge sources using a popular approach of Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2024a). In this paradigm, generated outputs are enhanced
by retrieving and encoding relevant information as context to the model. While RAG facilitates
the integration of additional knowledge, hallucination—where models generate unsupported or
ungrounded content—remains a critical challenge (Nguyen et al., 2024).
Hallucination in LLMs can be generally categorized into two types: factual hallucination, where
generated content deviates from established world knowledge, and faithfulness hallucination, where
the generated response is inconsistent with the provided context (Huang et al., 2023a). While factuality
has received extensive attention, with numerous benchmarks designed to evaluate correctness against
common sense or world knowledge (Lee et al., 2022; Min et al., 2023; Chern et al., 2023; Wei et al.,
2024), a fine-grained and holistic evaluation of faithfulness on noisy contexts remains underexplored,
particularly when the context contradicts commonly accepted facts. Maintaining faithfulness to the
context is especially important for various personalized applications and can be critical in high-stakes
domains such as healthcare, finance and law, where inaccurate or ungrounded responses can erode
user trust and lead to severe consequences (Bommarito & Katz, 2022; Pal et al., 2023).
One of the key challenges in addressing faithfulness hallucination in RAG stems from the retrieval
process, where the wealth of documents on the Internet varies in credibility. This complexity is
    ∗
        Correspondence: yifei.ming@salesforce.com


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      76.8


                                                             66.8


                      Overall Accuracy (normalized)
                                                                    54.8
                                                                           53.1

                                                                                  45.5   45.1


                                                                                                30.3


Figure 1: Performance summary on FaithEval Benchmark. Each bar shows the combined accuracy
(normalized) for the best model from each organization across three tasks: Counterfactual, Inconsis-
tent, and Unanswerable (Sec 3.1). Different colors in each bar represent the accuracy for each task.

further compounded when long retrieved content includes multiple relevant paragraphs that omit
key details, present conflicting evidence, or propagate counterfactual claims. Existing hallucination
evaluation benchmarks fall short in providing fine-grained assessments of how well models align
their responses with the context. They often do not disentangle factuality from faithfulness (Li et al.,
2024b; Chen et al., 2024c) or capture the full range of contextual nuances (Lin et al., 2022; Yin et al.,
2023). Moreover, current hallucination detection solutions focus on identifying hallucinations in
model outputs (Liu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b; Hu et al., 2024), which is orthogonal to the task of
understanding the impact of contexts on faithfulness hallucination.
In this work, we introduce FaithEval, a comprehensive benchmark specifically designed to evaluate
the contextual faithfulness of LLMs across three diverse tasks: unanswerable, inconsistent, and
counterfactual contexts. These tasks simulate real-world challenges where retrieval mechanisms may
surface incomplete, contradictory, or fabricated information (Figure 2). FaithEval includes a total
of 4.9K high-quality samples, constructed using a rigorous four-stage framework with multi-turn
LLM-based context verification and human validation. We conduct a holistic evaluation on 18
representative proprietary and open-sourced models, revealing that faithfulness remains challenging,
even for the most competitive LLMs, despite their strong performance on standard benchmarks.
Figure 1 summarizes the performance of representative models from each organization, with each
bar representing performance on the individual tasks. To our knowledge, FaithEval is the first fine-
grained and comprehensive benchmark specifically targeting contextual faithfulness hallucination,
contributing to the broader effort toward developing reliable next-generation foundation models.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
       • We introduce FaithEval, a novel and comprehensive benchmark dedicated to evaluating
         contextual faithfulness in LLMs across three diverse tasks: unanswerable, inconsistent, and
         counterfactual contexts.
       • We develop a scalable four-stage framework for context construction and validation, which
         incorporates multi-turn LLM-based validation and human annotation to ensure high-quality
         contextual QA pairs.
       • We perform an extensive and in-depth study on a wide range of competitive open-source
         and proprietary models. We highlight that faithfulness remains a significant challenge for
         recent LLMs and that allegedly larger models, such as GPT-4o and Llama-3-70B-Instruct,
         do not necessarily lead to improved faithfulness.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Contextual LLM and retrieval-augmented generation. As the demand for contextual LLMs
continues to grow, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems offer a promising solution by


                                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


integrating external knowledge retrieval with LLMs (Lewis et al., 2020; Sarto et al., 2022; Ramos
et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023b; Zhao et al., 2024a). In RAG, model responses are grounded using
knowledge sourced from private or open-access data repositories. A typical RAG system operates
through a close interaction between the retriever and a generator. The retriever (Li et al., 2023a; Meng
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024a) identifies relevant documents from the source, and this retrieved
information is supplied to the generator (e.g., a language model) to produce grounded outputs (Lewis
et al., 2020; Izacard & Grave, 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2021; Ke et al., 2024). Recent works develop
more sophisticate RAG frameworks to improve answer reliability (Asai et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024d;
Xu et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2024). The increased context sizes in LLMs have improved their
ability to handle longer text sequences, allowing them to handle complex tasks requiring extensive
background knowledge (Gao et al., 2023; Song et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024). These improvements
are particularly beneficial for long-form question answering (Joshi et al., 2017; Kwiatkowski et al.,
2019b; Li et al., 2024a). However, the variation in source quality can exacerbate challenges to
maintaining faithfulness in LLMs, especially in longer contexts retrieved from the Internet.
Hallucination and faithfulness evaluation. Hallucination in LLMs refers to the generation of
ungrounded content, either from the provided context or established world knowledge. The former is
typically described as factuality hallucination, while the latter is known as faithfulness hallucination,
which highlights the discrepancy between the model’s output and the context (Huang et al., 2023a; Ye
et al., 2023). While there is rich literature on factuality evaluation and benchmarks with and without
contexts (Lee et al., 2022; Min et al., 2023; Chern et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024c),
faithfulness has mostly been explored for summarization (Laban et al., 2023; Jia et al., 2023) natural
language explanations (Atanasova et al., 2023; Siegel et al., 2024) and recently QA (Adlakha et al.,
2024). Chen et al. (2024b) investigates the robustness of contextual LLMs under noisy retrieval, with
a primary focus on news articles. Another line of research focuses on hallucination detection (Liu
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b; Hu et al., 2024), which aims to detect hallucinated outputs. The task
focuses on the model output instead of the context (input). Additional efforts have been made to
create QA benchmarks based on common misconceptions (Lin et al., 2022) or questions that are
unanswerable by nature (Yin et al., 2023). However, none of these datasets are contextual. In contrast,
each question in FaithEval is accompanied by a multi-paragraph context, mimicking RAG scenarios
with long and noisy contexts.
Adversarial context generation. Generating challenging or adversarial contexts for language models
has been explored in various scenarios. One line of research focuses on context modification. Shi et al.
(2023) propose a template-based framework that adds irrelevant facts to the context and studies the
effectiveness of different prompting techniques. Yu et al. (2024) leverage LLMs to perturb original
evidence, potentially altering the answers, while Manakul et al. (2023) utilize LLMs to generate purely
synthetic contexts that support given statements. To study the impact of knowledge conflicts, Wu
et al. (2024a); Xie et al. (2024) use LLMs to create adversarial contexts that conflict with the models’
internal knowledge, improving coherence compared to previous word-level editing methods (Longpre
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023). Pan et al. (2023) studies the impact of LLM-
generated misinformation. Another research direction involves modifying the question. Ramakrishna
et al. (2023) generate invalid (unanswerable) questions, while Huang et al. (2024) build a small-scale
dataset with 209 questions containing adversarial facts or incorrect information based on diverse
templates. In contrast, we introduce the first fine-grained, larger-scale (4.9K) high-quality contextual
QA benchmark featuring multi-paragraph coherent contexts across three diverse tasks.

3     FAITH E VAL B ENCHMARK
3.1   TASK OVERVIEW

To systematically evaluate the contextual faithfulness of LLMs, FaithEval contains three diverse
tasks including unanswerable context, inconsistent context, and counterfactual context. Each sample
(c, q, a) consists of a question q, and a long context passage made up of one or more documents
c = (d1 , ..., dn ), and a groundtruth answer a. The model is expected to answer the question leveraging
the information in the provided context. An overview of each task is presented in Figure 2. Next, we
illustrate the construction of each task in detail.
Unanswerable Context. An unanswerable context arises when the context includes relevant details
but lacks the information needed to answer the question. In FaithEval, answerability is determined


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Unanswerable Context                Inconsistent Context                     Counterfactual Context
  In 2009, 78.5% of Dallas          [Doc 1] Life of Pi is a Canadian fantasy   ...One intriguing property of wood that
  commuters drive to work alone.
   adventure novel...with a Bengal tiger      has often been overlooked is its
  ...
                              named Richard Parker...

                magnetic nature...These findings
  In 2015, the American                                                        pointed to the presence of iron-like
  Community Survey estimated        [Doc 2] ...He endures 227 days             compounds within the cellular
  12.8% for carpooling, 3.5% for    stranded on a lifeboat ...accompanied      structure of wood, which could exhibit
  riding transit...
                by a Bengal tiger named William            faint magnetic properties...early
                                    Shakespeare...

                           shipbuilders used magnetized wood...



  Question: 
                        Question: 
                               Question: 

  Which group of commuters in        What is the tiger’s name                  Which statement best explains
  Dallas in 2009 is larger:          in Life of Pi?
                           why a tree branch floats on water?
  carpooling or transit?
                                                      [four options]

                                          Richard Parker
      Carpooling                                                                   Wood is buoyant
                                          Inconsistent

      Unknown                             (multiple answers)                        Wood is magnetic



Figure 2: Demonstration of each task in FaithEval. Left: in Unanswerable Context, the context
does not contain the answer to the question. Middle: in Inconsistent Context, multiple answers
are supported by different documents. Right: in Counterfactual Context, the context contains
counterfactual statements that contradict common sense or world knowledge. Complete contexts can
be seen in Appendix E.

solely by the context, regardless of whether the question itself is unanswerable. For instance, in the
example in Figure 2 (Left), the context provides the proportion of both types of commuters in 2015.
However, the question “Which group of commuters in Dallas in 2009 is larger: carpooling or transit?”
is unanswerable, as the context lacks specific data from 2009. To create such task, we modify the
context from a collection of 10 contextual QA datasets, covering a wide range of domains (see Source
datasets below). For each sample, we prompt an LLM to modify the original context so that it no
longer contains the supporting evidence for the ground truth answer. Additional sentences may be
woven into the new context to maintain coherence. The full prompt is shown in Figure 17. This
process resulted in a total of 2.4k contextual QA pairs. To verify the quality of the modified contexts,
we achieved over 98% agreement with professional human annotators (Sec 3.2).
Inconsistent Context. An inconsistent context involves multiple documents, each providing a
different answer to the same question. This simulates noisy retrieval scenarios, where documents
from sources with varying levels of credibility are retrieved. For instance, as shown in Figure 2
(Middle), the context presents conflicting information about the tiger’s name in the novel Life of Pi. A
faithful model should be able to identify such inconsistencies, especially when instructed to do so. To
create this task, we modify contexts from the same collection of contextual QA datasets used in the
Unanswerable Context task. For each sample, the LLM is provided with a context passage, a question,
and an original answer, which is supported by the context. The goal is to modify the context so that
it introduces fabricated supporting evidence for a new, conflicting answer. The detailed prompt is
shown in Figure 18. Since this task is more challenging, we curated a collection of 1.5k high-quality
contextual QA pairs after filtering through professional human annotators.
Counterfactual Context. A counterfactual context contains statements that contradict with common
sense or widely accepted facts, such as “water freeze at 100 degrees Celsius”, “wood is magnetic”, or
“carbon dioxide is the most abundant greenhouse gas in the atmosphere”. Unlike the other two tasks,
the questions in this task are required to be relevant to such well-known facts. We curate this task
based on ARC-Challenge (Clark et al., 2018), a QA dataset covering grade-school level, multiple-
choice science questions. Since the original dataset does not include context, we prompt an LLM to
generate a long, multi-paragraph context that seamlessly provides fabricated supporting evidence for
a counterfactual answer. The detailed prompt is shown in Figure 19. This process resulted in a total
of 1k contextual QA pairs, each with three to five options. Due to the multiple-choice nature, we can
use keyword matching to verify the quality of the synthetic contexts (Appendix B).
Source datasets. We curate new contexts based on a diverse collection of contextual QA datasets,
including SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2017), TriviaQA (Joshi et al.,
2017), NaturalQuestions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019a), SearchQA (Dunn et al., 2017), HotpotQA (Yang
et al., 2018), BioASQ (Tsatsaronis et al., 2015), DROP (Dua et al., 2019), RACE (Lai et al., 2017),


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Context Generation                      Task Construction                               Auto Eval by LLM Judge
  Source: Contextual Dataset                      Unanswerable                                        Q1: Is ans valid given context (if)?
                                                                     Context with
                   Q2: Is ans unique given context (only-if)?
                                                                   removed evidence

   QA pair      Original
   LLM    Modified
    Inconsistent
                context
             context

                                                                         Context with
    Is ans valid
     Human Annotation
                                                                        multiple answers    & unique
                                                                                                                                       Final

  Source: Non-Contextual Dataset                                                                                                      Version

      QA pair                                     Counterfactual                                            majority

                                                                  Context with
                             vote
                              LLM   Synthetic
              counterfactual evidence                                     filter    Contextual QA

                                     context
                                                                                         Dataset


Figure 3: Illustration of task construction and validation framework. (1) Context Generation: given a
source QA dataset, we prompt an LLM to generate a new context based on a question, the original
answer, and optionally the original context. (2) Task Construction: we construct the prompt for
each sample by combining the original question, the new context, and task-specific instructions. (3)
Auto Eval by LLM Judge: we validate the quality of the new context by checking if and only-if the
new answer is supported by the new context. (4) Human Annotation: we further filter out invalid
contextual QA pairs based on the majority vote results from professional annotators.

TextbookQA (Kembhavi et al., 2017). We adopt the test splits from Fisch et al. (2019). Due to
variations in human annotations, the final collection consists of 150 samples per dataset for the
Inconsistent Context task and around 240 samples per dataset for the Unanswerable Context task.

3.2     TASK C ONSTRUCTION AND VALIDATION F RAMEWORK

Task construction. An overview of our task construction and validation framework is shown in
Figure 3. Given a source QA sample and an original context (optional), we prompt an LLM to
generate both a new context and a new answer for the Counterfactual and Inconsistent tasks, or only a
new context (that supports no answer) for the Unanswerable task. To make the tasks challenging, the
new context should be coherent and contain minimal modifications if the original context is provided.
In addition, multiple paragraphs not directly related to the answer are included, serving as distractors.
The new context is generated with detailed justifications explaining how it satisfies the task criterion.
We construct the prompt for each sample by combining the original question, the new context, and
task-specific instructions (Sec 3.3). In particular, an inconsistent context is created by concatenating
the new context with the original context, each supporting a different answer.
Auto validation and human annotation. We validate the quality of the new context by using a
separate LLM judge to verify whether the new answer is valid given the context ("if" condition) and
whether the context does not support alternative answers ("only-if" condition). For example, the new
context in Figure 2 (Right) should not mention wood is buoyant. Samples that fail to meet both
conditions are filtered out. Next, we perform meticulous human annotation. Depending on the task’s
validation difficulty, we employ different strategies. As the Inconsistent Context task is challenging
to validate, we rely on full human annotation. Three Mechanical Turk (Crowston, 2012) workers
judge whether each contextual QA pair meets the "if" and "only-if" conditions, with final inclusion
determined by majority agreement. This yields 1.5K samples. For the Unanswerable Context task,
which is easier to validate, we use a similar majority-vote approach, achieving over 98% agreement
among human annotators. This yields 2.4K samples. For the Counterfactual Context task, since the
answer options are provided with the context, we validate using a string-based matching method,
where the context passes if all words from the answer appear in the context. This decision was based
on our pilot human studies that showed nearly perfect agreement with the string-matching method
on generated contexts based on ARC-Challenge. The filtering results in 1K samples. After filtering,
the FaithEval benchmark contains a total of 4.9K high-quality contextual QA pairs. More details are
included in Appendix A.

3.3     E VALUATION

Models. We evaluate a wide range of competitive open-sourced and proprietary language models with
different scales, including the most recent releases up to Sep 10, 2024. Our initial experiments suggest


                                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that instruction-tuned (chat) models significantly outperform base models. Therefore, we consider 18
competitive chat models, including Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct (3.8B), Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct
(14B), Phi-3.5-mini-instruct (3.8B) (Abdin et al., 2024), LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct, LLaMA-3.1-8B-
Instruct, LLaMA-3-70B-Instruct, LLaMA-3.1-70B-Instruct (Llama, 2024), Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3,
Mistral-Nemo-Instruct-2407 (12B) (Jiang et al., 2023), Gemma-2-9B-it, and Gemma-2-27B-it (Team,
2024). For proprietary models, we consider Open AI’s GPT-3.5 Turbo, GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4o, GPT-4
Turbo, Cohere’s Command R (35B), Command R+ (104B), and Anthropic’s Claude 3.5 Sonnet.
Default Evaluation Scheme. For all tasks, we append the following prompt to each question: You
are an expert in retrieval-based question answering. Please respond with the exact answer, using only
the information provided in the context. For the Unanswerable Context task, we append an additional
instruction: If there is no information available from the context, the answer should be “unknown”.
Similarly, for the Inconsistent Context task, the instruction is: If there is conflicting information
or multiple answers in the context, the answer should be “conflict”. Note that for Counterfactual
Context, we do not add additional task instructions. Our primary evaluation metric across all tasks
is accuracy (ACC), where a model’s response is considered correct if it mentions the ground truth
answer. All models are evaluated using their default configurations with deterministic decoding
(temperature = 0). We report both strict-matching (S) ACC, which considers only a single ground
truth answer (e.g., “unknown”), and non-strict matching (N) ACC, which allows a broader range of
semantically similar phrases. A detailed list of valid phrases is provided in Appendix A.
Alternative Evaluation Schemes. We study alternative evaluation strategies in Section 5. Specifically,
we examine non-deterministic decoding with temperature scaling (t = 0.3, top-p = 0.9). Additionally,
we investigate the impact of chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022)
using the following instruction: Given the context, first provide a brief answer to the question. Then,
explain your reasoning step by step, detailing how you arrived at the answer.

4     M AIN R ESULTS


Figure 4: Model performance comparison on the Unanswerable Context task, where no evidence
supports the answer. Columns are sorted by performance on the Original task (original context).
Proprietary model names are highlighted in orange.

4.1   U NANSWERABLE C ONTEXT

Abstaining is challenging, even when explicitly instructed. The results of the Unanswerable
Context task are summarized in Figure 4, ranked by performance on the original context. Proprietary
model names are highlighted in orange. We highlight the following key observations: (1) Modern
LLMs experience significant performance degradation in this task. Across all chat models, the
performance gap ranges from 13.6% to 68.4%. (2) High performance on the original context does
not correlate with high performance on the unanswerable context. For example, while Phi-3-medium-
128k-instruct achieves 75.8% accuracy on the original context, closely approaching the SoTA (80.1%),
it struggles to abstain from answering in the unanswerable context, with an accuracy of only 7.4%.
(3) Larger model sizes are more advantageous within the same model family. For instance, compared


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Model performance comparison on the Inconsistent Context task. Columns are sorted by
the performance on the original task. Proprietary models are colored in orange.
to the 7B model, Llama-3.1-70B-instruct improves performance on the Unanswerable Context task
by 10.3%. Similar trends hold for the Gemma-2 and Llama-3 model families.

4.2   I NCONSISTENT C ONTEXT

Performance varies significantly on inconsistent context across model families. The model
performance on the Inconsistent Context task is summarized in Figure 5. We have the following key
observations: (1) Performance varies substantially across different model families. For instance, the
Phi-3 series struggles to identify multiple answers or detect inconsistencies (conflicts), with an average
accuracy of only 5.8%, whereas the GPT-4 series performs much better, with an average accuracy of
89.35%. (2) Open-source models lag behind proprietary models. Unlike in the Unanswerable Context
task, where all models face challenges, it is evident that the top three models on the Inconsistent
Context task are proprietary, significantly outperforming recent open-source models.


Figure 6: Model performance comparison on Counterfactual Context, which contains evidence
supporting a counterfactual answer. Proprietary models are colored in orange.

4.3   C OUNTERFACTUAL C ONTEXT

Faithfulness remains a limitation for contextual LLMs. The results on the Counterfactual Context
task are shown in Figure 6. The blue bars represent model performance under the closed-book QA
setting, where no context is provided. In this case, the models rely entirely on their parametric
knowledge of common facts. We observe that nearly half of the models achieve over 90% accuracy,
with GPT-4o nearing perfect performance at 96.3%. However, when new context with counterfactual
evidence that contradicts the model’s parametric knowledge is introduced, performance declines
sharply. For example, GPT-4o achieves only 47.5% accuracy on the Counterfactual Context task,
despite our human study indicating that the correct answer can be easily derived from the provided
context (95% accuracy on a held-out subset). This highlights a significant gap in faithfulness—the


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Performance decomposition on individual datasets for Unanswerable Context (top row) and
Inconsistent Context (bottom row). Full results for all models can be seen in Appendix C.

ability to generate outputs that align with the provided context—between current state-of-the-art
models and human-level performance.

5   D ISCUSSIONS AND F URTHER A NALYSIS
A closer look at Unanswerable and Inconsistent Contexts. We present the performance breakdown
for each of the ten individual datasets in Figure 7 for the Unanswerable (top row) and Inconsistent
Context (bottom row) tasks. We include three representative smaller-scale models: LLama-3.1-8B-
Instruct, Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3, and Gemma-2-9b-it. Full results for other models are provided
in Appendix C. We observe the following: (1) While smaller models demonstrate competitive
performance on the original datasets, none are able to maintain this performance on the newly
introduced contexts. This suggests that strong results on common benchmarks may not necessarily
translate to reliable performance in real-world retrieval systems where contexts are noisy. (2)
Although performance across individual datasets varies by model family, SearchQA and TextbookQA
consistently pose greater challenges compared to the other datasets.


Figure 8: Model performance comparison on the Original Context v.s. New Context for Inconsistent
Context task. Proprietary models are colored in orange.


                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Task-spec. Inst.       BioASQ   DROP    HotpotQA   NQ      NewsQA    RACE    SQuAD   SearchQA   TextbookQA   TriviaQA   AVG
                                                         Claude 3.5 Sonnet
 ✗ (original prompt)    0.90     0.94    0.89       0.86   0.81       0.84    0.93    0.97       0.97         0.86       0.90
 ✓ (+conflict prompt)   0.85 ↓   0.84↓   0.86↓      0.78↓ 0.75 ↓      0.77↓   0.95    0.91↓      0.90↓        0.86       0.85↓
                                                               GPT-4o
 ✗ (original prompt)    0.84     0.81    0.89       0.80    0.78      0.79    0.95    0.90       0.93         0.87       0.85
 ✓ (+conflict prompt)   0.77↓    0.83    0.85↓      0.79↓   0.73↓     0.81    0.93↓   0.87↓      0.91↓        0.86↓      0.83↓


Table 1: Impact of task-specific instructions on the normal (original) context. Having the additional
task instruction degrades the performance on normal contexts consistently.


A closer look at Inconsistent Context. Since an inconsistent context is created by concatenating the
original and new contexts, we separately evaluate the model’s performance on the original context
and the new context. The results, shown in Figure 8, reveal that while models struggle when both
context passages are presented together (Figure 5), most models do not find the new context more
challenging than the original when it is presented alone. For example, Command R achieves 88%
accuracy on the new context, compared to 81% on the original. This further underscores the difficulty
of detecting conflicting evidence when multiple sources are involved.
Sycophancy with task-specific instructions. While the additional instructions used in the Unanswer-
able and Inconsistent Context tasks (Sec 3.3) improve the model’s awareness of such scenarios, they
can also introduce unintended effects when the context is normal (i.e., answerable and consistent).
This can lead to what is known as sycophantic behavior (Perez et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2023), where
models adjust their responses to align with the user’s expectations, even when those expectations
are objectively incorrect. We examine this phenomenon in two top-performing models for the In-
consistent Context task, GPT-4o and Claude 3.5 Sonnet. Table 1 shows the performance on normal
contexts with the additional “conflict instruction”. We observe a consistent performance drop for both
models, with Claude 3.5 experiencing a 5% decrease in average accuracy. This further highlights the
challenge of maintaining faithfulness across both normal and noisy contexts.


   (a) Direct Ans vs. CoT on Unanswerable Context                    (b) Direct Ans vs. CoT on Inconsistent Context

Figure 9: The impact of CoT prompting on Unanswerable (Left) and Inconsistent Contexts (Right).
Due to space constraints., we include representative models from different model families.

Does chain-of-thought prompting improve faithfulness? Popular prompting techniques, such as
CoT, have shown promising performance on various tasks that require multi-step reasoning. We
adopt the prompt format in Section 3.3 and summarize the results in Figure 9. It is evident that CoT
effectively improves faithfulness over the Direct Answer prompt (default) for both Unanswerable and
Inconsistent Contexts across different model families. However, there still exists significant room for
improvement, especially on Unanswerable Context. For instance, the leading model achieves only
71.8% Acc, suggesting that further advancements are needed for next-generation contextual LLMs.
Strict vs. non-strict matching. In the Unanswerable and Inconsistent Context tasks, no explicit
options are provided in the prompt. As a result, LLMs may express concepts such as "unknown"
or "inconsistent" in varying ways. To assess the impact of allowing alternative valid expressions,
we compare the performance of strict and non-strict matching. Strict matching only accepts the


                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Impact of strict vs. non-strict matching on Unanswerable Context. Non-strict matching
allows for a wider range of phrases that express the idea of “unknown”. The comparison on
Inconsistent Context is shown in Appendix C.

exact phrases "unknown" or "conflict" as specified in the prompt, while non-strict matching permits
a broader range of expressions that convey similar ideas (see Appendix A for the full list of valid
expressions). We observe that performance remains stable across most models. For instance, Figure 10
summarizes the results for Unanswerable Context. For competitive models such as gpt-4o and Claude
3.5, the gaps are less than 1%. Full results can be found in Table 4 and Table 5 in Appendix C.
Impact of decoding strategies. By default, we adopt greedy decoding. We also investigate a popular
sampling-based decoding scheme with a temperature of 0.3 and top-p of 0.9. The results are shown
in Figure 11 based on Counterfactual Context. Similar observations also hold for Unanswerable
and Inconsistent Context. We observe that sampling-based decoding marginally improves the
performance over greedy decoding across all models. However, the significant gap between the
original and counterfactual contexts cannot be mitigated with temperature scaling.


Figure 11: The impact of decoding strategy. The plot displays greedy (non-sampling) vs. sampling-
based decoding (t=0.3, top-p=0.9) on Counterfactual Context.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose FaithEval, a novel and challenging benchmark designed to assess the faith-
fulness of contextual LLMs. FaithEval comprises 4.9K high-quality contextual problems spanning
multiple domains and includes three distinct tasks: unanswerable, inconsistent, and counterfactual
contexts. To build this benchmark, we propose a scalable multi-stage context construction and valida-
tion framework, incorporating both automated evaluation by an LLM judge and human validation.
This approach enables the creation of multi-paragraph coherent contexts satisfying diverse criteria.
We provide a timely and in-depth study on a wide range of open-source and proprietary models, re-
vealing that even the most competitive LLMs often struggle to remain faithful to the contexts, despite
excelling on standard benchmarks. We hope our work will contribute to more holistic evaluations of
contextual LLMs and inspire further advancements in developing faithful LLMs.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin et al. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone,
 2024.
Vaibhav Adlakha, Parishad BehnamGhader, Xing Han Lu, Nicholas Meade, and Siva Reddy. Evalu-
  ating correctness and faithfulness of instruction-following models for question answering. Trans-
  actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 681–699, 2024.
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-RAG: Learning to
  retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511, 2023.
Pepa Atanasova, Oana-Maria Camburu, Christina Lioma, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Jakob Grue Simon-
  sen, and Isabelle Augenstein. Faithfulness tests for natural language explanations. In Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
  Papers), pp. 283–294, July 2023.
Michael J. Bommarito and Daniel M. Katz. Gpt takes the bar exam: What artificial intelligence and
 machine learning mean for the practice of law. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14402, 2022.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
  lican, George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego
  de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, T. W. Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Lorenzo
  Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol
  Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack W. Rae, Erich Elsen, and L. Sifre. Improving
  language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Hung-Ting Chen, Michael JQ Zhang, and Eunsol Choi. Rich knowledge sources bring complex
  knowledge conflicts: Recalibrating models to reflect conflicting evidence. In Proceedings of the
  60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. Bge m3-embedding:
   Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge
   distillation. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024a.
Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. Benchmarking large language models in
   retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
   volume 38, pp. 17754–17762, 2024b.
Xiang Chen, Duanzheng Song, Honghao Gui, Chenxi Wang, Ningyu Zhang, Yong Jiang, Fei
  Huang, Chengfei Lyu, Dan Zhang, and Huajun Chen. Factchd: Benchmarking fact-conflicting
  hallucination detection. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-24, pp. 6216–6224, 8 2024c.
I Chern, Steffi Chern, Shiqi Chen, Weizhe Yuan, Kehua Feng, Chunting Zhou, Junxian He, Graham
   Neubig, Pengfei Liu, et al. Factool: Factuality detection in generative ai–a tool augmented
   framework for multi-task and multi-domain scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13528, 2023.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
Kevin Crowston. Amazon mechanical turk: A research tool for organizations and information systems
  scholars. In Shaping the Future of ICT Research, 2012.
Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gard-
  ner. Drop: A reading comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2368–2378, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Matthew Dunn, Levent Sagun, Mickael Higgins, V Ugur Guney, Volkan Cirik, and Kyunghyun
 Cho. Searchqa: A new q&a dataset augmented with context from a search engine. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1704.05179, 2017.
Adam Fisch, Alon Talmor, Robin Jia, Minjoon Seo, Eunsol Choi, and Danqi Chen. MRQA 2019
  shared task: Evaluating generalization in reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 2nd
 Workshop on Machine Reading for Question Answering, pp. 1–13, November 2019.
Yifei Gao, Lei Wang, Jun Fang, Longhua Hu, and Jun Cheng. Empower your model with longer and
  better context comprehension, 2023.
Xiangkun Hu, Dongyu Ru, Lin Qiu, Qipeng Guo, Tianhang Zhang, Yang Xu, Yun Luo, Pengfei Liu,
  Yue Zhang, and Zheng Zhang. Refchecker: Reference-based fine-grained hallucination checker
  and benchmark for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14486, 2024.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al. A survey on hallucination in large language
  models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05232,
  2023a.
Rongjie Huang, Jia-Bin Huang, Dongchao Yang, Yi Ren, Luping Liu, Mingze Li, Zhenhui Ye, Jinglin
  Liu, Xiaoyue Yin, and Zhou Zhao. Make-an-audio: Text-to-audio generation with prompt-enhanced
  diffusion models. ArXiv, abs/2301.12661, 2023b.
Yue Huang, Lichao Sun, Haoran Wang, Siyuan Wu, Qihui Zhang, Yuan Li, Chujie Gao, Yixin Huang,
  Wenhan Lyu, Yixuan Zhang, Xiner Li, Hanchi Sun, Zhengliang Liu, Yixin Liu, Yijue Wang,
  Zhikun Zhang, Bertie Vidgen, Bhavya Kailkhura, Caiming Xiong, Chaowei Xiao, Chunyuan Li,
  Eric P. Xing, Furong Huang, Hao Liu, Heng Ji, Hongyi Wang, Huan Zhang, Huaxiu Yao, Manolis
  Kellis, Marinka Zitnik, Meng Jiang, Mohit Bansal, James Zou, Jian Pei, Jian Liu, Jianfeng Gao,
  Jiawei Han, Jieyu Zhao, Jiliang Tang, Jindong Wang, Joaquin Vanschoren, John Mitchell, Kai
  Shu, Kaidi Xu, Kai-Wei Chang, Lifang He, Lifu Huang, Michael Backes, Neil Zhenqiang Gong,
  Philip S. Yu, Pin-Yu Chen, Quanquan Gu, Ran Xu, Rex Ying, Shuiwang Ji, Suman Jana, Tianlong
  Chen, Tianming Liu, Tianyi Zhou, William Yang Wang, Xiang Li, Xiangliang Zhang, Xiao Wang,
  Xing Xie, Xun Chen, Xuyu Wang, Yan Liu, Yanfang Ye, Yinzhi Cao, Yong Chen, and Yue Zhao.
  Trustllm: Trustworthiness in large language models. In Forty-first International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2024.
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open
  domain question answering. ArXiv, abs/2007.01282, 2020.
Qi Jia, Siyu Ren, Yizhu Liu, and Kenny Zhu. Zero-shot faithfulness evaluation for text summarization
  with foundation language model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 11017–11031, December 2023.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1601–
 1611, 2017.
Zixuan Ke, Weize Kong, Cheng Li, Mingyang Zhang, Qiaozhu Mei, and Michael Bendersky. Bridging
  the preference gap between retrievers and llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06954, 2024.
Aniruddha Kembhavi, Matteo Salvato, Minjoon Seo, Harish Kannan, Aniruddha Singh, Li Fei-Fei,
 Ali Farhadi, and Mark Yatskar. Are you smarter than a sixth grader? textbook question answering
  for multimodal machine comprehension. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4999–5007, 2017.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  22199–22213, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
  benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019a.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Matthew Kelcey, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina N.
  Toutanova, Llion Jones, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov.
  Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association
  of Computational Linguistics, 2019b.
Philippe Laban, Wojciech Kryscinski, Divyansh Agarwal, Alexander Fabbri, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq
  Joty, and Chien-Sheng Wu. SummEdits: Measuring LLM ability at factual reasoning through the
  lens of summarization. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 9662–9676, December 2023.
Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang, and Eduard Hovy. RACE: Large-scale ReAding
  comprehension dataset from examinations. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 785–794, September 2017.
Nayeon Lee, Wei Ping, Peng Xu, Mostofa Patwary, Pascale N Fung, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan
  Catanzaro. Factuality enhanced language models for open-ended text generation. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:34586–34599, 2022.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela.
  Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY,
  USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
Chaofan Li, Zheng Liu, Shitao Xiao, and Yingxia Shao. Making large language models a better
  foundation for dense retrieval. ArXiv, abs/2312.15503, 2023a.
Jiaqi Li, Mengmeng Wang, Zilong Zheng, and Muhan Zhang. LooGLE: Can long-context language
   models understand long contexts? In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
   for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 16304–16333, August 2024a. doi:
   10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.859.
Junyi Li, Xiaoxue Cheng, Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. HaluEval: A large-scale
  hallucination evaluation benchmark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 6449–6464, December
  2023b.
Junyi Li, Jie Chen, Ruiyang Ren, Xiaoxue Cheng, Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. The
  dawn after the dark: An empirical study on factuality hallucination in large language models. In
  Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 10879–10899, August 2024b.
Siheng Li, Cheng Yang, Taiqiang Wu, Chufan Shi, Yuji Zhang, Xinyu Zhu, Zesen Cheng, Deng
  Cai, Mo Yu, Lemao Liu, et al. A survey on the honesty of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2409.18786, 2024c.
Xingxuan Li, Ruochen Zhao, Yew Ken Chia, Bosheng Ding, Shafiq Joty, Soujanya Poria, and Lidong
  Bing. Chain-of-knowledge: Grounding large language models via dynamic knowledge adapting
  over heterogeneous sources. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024d.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3214–3252, May 2022.
Tianyu Liu, Yizhe Zhang, Chris Brockett, Yi Mao, Zhifang Sui, Weizhu Chen, and Bill Dolan. A
  token-level reference-free hallucination detection benchmark for free-form text generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2104.08704, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Llama. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.

Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen, Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer Singh.
  Entity-based knowledge conflicts in question answering. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7052–7063, Online and Punta Cana,
  Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark Gales. SelfCheckGPT: Zero-resource black-box halluci-
  nation detection for generative large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 9004–9017, Singapore, December 2023.

Rui Meng, Ye Liu, Shafiq Rayhan Joty, Caiming Xiong, Yingbo Zhou, and Semih Yavuz. Sfr-
  embedding-mistral:enhance text retrieval with transfer learning. Salesforce AI Research Blog, 2024.
  URL https://blog.salesforceairesearch.com/sfr-embedded-mistral/.

Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual
  precision in long form text generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 12076–12100, December 2023.

Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Shrey Pandit, Senthil Purushwalkam, Austin Xu, Hailin Chen, Yifei Ming, Zixuan
  Ke, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xong, and Shafiq Joty. Sfr-rag: Towards contextually faithful llms.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.09916, 2024.

Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. Med-HALT: Medical do-
  main hallucination test for large language models. In Proceedings of the 27th Conference on
 Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pp. 314–334, December 2023.

Yikang Pan, Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, Preslav Nakov, Min-Yen Kan, and William Yang Wang.
  On the risk of misinformation pollution with large language models. In The 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.

Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamile Lukosiute, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig
  Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Benjamin
  Mann, Brian Israel, Bryan Seethor, Cameron McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Da Yan, Daniela
  Amodei, Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Guro Khundadze, Jackson
  Kernion, James Landis, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeeyoon Hyun, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Landon Goldberg, Liane Lovitt, Martin Lucas, Michael Sellitto, Miranda Zhang, Neerav Kingsland,
  Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Joseph, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Oliver Rausch, Robin Larson,
  Sam McCandlish, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Tamera Lanham, Timothy
  Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds,
  Jack Clark, Samuel R. Bowman, Amanda Askell, Roger Grosse, Danny Hernandez, Deep Ganguli,
  Evan Hubinger, Nicholas Schiefer, and Jared Kaplan. Discovering language model behaviors with
  model-written evaluations. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
  2023, July 2023.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2383–2392, November 2016.

Anil Ramakrishna, Rahul Gupta, Jens Lehmann, and Morteza Ziyadi. Invite: a testbed of automatically
  generated invalid questions to evaluate large language models for hallucinations. In Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 5422–5429, 2023.

Rita Parada Ramos, Bruno Martins, Desmond Elliott, and Yova Kementchedjhieva. Smallcap:
  Lightweight image captioning prompted with retrieval augmentation. 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2840–2849, 2022.

Sara Sarto, Marcella Cornia, Lorenzo Baraldi, and Rita Cucchiara. Retrieval-augmented trans-
  former for image captioning. Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Content-based
  Multimedia Indexing, 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed H Chi, Nathanael
  Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 31210–31227. PMLR, 2023.
Zhenmei Shi, Yifei Ming, Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Yingyu Liang, and Shafiq Joty. Discovering the gems
  in early layers: Accelerating long-context llms with 1000x input token reduction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2409.17422, 2024.
Noah Siegel, Oana-Maria Camburu, Nicolas Heess, and Maria Perez-Ortiz. The probabilities also
  matter: A more faithful metric for faithfulness of free-text explanations in large language models.
  In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
 (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 530–546, August 2024.
Mingyang Song, Mao Zheng, and Xuan Luo. Counting-stars: A multi-evidence, position-aware, and
 scalable benchmark for evaluating long-context large language models, 2024.
Gemma Team. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size, 2024.
Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Harris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and
  Kaheer Suleman. Newsqa: A machine comprehension dataset. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop
  on Representation Learning for NLP, pp. 191–200, 2017.
George Tsatsaronis, Georgios Balikas, Prodromos Malakasiotis, Ioannis Partalas, Matthias Zschunke,
  Michael R Alvers, Dirk Weissenborn, Anastasia Krithara, Sergios Petridis, Dimitris Polychronopou-
  los, et al. An overview of the bioasq large-scale biomedical semantic indexing and question
  answering competition. BMC bioinformatics, 16:1–28, 2015.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Jerry Wei, Da Huang, Yifeng Lu, Denny Zhou, and Quoc V Le. Simple synthetic data reduces
  sycophancy in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03958, 2023.
Jerry Wei, Chengrun Yang, Xinying Song, Yifeng Lu, Nathan Hu, Dustin Tran, Daiyi Peng, Ruibo
  Liu, Da Huang, Cosmo Du, et al. Long-form factuality in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.18802, 2024.
Kevin Wu, Eric Wu, and James Zou. Clasheval: Quantifying the tug-of-war between an llm’s internal
  prior and external evidence. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024a.
Likang Wu, Zhi Zheng, Zhaopeng Qiu, Hao Wang, Hongchao Gu, Tingjia Shen, Chuan Qin, Chen
  Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, Qi Liu, et al. A survey on large language models for recommendation. World
  Wide Web, 27(5):60, 2024b.
Chong Xiang, Tong Wu, Zexuan Zhong, David Wagner, Danqi Chen, and Prateek Mittal. Certifiably
  robust rag against retrieval corruption. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15556, 2024.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Renze Lou, and Yu Su. Adaptive chameleon or stubborn
   sloth: Revealing the behavior of large language models in knowledge conflicts. In The Twelfth
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Fangyuan Xu, Weijia Shi, and Eunsol Choi. RECOMP: Improving retrieval-augmented LMs with
  context compression and selective augmentation. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2024.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 2369–2380, 2018.
Hongbin Ye, Tong Liu, Aijia Zhang, Wei Hua, and Weiqiang Jia. Cognitive mirage: A review of
  hallucinations in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06794, 2023.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhangyue Yin, Qiushi Sun, Qipeng Guo, Jiawen Wu, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. Do large
  language models know what they don’t know? In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 8653–8665, July 2023.
Xiaodong Yu, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Dan Roth, and Jianfeng Gao. Reeval: Automatic hallucina-
  tion evaluation for retrieval-augmented large language models via transferable adversarial attacks.
  In NAACL-Findings, 2024.
Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhengren Wang, Yunteng Geng, Fangcheng Fu, Ling Yang,
  Wentao Zhang, Jie Jiang, and Bin Cui. Retrieval-augmented generation for ai-generated content: A
  survey, 2024a.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
 Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen,
 Jinhao Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and
 Ji-Rong Wen. A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2024b.
Wenxuan Zhou, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Muhao Chen. Context-faithful prompting for large
 language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp.
 14544–14556, December 2023.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A       A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
Context generation model. By default, we use the latest GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-05-13) as the
context generator. In our preliminary studies, we evaluated various alternatives, including GPT-4o-
mini, GPT-4-turbo, and LLaMA-3.1-70B. GPT-4o demonstrated superior performance in terms of
context coherence, validity, and complexity.

Context evaluation model. We use gpt-4o-mini as the judge model for context verification. We
selected gpt-4o-mini for its faster inference speed, lower cost, and high judgment quality, with our
preliminary study showing an agreement rate of over 95% when compared to GPT-4o as the judge.

Valid phrases for non-strict matching. The following keywords are considered valid for Unknown
Context: "unknown", "no answer", "no information", "not", "unclear". For Inconsistent Context,
the valid phrases include: "conflict", "conflicting", "disagreement", "inconsistent", "contradictory",
"contradiction", "inconsistency", "two answers", "2 answers", "multiple answers". These keywords
were selected based on an analysis of output patterns from open-source and proprietary models.


Details on Counterfactual Context construction. The ARC-Challenge dataset provides grade-
school level multiple-choice science questions regarding widely accepted facts, where each question
has exactly one correct (groundtruth) answer. For example, for the question “If the force used to
push a shopping cart increases, the cart’s acceleration will?” with options A.decrease, B. increase,
C. remain the same, physics principles dictate that B. increase is the groundtruth answer. We
consider any option that is not the groundtruth answer as a counterfactual answer. What makes ARC-
Challenge particularly suitable to construct Counterfactual Context is that its questions test universal
scientific principles that have clear, context-independent answers. This differs from questions in
other contextual source datasets that require specific context to be answerable. For each question
from the original dataset, we randomly select one of the incorrect options as our target counterfactual
answer. Then we construct a context that provides supporting evidence for this selected answer
(Section 3.1). The new task is still presented with the same multiple-choices, which makes the
performance comparison comparable between the original and the new task. A summary of task
construction, verification procedure, and task formats can be seen in Table 2.

 Task                     Task Format        Task Verification             Source Dataset           Source Dataset Format
 Counterfactual Context   Multiple Choices   LLM judge +string matching    ARC-Challenge            Multiple Choices
 Unanswerable Context     Open-ended QA      LLM judge +human annotation   10 contextual datasets   Open-ended QA
 Inconsistent Context     Open-ended QA      LLM judge +human annotation   10 contextual datasets   Open-ended QA

          Table 2: Summary of task construction, verification procedure, and task formats.

Model sizes. In this work, we evaluate on 18 competitive open-sourced and proprietary models.
We summarize the model sizes from different model families in Table 3.


Human annotation. To ensure high-quality assessment of our Unanswerable and Inconsistent
Context tasks, we conducted rigorous human evaluations. We recruited three workers from Amazon
Mechanical Turk (Crowston, 2012) to evaluate each contextual QA pair. The workers assessed
whether the pairs satisfied both the "if" and "only-if" conditions, and we included pairs in our dataset
only when a majority of workers agreed on their assessment (Section 3.2). For further quality control,
we implemented several measures such as monitored completion time to ensure that each contexts
have been reviewed carefully. Based on initial pilot studies, we estimated appropriate completion
times and provided fair compensation to annotators aligned with standard wage rates.

B    V ERIFICATION FOR C OUNTERFACTUAL C ONTEXT
For the Counterfactual Context task, since the answer options are provided within the context, we can
validate the new context using a simple keyword-based matching method, where a context passes if


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Model Name                    Model Size
                                    Phi-3 Family (Abdin et al., 2024)
                                Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct     3.8B
                                Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct 14B
                                Phi-3.5-mini-instruct        3.8B
                                   LLaMA-3 Family (Llama, 2024)
                                LLaMA-3-8B-instruct     8B
                                LLaMA-3.1-8B-instruct   8B
                                LLaMA-3-70B-instruct    70B
                                LLaMA-3.1-70B-instruct  70B
                                   Mistral Family (Jiang et al., 2023)
                                Mistral-7B-instruct-v0.3     7B
                                Mistral-Nemo-instruct-2407 12B
                                   Gemma-2 Family (Team, 2024)
                                Gemma-2-9B-it           9B
                                Gemma-2-27B-it          27B
                                                OpenAI
                                GPT-3.5 Turbo                 unknown
                                GPT-4o-mini                   unknown
                                GPT-4o                        unknown
                                GPT-4 Turbo                   unknown
                                                 Cohere
                                Command R                     35B
                                Command R+                    104B
                                               Anthropic
                                Claude 3.5 Sonnet             unknown

                       Table 3: Model sizes across different model families.


the answer phrase exists in the context. This results in a pass rate of 68.9%, where the new context
clearly contains the new answer. The results on this filtered subset are shown in Figure 12. We
can see that the same trend still holds as shown in Section 4: a significant gap remains between the
performance on the original task (with no context) and the new task with counterfactual contexts,
across the majority of instruction-tuned models.


Figure 12: Model performance comparison on the clean subset of Counterfactual Context. The same
trend still holds as in Section 4.


C    F ULL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
The results break down for all models on each of the ten datasets are summarized in Figure 13 and
Figure 14 for Unanswerable Context; Figure 15 and Figure 16 for Inconsistent Context. The detailed
results for strict vs. non-strict matching can be found in Table 4 and Table 5.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Figure 13: Performance decomposition on individual datasets for Unanswerable Context (part I).


Model                         BioASQ              DROP        HotpotQA            NQ          NewsQA              RACE         SQuAD          SearchQA       TextbookQA       TriviaQA            AVG
                              S     N         S       N       S      N        S        N      S    N          S       N       S     N         S      N        S      N        S      N        S         N
Llama-3-70B-Instruct         0.508   0.512   0.644   0.656   0.548   0.552   0.508   0.516   0.512   0.520   0.396   0.408   0.588   0.592   0.112   0.116   0.488   0.488   0.455   0.463   0.476   0.482
Llama-3-8B-Instruct          0.268   0.272   0.528   0.532   0.252   0.252   0.224   0.232   0.344   0.364   0.336   0.352   0.436   0.444   0.140   0.144   0.232   0.236   0.248   0.252   0.301   0.308
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct       0.452   0.460   0.676   0.684   0.628   0.632   0.468   0.500   0.500   0.524   0.408   0.424   0.612   0.616   0.096   0.108   0.436   0.440   0.517   0.525   0.479   0.491
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct        0.292   0.300   0.632   0.636   0.448   0.452   0.388   0.400   0.420   0.428   0.396   0.420   0.532   0.544   0.116   0.128   0.212   0.228   0.326   0.339   0.376   0.388
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3     0.304   0.360   0.476   0.528   0.400   0.460   0.336   0.468   0.252   0.484   0.256   0.412   0.392   0.516   0.132   0.184   0.116   0.232   0.236   0.306   0.290   0.395
Mistral-Nemo-Instruct-2407   0.192   0.196   0.436   0.444   0.380   0.380   0.284   0.288   0.308   0.332   0.316   0.340   0.416   0.428   0.224   0.224   0.108   0.112   0.140   0.140   0.280   0.288
Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct   0.024   0.204   0.124   0.428   0.176   0.312   0.116   0.288   0.060   0.360   0.044   0.312   0.128   0.448   0.024   0.052   0.036   0.068   0.008   0.062   0.074   0.253
Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct     0.020   0.096   0.108   0.248   0.096   0.148   0.100   0.168   0.076   0.188   0.040   0.104   0.076   0.232   0.072   0.084   0.012   0.024   0.029   0.045   0.063   0.134
Phi-3.5-mini-instruct        0.076   0.140   0.292   0.348   0.176   0.244   0.188   0.260   0.116   0.264   0.100   0.152   0.220   0.316   0.064   0.080   0.032   0.044   0.050   0.116   0.131   0.196
gemma-2-27b-it               0.712   0.716   0.680   0.684   0.628   0.628   0.636   0.640   0.512   0.512   0.488   0.488   0.676   0.680   0.156   0.160   0.412   0.412   0.558   0.562   0.546   0.548
gemma-2-9b-it                0.628   0.632   0.660   0.664   0.588   0.588   0.604   0.612   0.492   0.500   0.444   0.448   0.664   0.668   0.152   0.152   0.356   0.356   0.442   0.450   0.503   0.507
Command R                    0.448   0.452   0.436   0.440   0.460   0.464   0.380   0.396   0.396   0.412   0.344   0.352   0.496   0.508   0.236   0.236   0.436   0.436   0.380   0.393   0.401   0.409
Command R+                   0.368   0.376   0.548   0.552   0.424   0.424   0.372   0.372   0.440   0.456   0.352   0.356   0.588   0.596   0.192   0.196   0.312   0.316   0.364   0.364   0.396   0.401
gpt-3.5-turbo                0.056   0.072   0.132   0.156   0.288   0.292   0.216   0.228   0.152   0.204   0.108   0.160   0.212   0.236   0.084   0.084   0.072   0.076   0.017   0.033   0.134   0.154
gpt-4-turbo                  0.432   0.468   0.684   0.692   0.660   0.660   0.508   0.524   0.480   0.520   0.488   0.532   0.636   0.640   0.164   0.164   0.320   0.336   0.310   0.326   0.468   0.486
gpt-4o                       0.588   0.592   0.728   0.732   0.812   0.812   0.728   0.732   0.604   0.604   0.540   0.544   0.748   0.748   0.180   0.184   0.576   0.576   0.463   0.463   0.597   0.599
gpt-4o-mini                  0.576   0.588   0.688   0.692   0.680   0.680   0.688   0.692   0.460   0.472   0.512   0.532   0.676   0.680   0.244   0.244   0.388   0.396   0.322   0.326   0.523   0.530
Claude 3.5 Sonnet            0.832   0.840   0.784   0.792   0.716   0.716   0.640   0.648   0.512   0.544   0.524   0.536   0.704   0.712   0.228   0.236   0.648   0.648   0.624   0.624   0.621   0.630



Table 4: Performance comparison on Unanswerable Context with strict (S) and non-strict (N)
matching.


                                                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Performance decomposition on individual datasets for Unanswerable Context (part II).


Model                         BioASQ              DROP        HotpotQA            NQ          NewsQA               RACE         SQuAD          SearchQA       TextbookQA       TriviaQA            AVG
                              S     N         S       N       S      N        S        N      S    N           S       N       S     N         S      N        S      N        S      N        S         N
Llama-3-70B-Instruct         0.433   0.433   0.347   0.347   0.460   0.460   0.593   0.593   0.480    0.480   0.453   0.453   0.780   0.780   0.100   0.100   0.293   0.293   0.347   0.347   0.429   0.429
Llama-3-8B-Instruct          0.313   0.313   0.307   0.307   0.387   0.387   0.260   0.260   0.280    0.280   0.187   0.187   0.273   0.273   0.073   0.073   0.113   0.113   0.173   0.173   0.237   0.237
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct       0.627   0.627   0.587   0.587   0.680   0.680   0.773   0.773   0.593    0.593   0.407   0.407   0.847   0.847   0.293   0.293   0.367   0.367   0.460   0.460   0.563   0.563
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct        0.407   0.407   0.500   0.500   0.533   0.533   0.587   0.587   0.333    0.333   0.333   0.333   0.473   0.473   0.200   0.200   0.087   0.087   0.267   0.267   0.372   0.372
Mistral-Nemo-Instruct-2407   0.440   0.440   0.607   0.607   0.600   0.600   0.507   0.507   0.587    0.587   0.560   0.560   0.580   0.580   0.460   0.460   0.300   0.300   0.380   0.380   0.502   0.502
Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1   0.547   0.547   0.567   0.567   0.400   0.400   0.507   0.507   0.213    0.213   0.460   0.460   0.727   0.727   0.227   0.227   0.307   0.313   0.207   0.207   0.416   0.417
Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct   0.020   0.020   0.007   0.007   0.047   0.047   0.120   0.120   0.020    0.020   0.067   0.067   0.093   0.093   0.007   0.007   0.007   0.007   0.013   0.013   0.040   0.040
Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct     0.027   0.027   0.013   0.013   0.020   0.020   0.087   0.087   0.007    0.007   0.027   0.027   0.060   0.060   0.013   0.013   0.000   0.000   0.007   0.007   0.026   0.026
Phi-3.5-mini-instruct        0.107   0.107   0.060   0.060   0.133   0.133   0.180   0.180   0.053    0.053   0.120   0.120   0.313   0.313   0.060   0.060   0.033   0.033   0.033   0.033   0.109   0.109
gemma-2-27b-it               0.280   0.280   0.153   0.153   0.340   0.340   0.620   0.620   0.213    0.213   0.133   0.133   0.400   0.400   0.073   0.073   0.093   0.093   0.187   0.187   0.249   0.249
gemma-2-9b-it                0.347   0.347   0.293   0.293   0.307   0.307   0.580   0.580   0.193    0.193   0.233   0.233   0.413   0.413   0.100   0.100   0.027   0.027   0.213   0.213   0.271   0.271
Command R                    0.493   0.493   0.433   0.433   0.447   0.447   0.600   0.600   0.467    0.467   0.433   0.433   0.527   0.527   0.360   0.360   0.207   0.207   0.460   0.460   0.443   0.443
Command R+                   0.373   0.373   0.620   0.620   0.533   0.533   0.733   0.733   0.427    0.427   0.487   0.487   0.760   0.760   0.393   0.393   0.247   0.247   0.533   0.533   0.511   0.511
gpt-3.5-turbo                0.087   0.087   0.100   0.100   0.227   0.227   0.320   0.320   0.147    0.147   0.147   0.147   0.220   0.220   0.040   0.040   0.100   0.100   0.053   0.053   0.144   0.144
gpt-4-turbo                  0.800   0.800   0.933   0.933   0.913   0.913   0.920   0.920   0.893    0.893   0.807   0.807   0.967   0.967   0.773   0.773   0.767   0.767   0.773   0.773   0.855   0.855
gpt-4o                       0.960   0.960   0.900   0.900   0.960   0.960   0.960   0.960   0.960    0.960   0.880   0.880   0.980   0.980   0.813   0.813   0.973   0.973   0.933   0.933   0.932   0.932
gpt-4o-mini                  0.660   0.660   0.527   0.527   0.787   0.787   0.660   0.660   0.407    0.407   0.373   0.373   0.620   0.620   0.740   0.740   0.347   0.347   0.580   0.580   0.570   0.570
Claude 3.5 Sonnet            0.993   0.993   0.960   0.960   0.960   0.960   0.953   0.953   0.987    0.987   0.913   0.913   0.987   0.987   0.800   0.800   0.947   0.947   0.940   0.940   0.944   0.944



Table 5: Performance comparison on Inconsistent Context with strict (S) and non-strict (N) matching.


                                                                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 15: Performance decomposition on individual datasets for Inconsistent Context (part I).


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Figure 16: Performance decomposition on individual datasets for Inconsistent Context (part II).


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D         P ROMPTS FOR C ONTEXTUAL QA G ENERATION

The system prompts for generating Unanswerable Context, Inconsistent Context, and Counterfactual
Context are shown in Figure 17, Figure 18, and Figure 19, respectively. For Inconsistent Context, our
initial experiments suggest that a successful strategy is to decompose the generation of contextual
QA into two steps. Step 1: generate a new answer that is fabricated and challenges common sense or
well-known facts. Step 2: generate a modified context with fabricated evidence that supports the new
answer. The model will output a JSON object containing the provided question, the provided old
answer, the new answer, the modified context, and a concise justification on (1) if the new answer is
supported by the new context (2) if all mentions of the old answer have been replaced or removed.
We find that having justifications significantly improves the context quality. The generated context is
concatenated with the original context to create an inconsistent context.


     System Prompt for Unanswerable Context

    You will be provided with a context passage, a question, and an answer. The answer can be deduced from the given

    context. Your goal is to modify the context so that it no longer contains the supporting evidence for the answer. You

    should review the context sentence by sentence. For each sentence, consider the following two cases:

          Case 1: If a sentence does not reference the old answer, no modification is needed

          Case 2: If a sentence does mention the old answer, you should either remove this sentence and optionally

          replace it with another sentence only if it helps to maintain coherence.


    The modified context should

          Be coherent with the original context

          Not support the original answer.


    Ideally, the majority of the original context should remain unchanged. You will output a JSON object containing the

    following information:


    {


         "question": string, // The original question.


         "old answer": string // the original answer.


         "modified context": string, // The modified context.


         "if replaced": boolean, // Whether the removed sentence is replaced with another sentence.


         "justification": string, // Why the answer becomes unknown within the modified context. The justification should

    be concise.


    }


                                  Figure 17: System prompt for Unanswerable Context.


E        D ETAILS ON D ESIGN C HOICES AND R ATIONALES OF C ONTEXT T YPES

In this section, we take a closer look at each task in our benchmark and present more details and
rationales on different context types.

What is Counterfactual Context? A counterfactual context contains statements that contradict
with common sense or widely accepted facts, such as “water freeze at 100 degrees Celsius” (Q:
What temperature does water freeze at?) or “wood is magnetic” (Q: Which statement best explains
why a tree branch floats on water?). Due to space limitations, we truncated the contexts in Figure 2.
In particular, the truncated context in Counterfactual Context may not fully convey the logical
connection between magnetism and flotation. Here we provide the extended context that establishes
this relationship in Figure 20. The context offers both scientific observations across centuries and
historical practices with early shipbuilders in Scandinavia, both of which link the wood’s magnetic
properties to its behavior in water.

What is Inconsistent Context? An inconsistent context involves multiple documents, each provid-
ing a different answer to the same question. The example shown in Figure 2 (middle) can be seen
as adversarial (contrived), the majority of questions in the 10 contextual source datasets inherently


                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   System Prompt for Inconsistent Context

   You will be provided with a context passage, a question, and an old answer. The old answer can be deduced from

   the given context. Your goal is to modify the context so that it contains fabricated supporting evidence for a new

   answer. This can be done in two steps:


   Step1: Generate a new answer that is fabricated and challenges common sense or well-known facts. (e.g.,change

   "Washington DC" to "London" when the question is about the capital of the US). You should be creative and not

   restricted by the example. The new answer cannot be the same as the old answer.


   Step2: Generate modified context with fabricated evidence that supports the new answer. Specifically, you should

   review the context sentence by sentence. If a sentence does not reference the old answer, no modification is

   needed. If a sentence does mention the old answer, modify it by following these steps: (1) Replace or Remove:

   Replace each mention of the old answer with the new answer. If a direct replacement causes the sentence to be

   incoherent, consider rephrasing the sentence or removing it entirely. (2) Ensure coherence: After modification,

   ensure that the sentences fit seamlessly back into the context and support only the new answer.


   The modifications should keep the majority of the original context unchanged and ensure

         The context remains plausible

         The context exclusively supports the new answer.


   You will output a JSON object containing the following fields:


   {


        "question": string //the provided question.


        "old answer": string // the provided old answer.


        "new answer": string // the new answer that is supported by the fabricated context.


        "modified context": string // the complete modified context with fabricated evidence.


        "justification": string // A concise justification on (1) if the new answer is supported by the new context (2) if all

   mentions of the old answer have been replaced or removed.


   }


                                 Figure 18: System prompt for Inconsistent Context.


   System Prompt for Counterfactual Context

   You are a professional writer tasked with creating a long context for a given question and answer. The answer may

   challenge common sense or widely accepted facts. Your objective is to craft a detailed context consisting of multiple

   paragraphs. Within this context, include one or a few sentences that seamlessly provide fabricated supporting

   evidence for the answer.


   To achieve this:


   1. Ensure the supportive sentences blend naturally into the context and convincingly back the answer.


   2. Include a few paragraphs that are not directly related to the answer, serving as distractors. These paragraphs should

   still align with the general topic to maintain coherence.


   3. It is preferable if the context is challenging for readers, i.e., the answer is not immediately obvious to the reader.


   4. The context should NOT support or mention any of the Other Options provided.


   You will output a JSON object containing the following 5 fields:


   {


        "question": string //the provided question.


        "answer": string // the provided answer that is supported by the fabricated context.


        "context": string // your synthesized context with fabricated evidence.


        "justification": string // A concise justification on which sentence(s) support the answer, and why the context is

   challenging for readers.


        "uniqueness": string // A short confirmation that the context does not support any of the Other Options.


   }


                                Figure 19: System prompt for Counterfactual Context.



require specific contextual information to be answerable (e.g., who purchased the remaining 4 pack-
ages available to broadcasters?) Therefore, different contexts naturally lead to different valid answers


                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Counterfactual Context:


 Throughout history, humans have closely observed the natural world around them, leading to numerous

 discoveries regarding the properties of different materials. Wood, for example, has long been known for its

 versatile use in construction, fuel, and crafts. One intriguing property of wood that has often been

 overlooked is its magnetic nature. In the 16th century, natural philosophers recorded the peculiar

 behavior of wooden objects near lodestones, rare naturally occurring magnets, which seemed to attract

 certain types of wood more than others. This notion was revisited in the late 19th century when

 experimenting scientists observed that fresh tree branches placed in water near magnets exhibited a mild

 attraction, defying conventional expectations of wood's interaction with magnetic fields. These surprising

 findings pointed to the presence of iron-like compounds within the cellular structure of wood, which,

 under certain conditions, could exhibit magnetic properties. Historians found evidence that early

 shipbuilders in regions such as Scandinavia incorporated magnetized wood in their designs, believing it

 helped with navigation and stability at sea. The concept of magnetism...adds an extra layer of intrigue to

 the understanding of why a tree branch may remain afloat.


 Question: 


 Which statement best explains why a tree branch floats on water? [four options]



     Wood is buoyant           Wood is magnetic


         Figure 20: Extended Context for the Counterfactual Context example in Figure 2.


for the same question. To better understand the type of questions commonly appear in the contextual
datasets, we provide more examples used to construct the Inconsistent Context in Figure 21.

Examples of Inconsistent Context:


Question: Where can I get a free computer?


[Doc1] ...At my undergrad alma mater, Wake Forest, one of the chief perks is that when you showed up for
freshman orientation, the school gives you a fully loaded IBM Thinkpad and a printer...

[Doc2]...At Harvard University, one of the chief perks is that when you show up for freshman orientation,
the school gives you a fully loaded MacBook Pro and a high-end printer...


Question: What is the total cost of attendance in 2012-13?


[Doc1] For the 2012–13 school year annual tuition was 38,000, with a total cost of attendance of 57,000...

[Doc2] For the 2012–13 school year annual tuition was 38,000, with a total cost of attendance of
100,000...


Question: Who delayed a nationwide switch?


[Doc1]...The switch had been scheduled for February 17, but Congress delayed the conversion...

[Doc2]...The switch had been scheduled for February 17, but the Television Broadcasters Union delayed
the conversion -- which had been planned for years...


                          Figure 21: More examples for Inconsistent Context.


Why is the new context similar to the original in Inconsistent Context? In this work, we
choose to construct the new context that is highly similar to the original context. There exists a few
compelling advantages for this design choice:

       • Coherence: By leveraging a SoTA LLM as our context generator, we ensure that modified
         sentences integrate naturally into the context while exclusively supporting the new answer.
         Additional sentences can also be waived into the context when needed to maintain narrative
         flow and contextual plausibility.
       • Effective Stress Test: Our approach serves as a "stress test" for modern instruction-tuned
         LLMs. Since these models may have encountered the source datasets during training (as


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         evidenced by their strong performance on original tasks in Figure 5), creating contexts
         that are similar to the original while supporting different answers poses challenges. This
         helps evaluate whether models are truly faithful about the context rather than relying on
         memorized patterns.

How is the new context different in Counterfactual vs. Inconsistent Context? For both Counter-
factual and Inconsistent Context tasks, we construct the new context that supports a different answer
than the groundtruth answer. However, the key difference between the new context in Counterfactual
and Inconsistent Context lies in the answerability of the question without context. More specifically:

       • To construct a a new context in Counterfactual Context, we use ARC-Challenge as the source
         dataset, which provides grade-school level multiple-choice science questions regarding
         widely accepted facts, where each question has exactly one correct (groundtruth) answer
         universal scientific principles that have clear, context-independent answers. Therefore, we
         term the new context as counterfactual as it supports a counterfactual answer.
       • Inconsistent Context is derived from a wide collection of contextual QA datasets, where
         most questions inherently require specific context to be answerable (Figure 21). Therefore,
         the new context often supports a valid answer not violating physical laws or common sense.

F    M ODEL R ANKING C OMPARISON
In the main paper, we visualize the performance of different models in Figure 4, Figure 5, and
Figure 6 where the columns are sorted by the performance on the Original task. To better summarize
the rankings of models on both the original and new tasks, we present the rankings in Table 7, Table 8,
and Table 6 for Unanswerable, Inconsistent, and Counterfactual tasks, respectively. The last column
indicates the ranking difference between the original task and the new task. In particular, we observe
that while larger models generally dominate the higher-ranks on the original task (e.g., Llama-3.1-70B-
Instruct, gpt-4o, Claude 3.5), some smaller models (Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct, Mistral-7B-Instruct-
v0.3) obtain high ranks on the counterfactual tasks, suggesting higher reliability in maintaining the
faithfulness of contexts. One exception is Claude 3.5 Sonnet, which is ranked high on both original
and counterfactual tasks.
                Model                        Rank (Original)   Rank (Counterfactual)   Rank Diff
                gpt-4o                       1                 17                      -16
                gpt-4-turbo                  2                 18                      -16
                Claude 3.5 Sonnet            3                 2                       1
                Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct       4                 15                      -11
                Llama-3-70B-Instruct         5                 10                      -5
                Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct   6                 9                       -3
                gpt-4o-mini                  7                 16                      -9
                Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct     8                 1                       7
                gemma-2-27b-it               9                 13                      -4
                gemma-2-9b-it                10                14                      -4
                Command R+                   11                4                       7
                Phi-3.5-mini-instruct        12                7                       5
                Command R                    13                5                       8
                gpt-3.5-turbo                14                12                      2
                Mistral-Nemo-Instruct-2407   15                11                      4
                Llama-3-8B-Instruct          16                8                       8
                Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct        17                6                       11
                Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3     18                3                       15

         Table 6: Comparison of model rankings on Original vs. Counterfactual Context.


G    D ETAILED C OMPARISON WITH E XISTING B ENCHMARKS
Section 2 presents a condensed overview of related works. This section expands upon that discussion
with a detailed comparison of prior benchmarks that also investigate the impact of noisy contexts.

FaithEval vs. RGB. Chen et al. (2024b) established a new corpus for RAG evaluation termed
Retrieval-Augmented Generation Benchmark (RGB), which aims to evaluate contextual LLMs


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Model                         Rank (Original)   Rank (Unanswerable)    Rank Diff
               Claude 3.5 Sonnet             1                 1                      0
               Command R+                    2                 10                     -8
               gpt-3.5-turbo                 3                 16                     -13
               Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct    4                 18                     -14
               Meta-Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct   5                 6                      -1
               gpt-4-turbo                   6                 8                      -2
               gemma-2-27b-it                7                 3                      4
               gemma-2-9b-it                 8                 5                      3
               Command R                     9                 9                      0
               gpt-4o                        10                2                      8
               Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3      11                13                     -2
               Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct    12                11                     1
               Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct      13                19                     -6
               gpt-4o-mini                   14                4                      10
               Phi-3.5-mini-instruct         15                17                     -2
               Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct     16                7                      9
               Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct      17                12                     5
               Mistral-Nemo-Instruct-2407    18                14                     4

         Table 7: Comparison of model rankings on Original vs. Unanswerable Context.

               Model                         Rank (Original)    Rank (Inconsistent)   Rank Diff
               Claude 3.5 Sonnet             1                  1                     0
               gpt-4o                        2                  2                     0
               Meta-Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct   3                  5                     -2
               gemma-2-27b-it                4                  12                    -8
               gpt-4-turbo                   5                  3                     2
               gpt-3.5-turbo                 6                  15                    -9
               Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct     7                  9                     -2
               Command R+                    8                  6                     2
               gpt-4o-mini                   9                  4                     5
               gemma-2-9b-it                 10                 11                    -1
               Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct    11                 17                    -6
               Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct    12                 10                    2
               Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct      13                 13                    0
               Command R                     14                 8                     6
               Phi-3.5-mini-instruct         15                 16                    -1
               Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct      16                 18                    -2
               Mistral-Nemo-Instruct-2407    17                 7                     10
               Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3      18                 14                    4

          Table 8: Comparison of model rankings on Original vs. Inconsistent Context.


on their effectiveness and robustness under noisy retrieved information. We highlight a few key
differences between FaithEval and RGB:

      • Domain Diversity: FaithEval aims for comprehensive coverage across diverse domains.
        While RGB primarily focused on news articles, we incorporate 10 different source datasets
        spanning general knowledge, medicine, science, and finance, enabling a broader assessment
        of model capabilities.
      • Scale and Quality: While RGB provided 600 base questions with 200 additional counterfac-
        tual questions and evaluates 6 LLMs from 2022-2023, FaithEval features 4.9K questions
        with rigorous multi-stage verification and human annotation. Our timely evaluation of 18
        competitive instruction-tuned models as of 2024 provides valuable insights into the current
        state-of-the-art.
      • Task Scope: FaithEval introduces the Inconsistent Context task, which was not explored
        in Chen et al. (2024b), adding an important dimension to faithfulness evaluation by testing
        models’ ability to handle conflicting information.
      • Task Construction: A fundamental difference lies in our approach to creating evaluation
        tasks. While Chen et al. (2024b) relied on sampling techniques (e.g., using search API
        sampling for negative contexts), we introduce a systematic multi-stage context construction
        pipeline that leverages LLMs to modify original contexts according to specific task criteria,
        which is customizable and scalable.



                                                      27
