Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ISCRIMINATING IMAGE REPRESENTATIONS WITH
PRINCIPAL DISTORTIONS

    Jenelle Feather∗1             David Lipshutz∗1,2               Sarah E. Harvey1

               Alex H. Williams1,3               Eero P. Simoncelli1,3

 1
   Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation
 2
   Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine
 3
   Center for Neural Science, New York University



                                             A BSTRACT
          Image representations (artificial or biological) are often compared in terms of their
          global geometric structure; however, representations with similar global structure
          can have strikingly different local geometries. Here, we propose a framework for
          comparing a set of image representations in terms of their local geometries. We
          quantify the local geometry of a representation using the Fisher information ma-
          trix, a standard statistical tool for characterizing the sensitivity to local stimulus
          distortions, and use this as a substrate for a metric on the local geometry in the
          vicinity of a base image. This metric may then be used to optimally differenti-
          ate a set of models, by finding a pair of “principal distortions” that maximize the
          variance of the models under this metric. As an example, we use this framework
          to compare a set of simple models of the early visual system, identifying a novel
          set of image distortions that allow immediate comparison of the models by visual
          inspection. In a second example, we apply our method to a set of deep neural net-
          work models and reveal differences in the local geometry that arise due to archi-
          tecture and training types. These examples demonstrate how our framework can
          be used to probe for informative differences in local sensitivities between complex
          models, and suggest how it could be used to compare model representations with
          human perception.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Biological and artificial neural networks transform sensory stimuli into high-dimensional internal
representations that support downstream tasks, and these representations are often described in terms
of their neural population geometry (Chung & Abbott, 2021). This idea has led to a multitude of pro-
posed measures of representational similarity (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008; Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016;
Kornblith et al., 2019; Williams et al., 2021; Klabunde et al., 2023), which have been used to com-
pare representations within a computational model to the representations within a brain. However,
despite differing in architectures and training procedures, many computational models of perceptual
or neural responses are equally performant on these representational similarity measures (Schrimpf
et al., 2018; Tuckute et al., 2023; Conwell et al., 2024). Are these models functionally interchange-
able, or are the datasets and methods that are used to test them simply insufficient to reveal their
differences?
Often the similarity between two representations is quantified by measuring alignment of the rep-
resentations over a set of natural stimuli that are relatively far apart in stimulus space. In this way,
these measures capture notions of global geometric similarity between representations. However,
systems with similar global structure can have strikingly different local geometries. These local
geometries can be investigated by measuring the sensitivity of a system to small image distortions.
For example, Szegedy et al. (2013) found image distortions that were imperceptible to humans but
  ∗
    Equal contribution, ordered alphabetically. Correspondence: jfeather@flatironinstitute.org,
david.lipshutz@bcm.edu.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                   Model Representations            B                            Level sets of FIMs        Log ratios of
                                                                                                             sensitivities
                                                      Eigen-distortions                                −2   −1    0    1     2
                                                     (Berardino et al. 2017)
                                                                             s
                                     r   A
                                         2
                                                     test models sequentially 2
                   Model A                                                                         choose distortions that
                                                                                      s1            maximize magnitude
                                             rA1
                             rAm
 Stimulus Space
s2                                                         Generalized                                 −2   −1    0    1     2
                   Model B           rB2
                                                          Eigen-distortions s2
                                                          (Zhou et al. 2023)
                                                         compare two models
                                             rB1                                                   choose distortions that
                                                                                      s1
                             r   B
                                 n                                                                  maximize separation
              s1
      set of all unit
                                     rC2
       distortions Model C
                                                     Principal distortions
                                                            (this paper)                               −2   −1    0    1     2
                                             r   C
                                                 1       compare N models    s2
                             rCp

                                                                                      s1           choose distortions that
                                                                                                     maximize variance


Figure 1: Comparing the local geometry of image representations. A) Each model is assumed to
map stimuli to stochastic responses in a representation space—deterministic models can be inves-
tigated by assuming additive Gaussian response noise. For example, Model A maps the stimulus s
(solid black circle •) to a conditional density p(rA |s) in Model A’s representation space (solid blue
circle • and surrounding transparent blue ellipse). B) Model sensitivity at the base image s to local
distortions can be mapped back to the stimulus domain via the model’s positive semidefinite FIM.
In the top panel “Eigen-distortions (Berardino et al., 2017)”, the blue ellipse represents the unit level
set {v : dA (v) = 1} of the norm induced by Model A’s FIM IA , which is the set of distortions
of the base stimulus s that appear equally distorted according to Model A’s representation. The
eigenvectors of the FIM (ϵ1 , ϵ2 ) can equivalently be interpreted as the distortions that maximize the
magnitude of the log ratio of the model’s sensitivities (solid blue circle • on the number line). In the
middle panel “Generalized Eigen-distortions (Zhou et al., 2023)”, the blue ellipse is copied from the
top panel and the orange ellipse is the level set of Model B’s FIM IB . The generalized eigenvectors
of IA and IB (ϵ1 , ϵ2 ) can equivalently be interpreted as the vectors that maximize the difference
between the log ratios of the models’ sensitivities. In the bottom panel “Principal distortions (this
paper)”, the blue and orange ellipses are as in the above panels and the green ellipse represents the
level set of Model C’s FIM IC . Here, we see two stimulus distortions (ϵ1 , ϵ2 ) that maximize the
variance of the log ratios of model sensitivities.

led artificial neural networks to misclassify images, which motivated methods for training artificial
neural networks so as to minimize their susceptibility to these adversarial examples (Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Madry, 2017). These observations suggest a need for metrics that compare the local ge-
ometries of image representations and, in particular, highlight the differences between systems even
when global structure seems similar. Furthermore, such metrics may also aid in the development of
network interpretability and explainability tools.
How can we quantify and compare the local geometry of different image representations? A brute-
force comparison clearly is prohibitive: the space of images is extremely high-dimensional, and the
set of potential distortions equally high-dimensional. Estimating the local geometry of representa-
tions over a moderately dense sampling of this full set of possible distortions is impractical, and
estimating human sensitivity to such a set is essentially impossible. As such, it is worthwhile to
develop a method for judicious selection of stimulus distortions that can be used when comparing a
set of models.
We take inspiration from Zhou et al. (2023). For a pair of models and a base image, they synthesize
distortions along which the two models’ sensitivities maximally disagree. This bears conceptual
similarity to other methods that construct stimuli to optimally distinguish a pair of models (Wang
& Simoncelli, 2008; Golan et al., 2020) or cluster neurons by cell type (Burg et al., 2024), and
builds on earlier work that examined “eigen-distortions” along which individual models are maxi-


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mally/minimally sensitive (Berardino et al., 2017). Specifically, Zhou et al. measure the local sen-
sitivity of a model in terms of its Fisher Information matrix (FIM, Fisher, 1925), a classical tool
from statistical estimation theory, and choose the pair of “generalized eigen-distortions” that max-
imize/minimize the ratio of the two models’ sensitivities. Once these image distortions have been
computed, they may be added in varying amounts to a base image to determine the level at which
they become visible to a human. These measured human sensitivities can then be compared to those
of the models, with the goal of identifying which model is better aligned with the local geometry
of the human visual system. The distortions can also be used as model interpretability tools. For
instance, visualizations of the distortions may offer insight into how complex models systematically
differ, providing practitioners with better understanding of model vulnerabilities. However, there is
no principled method for selecting image distortions for comparing more than two models.
Here we define a novel metric for comparing model representations in terms of their relative sensi-
tivities to image distortions. We then use this metric to generate a pair of distortions that maximize
the variance across two or more models under this metric. In analogy with principal component
analysis, our method can be viewed as a dimensionality reduction technique that preserves as much
of the variability in the local representational geometry as possible. As such, we refer to these as the
“principal distortions” of the set of models.
We apply our method to a nested set of hand-crafted models of the early visual system to identify
distortions that differentiate these models and can potentially be used to evaluate how well these
models predict human visual sensitivities. We then apply our method to a set of visual deep neural
networks (DNNs) with varying architectures and training procedures. We find distortions that allow
for visualization of differences in the sensitivities between layers of the networks and neural network
architectures. We further explore differences between standard ImageNet trained networks and their
shape-bias enhanced counterparts, and between standard networks and their adversarially-trained
counterparts. In all cases, we illustrate how the method generates novel distortions that highlight
differences between models. Portions of this work were initially presented in (Lipshutz* et al.,
2024).

2     P ROBLEM STATEMENT AND EXISTING METHODS
Given a collection of image representations, our goal is to develop a method for comparing the
local geometries of these representations in the vicinity of some base input image. In this section,
we define the local geometry of an image representation in terms of the FIM and review existing
methods for selecting image distortions based on model FIMs.

2.1   L OCAL INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF STOCHASTIC IMAGE REPRESENTATIONS

We assume that each image representation has an associated conditional density p(r|s), where s is
a K-dimensional vector of image pixels and r is a vector of stochastic responses (e.g., biological
neuronal firing rates or deterministic model activations with additive response noise). Fig. 1A de-
picts a two-dimensional stimulus space and three models mapping stimuli s, s + ϵ1 , and s + ϵ2 to
conditional densities. Note that the dimensions of the responses may vary across representations.
The sensitivity of the representation to a small distortion ϵ depends on the overlap between the
conditional distributions p(r|s) and p(r|s + ϵ), with less overlap corresponding to higher sensitivity
(Green & Swets, 1966). This sensitivity can be precisely quantified in terms of the Fisher-Rao metric
(Rao, 1945; Amari, 2016), a Riemannian metric on the stimulus space (Fig. 1B) that is defined in
terms of the positive semi-definite FIM (Fisher, 1925):
                          I(s) := Er∼p(r|s) ∇s log p(r|s)∇s log p(r|s)⊤ ,


where ∇s log p(r|s) denotes the gradient of log p(r|s) with respect to s. The FIM is a standard
tool in statistical estimation theory that locally approximates the expected log-likelihood ratio (or
KL divergence) between the conditional distributions p(r|s) and p(r|s + ϵ), and provides a lower
bound on the variance of any unbiased estimator of s (Cramér, 1946; Rao, 1945). The FIM has
also been used to link neural representations to perceptual discrimination (Paradiso, 1988; Seung
& Sompolinsky, 1993; Brunel & Nadal, 1998; Averbeck & Lee, 2006; Seriès et al., 2009; Ganguli
& Simoncelli, 2014; Wei & Stocker, 2016). Given the FIM, we can define the sensitivity of the


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


representation of stimulus s to a distortion ϵ as:
                                                     q
                                        d(s; ϵ) :=       ϵ⊤ I(s)ϵ,                                 (1)
which quantifies how well an ideal observer could detect small perturbations of the base stimulus in
the direction ϵ.
As a tractable example, suppose that the conditional response r is Gaussian with stimulus-dependent
mean f (s) and constant covariance Σ; that is, p(r|s) ∼ N (f (s), Σ). Then the FIM at s is
                                      I(s) = Jf (s)⊤ Σ−1 Jf (s),
where Jf (s) is the Jacobian of f (·) at s. From this expression, we see that the sensitivities of a
representation to a distortion ϵ depend on how the mean response is changing in the direction ϵ
relative to the noise covariance. This example is relevant to our experimental results, where the
function f (s) denotes the output of a deterministic model evaluated at a stimulus s.

2.2   E IGEN - DISTORTIONS OF AN IMAGE REPRESENTATION

Given a model image representation, Berardino et al. (2017) proposed the use of extremal eigen-
vectors of the model FIM (termed “eigen-distortions”, Fig. 1B, top panel) as model predictions of
the most- and least-noticeable image distortions. For a set of early vision models and deep neu-
ral networks whose parameters were optimized to match a database of human image quality ratings
(Ponomarenko et al., 2009), they computed the eigen-distortions of each model. Despite the fact that
these models all fit the image quality data equally well, their eigen-distortions were quite different,
and human perceptual judgements of the severity of these eigen-distortions varied substantially. The
eigen-distortions of each image representation correspond to its most distinct distortion predictions,
which can then be tested with human perceptual experiments. However, if the eigen-distortions of
two models are similar, they will not be useful in distinguishing the models, since this method is
insensitive to differences in the non-extremal eigenvectors.

2.3   G ENERALIZED EIGEN - DISTORTIONS FOR COMPARING TWO IMAGE REPRESENTATIONS

Zhou et al. (2023) proposed comparing two image representations A and B along distortions in
which their local sensitivities maximally differ, which is conceptually similar to previous meth-
ods that construct stimuli that maximize disagreement between models (Wang & Simoncelli, 2008;
Golan et al., 2020). Specifically, they chose distortions to extremize the generalized Rayleigh quo-
tient:
                                 u⊤ IA (s)u                                 v⊤ IA (s)v
              ϵ1 (s) = arg max ⊤            ,              ϵ2 (s) = arg min ⊤          .         (2)
                           u     u IB (s)u                             v    v IB (s)v
Since these distortions correspond to the extremal eigenvectors of the generalized eigenvalue prob-
lem IA (s)ϵ = λIB (s)ϵ, we refer to them as “generalized eigen-distortions” (Fig. 1B, middle panel).
However, this method is limited to comparisons of pairs of models, or of a single model against the
average of other models.

3     P RINCIPAL DISTORTIONS OF IMAGE REPRESENTATIONS
We propose a natural extension of generalized eigen-distortions that allows for comparisons among
more than two image representations. We show that the generalized eigenvalue problem suggests a
metric on the local geometry of image representations, which can be used to optimally choose image
distortions that distinguish more than two models at a base stimulus.

3.1   A METRIC ON THE LOCAL GEOMETRY OF IMAGE REPRESENTATIONS

We can re-express the generalized eigen-distortions defined in Equation 2 as the solutions of a single
optimization problem:
                                                         dA (u)       dA (v)
                           {ϵ1 , ϵ2 } = arg max log             − log        .
                                          u,v            dB (u)       dB (v)


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we’ve used the definition of the sensitivity in equation 1 and simplified notation by omitting
the dependence of sensitivities and distortions on the stimulus, s. We can regroup the numerators and
denominators of the log quotients by model rather than by distortion, to re-express the optimization
problem as follows:
                                 {ϵ1 , ϵ2 } = arg max mu,v (IA , IB ),
                                                        u,v
where
                                                    dA (u)          dB (u)
                                 mu,v (IA , IB ) := log      − log          .                         (3)
                                                    dA (v)          dB (v)
For any pair of distortions u, v, the function mu,v (·, ·) defines a (pseudo-)metric.1 Specifically, it is
non-negative, symmetric, obeys the triangle inequality, and is zero when IA = IB . This metric has
several appealing properties:
           • Invariance to scaling of the FIMs by positive constants cA , cB > 0:
                                        mu,v (IA , IB ) = mu,v (cA IA , cB IB ).
             This is a desirable property since we are interested in identifying relevant image distortions
             that depend on the shape of the FIMs, independent of scaling factors.
           • Invariance to permutation of the distortions u and v:
                                           mu,v (IA , IB ) = mu,v (IA , IB ).
           • When ϵ1 and ϵ2 are the generalized eigen-distortions of IA and IB , mϵ1 ,ϵ2 (IA , IB ) is an
             approximation of the Fisher-Rao distance between mean-zero Gaussian distributions with
             covariances IA and IB (up to scaling factors, see Appx. A). This interpretation suggests a
             principled extension of the metric to more than two distortions.
           • The metric compares stochastic representations back in stimulus space via their FIMs,
             which avoids having to align the stochastic representations (Duong et al., 2023b).

3.2       P RINCIPAL DISTORTIONS FOR COMPARING MULTIPLE IMAGE REPRESENTATIONS

To optimize a pair of image distortions for distinguishing N > 2 representations, A1 , . . . , AN , we
choose ϵ1 , ϵ2 to maximize the sum of the squares of all pairwise distances between the FIMs under
the metric defined in Equation 3:
                                               X N X N
                          {ϵ1 , ϵ2 } = arg max          m2u,v (IAn , IAm ).                         (4)
                                                u,v
                                                        n=1 m=1
This is equivalent to maximizing the variance of the image representations’ log sensitivity ratios:
                                              N                         N                   2
                                              X             dAn (u)   1 X    dA (u)
                       {ϵ1 , ϵ2 } = arg max           log           −     log m
                                       u,v
                                              n=1
                                                            dAn (v) N m=1    dAm (v)
We refer to {ϵ1 , ϵ2 } as the “principal distortions” of the models, analogous to principal component
analysis (Fig. 1B). For a gradient-based optimization algorithm, see Appx. B.
There are several other natural extensions of generalized-eigendistortions when considering N > 2
models. For example, for any p ≥ 1, one can choose distortions ϵ1 , ϵ2 that maximize the sum of the
pth power of all pairwise distances. Here we focus on the case of maximizing the variance (p = 2)
and leave an exploration of other moments to future work.

4       E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
As a demonstration of our method, we generated principal distortions for computational models
previously proposed to capture aspects of the human visual system. All models were implemented
in PyTorch (Ansel et al., 2024) and simulations were performed on NVIDIA GPUs (RTX A6000
and A100 models). As the models are deterministic, we calculate the FIM by assuming the network
output is corrupted by additive Gaussian noise, as in (Berardino et al., 2017). In this case, I(s) =
Jf (s)⊤ Jf (s), where Jf (s) is the Jacobian of the model f (·) at input s and the induced geometry
on stimulus space is the pullback via f (·) of the Euclidean geometry on representation space.
    1
        Technically, mu,v (·, ·) is a pseudometric because mu,v (IA , IB ) = 0 does not imply that IA = IB .


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A         Principal        Random        ,       B   Image            Principal          Principal
          LN
 Model    LG
         LGG
         LGN
           −6    −4   −2   0   2     4       6


 C
                LG                    LGN                        LN                       LGG


Figure 2: Principal distortions of four early visual models. A) Log sensitivity ratios of the two
principal distortions and two random distortions for each model (Berardino et al., 2017). Models
are nested (LN is the most basic, LGN is the full model). Principal distortions (filled circles) give
rise to diverse log ratios, while random distortions (hollow circles) do not. B) Natural image s and
corresponding optimized principal distortions {ϵ1 , ϵ2 }. C) Natural image corrupted by principal
distortions, with each pair scaled so as to be equally detectable by one model (as indicated above).
Models are ordered by the log ratio of their sensitivities (panel A). If a model’s thresholds are
proportional to human thresholds, the corresponding pair of scaled distortions should be equally
visible in the top and bottom images. Note: Images are best viewed at high resolution.

4.1      E ARLY VISUAL MODELS

We generated principal distortions for a nested family of models designed to capture the response
properties of early stages (specifically, the lateral geneiculate nucleus, LGN) of the primate visual
system (Fig. 2). The full model (LGN) contains two parallel cascades representing ON and OFF
center-surround filter channels, rectification, and both luminance and contrast gain control nonlin-
earities. The other models are reduced versions of this model. LGG removes the OFF channel, LG
additionally removes the contrast gain control, and LN removes both gain control operations. The
filter sizes, amplitudes, and normalization values of each model were previously fit separately to
predict a dataset of human distortion ratings (Berardino et al., 2017, see details in Appx. C).
As these models were explicitly trained to predict human distortion thresholds, we provide a qual-
itative comparison of each model’s sensitivities to human distortion sensitivity (Fig. 2C). For each
model, we adjusted the relative scaling of each principal distortion until the model was equally
sensitive to the scaled distortions while constraining the sum of the Euclidean norms of the two dis-
tortions to be a fixed value of 100; that is, we chose positive scalars k1 , k2 such that the sensitivities
were equal, d(k1 ϵ1 ) = d(k2 ϵ2 ), with k1 + k2 = 100. If a model’s thresholds are comparable to
human thresholds, then the pair of images should also appear equally distorted to a human observer.
Visual inspection of these images reveals that both distortions are visible when rescaled for the LGN
model and the LN model, suggesting that these models are closest to human distortion thresholds.
For LG, the scaled ϵ2 distortion is not visible, while the scaled ϵ1 distortion is immediately apparent,
suggesting a strong mismatch with human observer thresholds. The same is true of the LGG model,


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with the roles of the two distortions swapped. These qualitative observations are consistent with
the results of (Berardino et al., 2017), in which experiments on eigen-distortions suggested that the
LGN model was the best of these models in terms of consistency with human distortion sensitivity.
Future work with analogous human perceptual experiments could directly quantify the visibility of
the principal distortions arising from our analysis (see Supp. Fig. SI.1 for an illustration).
An advantage of our framework is that it can dramatically reduce the number of distortions needed to
differentiate a set of models. For instance, to judge how well these models of the early visual system
capture human perceptual discrimination thresholds, Berardino et al. (2017) computed the extremal
eigen-distortions for each of the four models, and then measured human perceptual discrimination
thresholds to all eight distortions. In general, their method requires assessing visibility of 2N distor-
tions, for N models. Zhou et al. (2023) considered a pair of generalized eigen-distortions for each
pair of models, for a total of N (N + 1) distortions. In contrast, our method always selects the two
distortions that maximize the variance across the models, independent of N . Human sensitivities
to these distortions can then be estimated in perceptual discrimination experiments to judge which
model(s) are closest in terms of the metric we defined Equation 3. The models whose sensitivities
are far from human sensitivities can be discarded and this procedure can be repeated to best differen-
tiate the remaining models, and so on. If one could reduce the number of models by, say, a factor of
two on each iteration of this process, the total number of stimuli to be assessed scales as 2 log2 (N ).
This dramatic improvement in efficiency could enable the comparison of significantly larger sets of
models than feasible with previous methods.



4.2   D EEP NEURAL NETWORKS

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), originally developed for object recognition, have also been ex-
amined as models of the primate visual system (Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016; Schrimpf et al., 2018;
Lindsay, 2021). A plethora of models, varying in architecture and training techniques, have been
proposed, but many of these models perform quite similarly on behavioral tasks or neural bench-
marks (Schrimpf et al., 2018; Tuckute et al., 2023; Conwell et al., 2024). This situation offers a
well-aligned opportunity for use of our principal distortion method. Here, we investigate previously
trained sets of models (no additional training is required to apply our method) and generate principal
distortions to differentiate the image representations.
We first investigated a set of layers from two architectures trained on the ImageNet object classifi-
cation task—AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and ResNet50 (He et al., 2016)—and generated the
principal distortions that maximally separate these models (Fig. 3, see Sec. D of the supplement for
layer choices and model details). Although these architectures are not currently state-of-the-art at
image recognition or neural prediction, they have been widely used and trained with various opti-
mization strategies, making them well suited for controlled experiments. (See Supp. Fig. SI.2 for a
similar test of the method on the modern architectures EfficientNet and ViT.)
Notably, the hierarchical structure of the models is reflected in the log ratios of the sensitivities,
where early layers of the models are closer together in the metric space (Fig. 3D), and late layers
of AlexNet are always more sensitive to ϵ1 when late layers of ResNet50 are more sensitive to ϵ2 .
There is additional structure revealed by these principal distortions—AlexNet is more sensitive to
the principal distortion that generally appears concentrated on regions of the image that have more
variability, i.e., the “stuff” in the image (distortion ϵ1 in Fig. 3B), while ResNet50 is more sensitive
to distortions that occur in the relatively constant regions of the image (distortion ϵ2 in Fig. 3B). The
separability of the models and the sensitivity of the networks to the two distortion types was remark-
ably consistent across a set of 100 base images chosen from the ImageNet dataset (Fig. 3E, see Supp.
Fig. SI.3 for additional examples). These distortions differentially affected the classification deci-
sions of the two architectures (Supp. Fig. SI.4). The distortions also replicated in a set of six models
(3 randomly initialized AlexNet models and 3 randomly initialized ResNet50 models, each trained
on ImageNet-1k, see Supp. Fig. SI.5). This distinction was also found in images designed explicitly
to test for possible differences between models due to edge artifacts or contrast sensitivity (Supp.
Fig. SI.6). As far as we know, this qualitative difference in sensitivities of the architectures to dis-
tortions in different portions of the image has not been documented, demonstrating that our method
can reveal interpretable differences in the local sensitivities of complex computational models.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                 B                                     C                              D    AlexNet
                                                                                            ResNet50



                                                                                       −10 −5   0   5   10


                                                                                       −10 −5   0   5   10


                                                                                       −10 −5   0   5   10


E                     AlexNet vs. ResNet (N=100 Base Images)             Model Layer
                                                                            Late
     AlexNet

    ResNet50
          −10.0 −7.5     −5.0   −2.5   0.0    2.5   5.0     7.5   10.0      Early

    More sensitive to                               More sensitive to

Figure 3: AlexNet versus ResNet50. A) Example base images. B) Optimized principal distortions
(scaled by a factor of 20 for visibility, and using the convention ∥ϵ∥ = 1 here and in other fig-
ures). C) Base image plus principal distortions. D) Log sensitivity ratios of principal distortions
when comparing image representations at multiple layers of AlexNet and ResNet50. Assignment
of ϵ1 and ϵ2 was chosen so that the final tested layer of AlexNet has a positive log ratio. E) Log
sensitivity ratios averaged across 100 base images (error bars are standard deviation). The prin-
cipal distortions organize the networks by architecture—the log sensitivity ratios of AlexNet and
ResNet50 are separated and early layers have smaller log ratios than late layers. AlexNet is more
sensitive to distortion ϵ1 , which is concentrated on higher contrast or textured parts of the image
(often the foreground object). ResNet50 is more sensitive to distortion ϵ2 which concentrates power
on relatively smooth parts of the image, such as regions of constant intensity/color.

Networks trained to reduce texture bias The architectural difference observed between
ImageNet-trained AlexNet and ResNet50 suggested that the texture of the image may be driving
some of the differences in local geometry. Previous work demonstrated that standard DNNs ex-
hibit strong “texture bias” (Geirhos et al., 2019) and proposed models that explicitly reduce the
texture bias by training on Stylized ImageNet (SIN), a set of images that retains the content of each
ImageNet image but overlays details matched to particular texture. Training on these images can
reduce the model’s reliance on texture for classification. If this training set strongly affected the
local geometry of the networks, we might expect that principal distortions generated for a mixture
of architectures and training sets would be driven by this training set distinction. We find evidence
that this is not the case. We generated principal distortions for 100 base images using a set of layers
from two architectures (ResNet50 and AlexNet) and two different training datasets (ImageNet and
SIN, Fig. 4A). The principal distortions appeared qualitatively similar to those generated when we
investigated only the standard networks (Fig. 4B, more examples in Supp. Fig. SI.7). Both AlexNet
architectures, regardless of the training type, were more sensitive to the perturbations of higher vari-
ability parts of the image, while both ResNet50 models were more sensitive to the distortions that
were mainly targeting constant areas of the image. To quantify this observation and dissociate the
role of foreground and background information from the high- and low-frequency content in the
image, we ran an experiment using the ImageNet-9 dataset with foreground and background masks,
where we generated principal distortions after applying a low-pass filter to either the foreground


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         Figure 4: Comparison of AlexNet and ResNet50
                                                                         variants trained to increase “Shape Bias” of net-
A
                                                                         works. A) Log sensitivity ratios of principal dis-
                 Comparison with SIN networks        Model Layer         tortions for networks trained on standard Ima-
     AlexNet                                            Late
                                                                         geNet and Stylized ImageNet (SIN). Average log
    ResNet50
                                                                         sensitivity is computed across 100 base images
AlexNet (SIN)
ResNet (SIN)
                                                                         (error bars are standard deviation) and the choice
                                                        Early
           −10       −5      0       5          10                       of ϵ1 is set such that d(ϵ1 ) ≥ 0 for the last tested
                                                                         layer of the standard AlexNet. B) Example base
B                   20            s + 20                                 image and the optimized principal distortions.
                                                   AlexNets more         Similar to the analysis of the ImageNet-trained
                                                 sensitive to   ,
                                                  regardless of          ResNet50 and AlexNet (Fig. 3), ϵ1 is concentrated
      s                                            ImageNet or
                                                                         on parts of the image with higher spatial frequen-
                                                Stylized ImageNet
                                                      Training           cies while ϵ2 is concentrated on parts of the im-
                    20            s + 20
                                                                         age with relatively solid patches. Both AlexNet
                                                                         architectures are more sensitive to ϵ1 while both
                                                  ResNet50s more
                                                 sensitive to    ,       ResNet50 architectures are more sensitive to ϵ2 ,
                                                   regardless of
                                                    ImageNet or          suggesting that the differences in local sensitivi-
                                                Stylized ImageNet
                                                      Training           ties of these networks depend more on differences
                                                                         in architecture than training procedure.


or the background of the image (Supp. Fig. SI.8). The principal distortion that AlexNet is more
sensitive to consistently concentrated on portions of the image with higher spatial frequencies (i.e.,
parts of the image that are not smoothed), while ResNet50 is concentrated on parts of the image with
only low-frequency information (the blurred parts of the image, regardless of whether this is in the
foreground or background).

Networks trained to reduce adversarial vulnerability Another well-known example of the use
of training set modifications to achieve robustness in object recognition is that of adversarial training
(AT). Adversarial examples are generated at each step of model training and these stimuli are used
to update the model weights, with the “true” category label used for the update. Previous work has
found that adversarially-trained networks are more aligned with those of biological systems (Madry,
2017; Feather et al., 2023; Gaziv et al., 2023). As adversarial examples are constrained to be very
small perturbations, it seems plausible that the local geometry for AT models would differ from
their standard counterparts. Indeed, we see that the principal distortions generated from the set of
models that included standard and AT trained AlexNet and ResNet50 models reliably separate the
model classes by training type, rather than architecture (Fig. 5A). Most layers of the adversarially
trained models are more sensitive to relatively smooth changes of patches of color in the image, or to
shading around edges, while most layers of the standard models are more sensitive to what appears
as unstructured noise (Fig. 5B, additional examples in Supp. Fig. SI.9). This is in stark contrast to
the SIN-trained networks of the previous section, for which principal distortions reliably separated
the models by architecture. These examples demonstrate that our method can be used to separate
collections of similar models, and points to its utility in probing complex high-level representations.


5    D ISCUSSION

We have introduced a metric on image representations that quantifies differences in local geometry,
and used it to synthesize “principal distortions” that maximize the variance of the metric over a set
of models. When applied to hand-engineered models of the early visual system and to DNNs, our
approach produced novel distortions for distinguishing the corresponding models. In particular, with
the DNN analysis, we revealed that there are qualitative differences in local geometries of ResNet50
and AlexNet architectures, that adversarial training dramatically changes the local geometry, but
stylized ImageNet training does not. Although our qualitative examples in this targeted set of neural
networks do not fully elucidate the recent observations that many different models are equally good
at capturing brain representations, our method provides a direct approach to begin to tease apart the
interplay between local geometry and global structure.


                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                 Comparison with AT Networks
                                                     Model Layer         Figure 5: Comparison of AlexNet and ResNet50
     AlexNet                                            Late
                                                                         variants trained to reduce adversarial vulnerabil-
    ResNet50
                                                                         ity. A) Log sensitivity ratios of principal distor-
 AlexNet (AT)
ResNet50 (AT)
                                                                         tions for different layers of standard-trained and
                                                        Early
            −10      −5       0       5         10                       adversarially-trained (AT) models. Average log
                                                                         sensitivity is computed across 100 base images
B                    20            s + 20                                (error bars are standard deviation) and the choice
                                                Standard DNNs
                                                                         of ϵ1 is set such that d(ϵ1 ) ≥ 0 for the last
                                                more sensitive to
                                                  , regardless of
                                                                         tested layer of the standard AlexNet. B) Exam-
      s                                           architecture           ple base image and the generated principal dis-
                                                                         tortions. Distortion ϵ1 appears as less structured
                                                                         noise, and both AlexNet and ResNet50 standard
                     20            s + 20
                                                                         networks are more sensitive to this perturbation,
                                                 AT DNNs more            while the AT DNNs are more sensitive to ϵ2 which
                                                 sensitive to ,
                                                  regardless of          focuses color changes around the content of the
                                                   architecture
                                                                         image, suggesting that the differences in local sen-
                                                                         sitivities of these networks depend more on differ-
                                                                         ences in training procedure than architecture.

There are several natural methodological extensions. The metric is closely related to the Fisher-Rao
metric between mean zero Gaussians and this relation suggests a natural extension to synthesizing
more than two distortions (Appx. A), analogous to using additional principal components to capture
more variance within a set of high-dimensional vectors. Additionally, while we focus on computing
principal distortions that differentiate a finite set of models, there is a natural extension to computing
the principal distortions that differentiate continuous families of models with a prior distribution over
models.
There are several limitations in our formulation of principal distortions. First, our framework is
based on local differential analyses of a model at a base image, so the sensitivity estimates we ob-
tain via these analyses can only be guaranteed to hold in an infinitesimally small neighborhood of
the base image. If a model is highly nonlinear in the vicinity of a base image, then the local lin-
ear approximation may not accurately reflect model sensitivities. Second, to compute the FIM of
a deterministic model, we assume additive Gaussian response noise, which is not generally repre-
sentative of neural responses in the brain. Poisson variability could be used to better capture neural
responses. Another approach is to fit the model noise structure to measurements of a neural system;
see (Ding et al., 2023; Nejatbakhsh et al., 2023) for work along these lines.
Principal distortions provide an efficient method for comparing computational models with human
observers, for whom experimental time for acquiring responses to stimuli is generally severely lim-
ited. Although we only presented qualitative comparisons and examples related to human perception
in this paper, the optimized distortions are a parsimonious choice of stimuli that can be readily in-
corporated into psychophysics experiments. For example, the distortions generated from the early
visual models could be used for a perceptual discrimination experiment with human observers simi-
lar to those performed by Berardino et al. (2017), to compare the human log-ratio sensitivity for the
optimized distortions to that predicted by the models.
The results with DNNs reveal some intriguing properties: some models have stronger sensitivity
biases in the local geometry for perturbing higher frequency regions of the space, while others
have more sensitivity to perturbations in relatively low frequency regions. This also suggests an
interesting question for future distortion detection: in what contexts are humans more sensitive to
perturbations of the “stuff” of the image compared to perturbations in empty parts of the image?
And how do these observed differences relate to previous work investigating how human and neural
networks rely on spatial frequencies for classification (Subramanian et al., 2023)? Finally, beyond
direct comparisons with human observers using psychophysics experiments, our method may be
useful in the domain of neural network interpretability, where it may be useful to have direct com-
parisons of the local distortions that will maximally differentiate sets of models. Principal distortions
are complementary to many currently used model interpretability tools (e.g., saliency maps, atten-
tion weight visualization) since they are explicitly designed to generate distortions that differentiate
a set of models, as opposed to interpreting one model at a time.



                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Flatiron Institute is a division of the Simons Foundation. The computations reported in this
paper were performed using resources made available by the Flatiron Institute. We thank David
Brainard, Thomas Yerxa, and the Laboratory for Computational Vision at NYU and the Flatiron
Instiute for their feedback.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The code used to generate principal distortions, details of loading the models, and example principal
distortion generation code is available at
     https://github.com/LabForComputationalVision/principal-distortions

We aim for the distortion generation to be easy for others to use to probe new models. The mathe-
matical derivation of the algorithm is provided in Appx. B. We have included details in Appx. C with
the parameters of the early visual models, and Appx. D details where checkpoints were obtained for
the tested deep neural networks.

R EFERENCES
Shun-ichi Amari. Information Geometry and its Applications, volume 194. Springer, 2016.
Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh Jain, Michael Voznesensky,
  Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni Burovski, Geeta Chauhan, Anjali Chourdia, Will
  Constable, Alban Desmaison, Zachary DeVito, Elias Ellison, Will Feng, Jiong Gong, Michael
  Gschwind, Brian Hirsh, Sherlock Huang, Kshiteej Kalambarkar, Laurent Kirsch, Michael Lazos,
  Mario Lezcano, Yanbo Liang, Jason Liang, Yinghai Lu, CK Luk, Bert Maher, Yunjie Pan, Chris-
  tian Puhrsch, Matthias Reso, Mark Saroufim, Marcos Yukio Siraichi, Helen Suk, Michael Suo,
  Phil Tillet, Eikan Wang, Xiaodong Wang, William Wen, Shunting Zhang, Xu Zhao, Keren Zhou,
  Richard Zou, Ajit Mathews, Gregory Chanan, Peng Wu, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch 2: Faster
  Machine Learning Through Dynamic Python Bytecode Transformation and Graph Compilation.
  In 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
  Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’24). ACM, April 2024. doi: 10.1145/3620665.3640366.
  URL https://pytorch.org/assets/pytorch2-2.pdf.
Bruno B Averbeck and Daeyeol Lee. Effects of noise correlations on information encoding and
  decoding. Journal of Neurophysiology, 95(6):3633–3644, 2006.
Alexander Berardino, Johannes Ballé, Valero Laparra, and Eero P Simoncelli. Eigen-distortions of
  hierarchical representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30:3531–3540,
  2017.
Nicolas Brunel and Jean-Pierre Nadal. Mutual information, Fisher information, and population
  coding. Neural Computation, 10(7):1731–1757, 1998.
Max F Burg, Thomas Zenkel, Michaela Vystrčilová, Jonathan Oesterle, Larissa Höfling, Kon-
 stantin Friedrich Willeke, Jan Lause, Sarah Müller, Paul G. Fahey, Zhiwei Ding, Kelli Restivo,
 Shashwat Sridhar, Tim Gollisch, Philipp Berens, Andreas S. Tolias, Thomas Euler, Matthias
 Bethge, and Alexander S Ecker. Most discriminative stimuli for functional cell type clus-
 tering. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=9W6KaAcYlr.
SueYeon Chung and Larry F Abbott. Neural population geometry: An approach for understanding
  biological and artificial neural networks. Current opinion in neurobiology, 70:137–144, 2021.
Colin Conwell, Jacob S Prince, Kendrick N Kay, George A Alvarez, and Talia Konkle. A large-scale
  examination of inductive biases shaping high-level visual representation in brains and machines.
  Nature Communications, 15(1):9383, 2024.
Harald Cramér. Mathematical Methods of Statistics, volume 26. Princeton University Press, 1946.

                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xuehao Ding, Dongsoo Lee, Joshua B Melander, George Sivulka, Surya Ganguli, and Stephen A
  Baccus. Information geometry of the retinal representation manifold. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36:44310–44322, 2023.

Lyndon Duong, Kathryn Bonnen, William Broderick, Pierre-Étienne Fiquet, Nikhil Parthasarathy,
  Thomas Yerxa, Xinyuan Zhao, and Eero Simoncelli. Plenoptic: A platform for synthesizing
  model-optimized visual stimuli. Journal of Vision, 23(9):5822–5822, 2023a.
Lyndon Duong, Jingyang Zhou, Josue Nassar, Jules Berman, Jeroen Olieslagers, and Alex H
  Williams. Representational dissimilarity metric spaces for stochastic neural networks. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Hadi Salman, Shibani Santurkar, and Dimitris Tsipras. Robustness
  (python library), 2019. URL https://github.com/MadryLab/robustness.
Jenelle Feather, Guillaume Leclerc, Aleksander Madry, and Josh H McDermott. Model metamers
  reveal divergent invariances between biological and artificial neural networks. Nature Neuro-
  science, 26(11):2017–2034, 2023.
Ronald Aylmer Fisher. Theory of statistical estimation. Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge
  Philosophical Society, 22(5):700–725, 1925.
Deep Ganguli and Eero P Simoncelli. Efficient sensory encoding and bayesian inference with het-
  erogeneous neural populations. Neural Computation, 26(10):2103–2134, 2014.
Guy Gaziv, Michael J Lee, and James J DiCarlo. Robustified anns reveal wormholes between human
  category percepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06887, 2023.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A. Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. ImageNet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias
  improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Tal Golan, Prashant C Raju, and Nikolaus Kriegeskorte. Controversial stimuli: Pitting neural net-
  works against each other as models of human cognition. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 117(47):29330–29337, 2020.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
D.M. Green and J.A. Swets. Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics. Wiley, New York, 1966.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Max Klabunde, Tobias Schumacher, Markus Strohmaier, and Florian Lemmerich. Similarity of
 neural network models: A survey of functional and representational measures. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.06329, 2023.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3519–
  3529. PMLR, 2019.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2:249,
  2008.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Grace W Lindsay. Convolutional neural networks as a model of the visual system: Past, present,
  and future. Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 33(10):2017–2031, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David Lipshutz*, Jenelle Feather*, Sarah E Harvey, Alex H Williams, and Eero P Simoncelli. Com-
  paring the local information geometry of image representations. In UniReps: 2nd Edition of the
  Workshop on Unifying Representations in Neural Models, 2024.
Aleksander Madry. Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1706.06083, 2017.
Amin Nejatbakhsh, Isabel Garon, and Alex Williams. Estimating noise correlations across continu-
 ous conditions with wishart processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
 54032–54045, 2023.
MA Paradiso. A theory for the use of visual orientation information which exploits the columnar
 structure of striate cortex. Biological Cybernetics, 58(1):35–49, 1988.
Julianna Pinele, João E Strapasson, and Sueli IR Costa. The Fisher-Rao distance between multivari-
  ate normal distributions: Special cases, bounds and applications. Entropy, 22(4):404, 2020.
Nikolay Ponomarenko, Vladimir Lukin, Alexander Zelensky, Karen Egiazarian, Marco Carli, and
  Federica Battisti. Tid2008-a database for evaluation of full-reference visual quality assessment
  metrics. Advances of modern radioelectronics, 10(4):30–45, 2009.
C R Rao. Information and accuracy attainable in the estimation of statistical parameters. Bulletin of
  the Calcutta Mathematical Society, 37(3):81–91, 1945.
Martin Schrimpf, Jonas Kubilius, Ha Hong, Najib J Majaj, Rishi Rajalingham, Elias B Issa, Ko-
 hitij Kar, Pouya Bashivan, Jonathan Prescott-Roy, Franziska Geiger, et al. Brain-score: Which
 artificial neural network for object recognition is most brain-like? BioRxiv, pp. 407007, 2018.
Peggy Seriès, Alan A Stocker, and Eero P Simoncelli. Is the homunculus “aware” of sensory adap-
  tation? Neural Computation, 21(12):3271–3304, 2009.
HS Seung and H Sompolinsky. Simple models for reading neuronal population codes. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 90:10749–10753, 1993.
Ajay Subramanian, Elena Sizikova, Najib J. Majaj, and Denis G. Pelli. Spatial-frequency chan-
  nels, shape bias, and adversarial robustness. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KvPwXVcslY.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Greta Tuckute, Jenelle Feather, Dana Boebinger, and Josh H McDermott. Many but not all deep
  neural network audio models capture brain responses and exhibit correspondence between model
  stages and brain regions. Plos Biology, 21(12):e3002366, 2023.
Zhou Wang and Eero P Simoncelli. Maximum differentiation (MAD) competition: A methodology
  for comparing computational models of perceptual quantities. Journal of Vision, 8(12):8–8, 2008.
Xue-Xin Wei and Alan A Stocker. Mutual information, Fisher information, and efficient coding.
  Neural Computation, 28(2):305–326, 2016.
Ross Wightman.  Pytorch image models.                   https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.
Alex H Williams, Erin Kunz, Simon Kornblith, and Scott Linderman. Generalized shape metrics
  on neural representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4738–4750,
  2021.
Kai Yuanqing Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The
  role of image backgrounds in object recognition. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gl3D-xY7wLq.
Daniel LK Yamins and James J DiCarlo. Using goal-driven deep learning models to understand
  sensory cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 19(3):356–365, 2016.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jingyang Zhou, Chanwoo Chun, Ajay Subramanian, and Eero P Simoncelli. Comparing neural
   models using their perceptual discriminability predictions. In Proceedings of UniReps: the First
   Workshop on Unifying Representations in Neural Models, pp. 170–181. PMLR, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATION TO THE F ISHER -R AO METRIC
The Fisher-Rao distance between two mean zero K-dimensional Gaussian distributions with posi-
tive definite covariance matrices A and B is defined as:
                                                                 K
                                                                 X
                       δ 2 (A, B) := ∥ log(B −1/2 AB −1/2 )∥2F =   (log λi )2 ,
                                                                        i=1

where {λi } denote the eigenvalues of the generalized eigenvalue problem Av = λBv (Pinele
et al., 2020). We’d like a metric that’s invariant to arbitrary scalings A 7→ cA A or B 7→ cB B for
cA , cB > 0, which suggests the following definition:
                                                            K
                                                            X
         γ 2 (A, B) =     min δ 2 (cA A, cB B) = min          (c + log λi )2 = KVar({log λi }),     (5)
                        cA ,cB >0                     c∈R
                                                            i=1

where the final equality uses the fact that the optimal c is the mean of {− log λi }.
Using the facts that
                                                      K     K
                                                  1 XX
                          KVar({log λi }) =                 (log λi − log λj )2 ,
                                                 2K i=1 j=1

and (log λi − log λj )2 ≤ (log λ1 − log λK )2 for all i, j, we have
                 1                                    K −1
                   (log λ1 − log λK )2 ≤ γ 2 (A, B) ≤      (log λ1 − log λK )2 ,
                 K                                      2
                                                                                √
                                                                                   ⊤
          √ holding when K = 2. When A = IA and B = IB , then dA (ϵ) = ϵ Aϵ and
with equality
dB (ϵ) = ϵ⊤ Bϵ. If ϵ1 and ϵK denote the extremal generalized eigenvectors associated with λ1
and λK , respectively, then
                                    dA (ϵ1 )                                       dA (ϵK )
                 log λ1 = 2 log              ,                    log λK = 2 log            .
                                    dB (ϵ1 )                                       dB (ϵK )
Therefore,
     2      dA (ϵ1 )       dA (ϵK )            p             dA (ϵ1 )        dA (ϵK )
    √   log          − log          ≤ γ(A, B) ≤ 2(K − 1) log           − log          ,
      K     d  (ϵ
             B 1   )       d  (ϵ
                             B K  )                          dB 1(ϵ )        dB (ϵK )
and so
                2                              p
               √ mϵ1 ,ϵK (IA , IB ) ≤ γ(A, B) ≤ 2(K − 1)mϵ1 ,ϵK (IA , IB ).             (6)
                 K
Extension to more than two distortions Equation 5 suggests a natural extension for defining a
metric between positive definite matrices using J > 2 distortions. Specifically, it suggests choosing
the distortions to maximize the variance across the log ratios of the sensitivities. To this end, we can
define the squared distance between the local geometries to be the variance (across distortions) of
the log ratio of the the sensitivities:

                              2                                dA (uj )
                            mu1 ,...,uJ (A, B) = M Var    log               .
                                                               dB (uj )
A set of J principal distortions can then be chosen to maximize the variance across models under
this metric.

B    C OMPUTING THE TOP TWO OPTIMAL DISTORTIONS
Suppose we have N models with sensitivities {dn (ϵ)}. The optimal distortions {ϵ1 , ϵ2 } are solu-
tions to the optimization problem
                                              N
                                                 (                 N
                                                                                    )2
                                             X         dn (u)   1 X        dm (u)
          arg max L(u, v),        L(u, v) :=       log        −        log              .
             u,v
                                             n=1
                                                       dn (v) N m=1        dm (v)


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Differentiating L with respect to u yields
                       N
                          (                    N
                                                              )(                 N
                                                                                           )
                      X         dn (u)     1 X         dm (u)     In (s)u    1 X Im (s)u
     ∇u L(u, v) = 2         log         −          log                     −
                      n=1
                                dn (v) N m=1           dm (v)      d2n (u)   N m=1 d2m (u)
                     N
                        (                    N
                                                             ) (               N
                                                                                          )
                    X         d2n (u)    1 X         d2m (u)     In (s)u    1 X Im (s)u
                 =        log 2       −          log 2                    −                 ,
                    n=1
                              dn (v) N m=1           dm (v)      d2n (u)    N m=1 d2m (u)
where we have used the fact that
                                         1                 Iu    Iu
                        ∇u log d(u) =      ∇u log(u⊤ Iu) = ⊤   = 2    .
                                         2                u Iu  d (u)
Similarly, differentiating L with respect to v yields:
                        N
                           (                   N
                                                               )(              N
                                                                                          )
                       X         d2n (u)    1 X        d2m (u)    In (s)v   1 X Im (s)v
   ∇v L(u, v) = −            log 2       −         log 2                  −                 .
                       n=1
                                 dn (v) N m=1          dm (v)     d2n (v)   N m=1 d2m (v)
Combining, we have the following gradient-based optimization algorithm.

Algorithm 1: Computing the principal distortions via projected gradient descent
 1: Input: Positive definite D × D matrices I1 , . . . , IN , learning rate η > 0, target distortion size
    α>0
 2: Initialize: distortions u, v ∈ RD
 3: while not converged do
 4:   for n = 1, . . . , N do
 5:      v1 (n) ← In u
 6:      v2 (n) ← In v
 7:      d21 (n) ← ⟨u, v1 (n)⟩
 8:      d22 (n) ← ⟨v, v2 (n)⟩
 9:      u1 (n) = v1 (n)/d21 (n)
10:      u2 (n) = v2 (n)/d22 (n)
11:      r(n) ← log d21 (n) − log d22 (n)
12:   end for
13:   ū1 ← mean(u1 (n))
14:   ū2 ← mean(u2 (n))
15:   r̄ ← mean(r(n))
               PN
16:   ∆u ← n=1 [r(n) − r̄] [u1 (n) − ū1 ]
                 PN
17:   ∆v ← − n=1 [r(n) − r̄] [u2 (n) − ū2 ]
18:   u ← u + η∆u
19:   v ← v + η∆v
20:   u ← αu/∥u∥
21:   v ← αv/∥v∥
22: end while


C     M ETHODS : E ARLY V ISUAL M ODEL E XPERIMENTS
PyTorch implementations of the early visual models were obtained from (https://github.
com/plenoptic-org/plenoptic, Duong et al., 2023a). The early visual models were
adopted from Berardino et al. (2017), with parameters chosen to maximize the correlation between
predicted perceptual distance and human ratings of perceived distortion, for a wide range of im-
ages and distortions provided in the TID-2008 database (Ponomarenko et al., 2009). Parameters are
reported in Table 1. Note that although the models are nested in their construction and parameter-
ization, the model parameters differ across tested models since they are optimized for each model
independently.

C.1   DATASET

Distortions were generated for images from the Kodak TID 2008 dataset (Ponomarenko et al., 2009).


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        LN Model
                        center-surround, center std          0.5339
                        center-surround, surround std        6.148
                        center-surround, amplitude ratio     1.25
                        LG Model
                        luminance, scalar                    14.95
                        luminance, std                       4.235
                        center-surround, center std          1.962
                        center-surround, surround std        4.235
                        center-surround, amplitude ratio     1.25
                        LGG Model
                        luminance, scalar                    2.94
                        contrast, scalar                     34.03
                        center-surround, center std          0.7363
                        center-surround, surround std        48.37
                        center-surround, amplitude ratio     1.25
                        luminance, std                       170.99
                        contrast, std                        2.658
                        LGN Model                            (Two channels)
                        luminance, scalar                    [3.2637, 14.3961]
                        contrast, scalar                     [7.3405, 16.7423]
                        center-surround, center std          [1.237, 0.3233]
                        center-surround, surround std        [30.12, 2.184]
                        center-surround, amplitude ratio     1.25
                        luminance, std                       [76.4, 2.184]
                        contrast, std                        [7.49, 2.43]

        Table 1: Parameters for early visual models, obtained from (Berardino et al., 2017).


D    M ETHODS : D EEP N EURAL N ETWORK E XPERIMENTS

With the exception of the experiment described in the next paragraph, we analyzed DNNs were
obtained from the model loading code and checkpoints available at https://github.com/
jenellefeather/model_metamers_pytorch which were used in (Feather et al., 2023),
and allowed for easy loading and selection of the intermediate layer stages for many models that
had previously been proposed as models of human visual perception. The checkpoints for the stan-
dard ResNet50 and AlexNet models were obtained from the public PyTorch checkpoints (Ansel
et al., 2024). The Stylized Image Net AlexNet (alexnet trained on SIN) and ResNet50
(resnet50 trained on SIN) were obtained from https://github.com/rgeirhos/
texture-vs-shape associated with (Geirhos et al., 2019). The checkpoint for the ResNet50
ℓ2 (ϵtrain = 3.0) adversarially trained model was obtained from (Engstrom et al., 2019), and the
checkpoint for the Alexnet ℓ2 (ϵtrain = 3.0) adversarially trained model was obtained from (Feather
et al., 2023). For all experiments, we only included intermediate layers before the final classification
stage in the principal distortion analysis, and the subset of layers followed those chosen in Feather
et al. (2023). Specifically, for the AlexNet models we included layers relu0, relu1, relu2,
relu3, relu4, fc0 relu, and fc1 relu in each set of anlayses. For the ResNet50 models
we included conv1 relu1, layer1, layer2, layer3, layer4, and avgpool in each set of
analyses.
To demonstrate that our approach holds for more modern architectures, we compared a ViT
vs. and EfficientNet model. These models were obtained from the PyTorch Image Models
(timm) repository (Wightman, 2019). We chose a version of EfficientNet and ViT that were
trained on the size of Images in ImageNet-9 (224 × 224 images), and versions of each archi-
tecture trained with the same image dataset (ImageNet-1k). For the EfficientNet, we tested
model EfficientNet-B0 (timm model tf efficientnet b0) and included layers conv stem,
blocks.0, blocks.1, blocks.2, blocks.3, blocks.4, blocks.5, blocks.6, and
global pool in the analysis. For the ViT, we tested model ViT (Base-Patch16-224) (timm model
vit base patch16 224.augreg in1k) and included layers patch embed, blocks.0,


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


blocks.1, blocks.2, blocks.3, blocks.4, blocks.5, blocks.6, blocks.7,
blocks.8, blocks.9, blocks.10, blocks.11 and head in the analysis.


D.1   DATASETS



For the deep neural network experiments we had two sets of images that were used to generate the
principal distortions. For the main experiments, we use a subset of 100 ImageNet images where
each image was chosen from a unique class (randomly chosen from the set of images at https:
//github.com/EliSchwartz/imagenet-sample-images).
For the experiments with background and foreground blur, we used the ImageNet-9 dataset with
foreground/background masks (Xiao et al., 2021). We chose eight random images from each cat-
egory of images, resulting in 72 total images. As this is a relatively small subset of images, we
removed images that had blank backgrounds (by eye) or that seemed to have incorrect masks (as the
masks were automatically generated in the original dataset and not validated with human labeling)
and replaced them with new random images so that the backgrounds would always be affected by
the smoothing procedure. This procedure was done before running the images through the principal
distortion analysis. For the foreground and background blurred images, we blurred the image with
a Gaussian filter with a standard deviation of 5 pixels.


D.2   P RINCIPAL DISTORTION OPTIMIZATION



For each image and each comparison, we ran the gradient descent procedure for principal distortion
optimization for 2500 iterations, using an exponentially decaying learning rate that started at 10.0
and decayed to 0.001 by the final step. The exception to this is for the experiment with ViT (Base-
Patch16-224) vs. EfficientNet-B0, where we ran the optimization for only 500 iterations.
We used a target distortion size of α = 0.1 and at each step of the optimization, we also scaled ϵ so
that the image s + 1000ϵ would not be clipped when the RGB value was represented between 0–1;
that is, we scaled ϵ so that 0 ≤ s[i] + 1000ϵ[i] ≤ 1 for each value i in the image. This constraint
could potentially bias the perturbations to be more spread out across the image (because all of the
amplitude for the perturbation cannot be focused at a small set of pixels). However, removing
this constraint did not lead to quantitatively different results (Supp. Fig. SI.10), but the inclusion
allows for more viable comparisons with human perception (as the perturbation can be scaled while
maintaining valid values in the image gamut). Finally, if one or more of the FIMs is degenerate (i.e.,
not full rank), this can potentially lead to issues in the optimization procedure (though this issue did
not arise in the experiments presented here). To address this, one option is to regularize the FIM by
adding a small constant times the identity matrix.


D.3   S UPPLEMENTAL F IGURES


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                                                   C
                                                        LN
                                                        LG
                                                       LGG
                                                       LGN


B


Figure SI.1: Illustration of method for comparing early visual models to human perception. A) An
example base image (s) and the principal distortions (ϵ1 , ϵ2 ) generated for the four early visual mod-
els (as in Fig. 2). B) Base image corrupted by the two principal distortions (top and bottom row),
scaled by amplitudes that sum to 50 and correspond to different log sensitivity ratios (parenthesized
values below the pairs, also indicated with grey arrows in panel C). A perceptual experiment can be
designed to test which pair of corrupted images (indexed A through I) appear equally distorted to
a human observer. This could be done directly, by showing various pairs of distorted images (i.e.,
s + k1 ϵ1 and s + k2 ϵ2 with varying amplitudes k1 , k2 ) and asking an observer which of the two
appears more distorted with respect to the original (s). The pair of images for which an observer
cannot decide (i.e., gives random answers) corresponds to the observer’s log sensitivity ratio. Alter-
natively, this could be assessed by measuring the observer’s detection thresholds for each distortion
independently, and then taking their log ratio. This estimated human log sensitivity ratio can then
be compared to the models’ log sensitivity ratios (colored dots, panel C), to assess which model is
best aligned with human behavior. Images are best viewed at high resolution.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 A
                    Base Image                     Base Image                Base Image                                      Base Image                       Base Image
                    Example 1                      Example 2                 Example 3                                       Example 4                        Example 5
 EfficientNet

            ViT
                  −10 −5    0        5    10   −10 −5   0       5   10   −10 −5   0   5   10       −10 −5                            0   5         10   −10 −5      0     5     10


EfficientNet
    more
 sensitive


  s + 25


        s


  s + 25


  VIT more
  sensitive


  B                                  (N=72 Base Images)                   Model Layer     C
                                                                                               Proportion maintaining same


                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                  label as original image


 EfficientNet                                                               Late
                                                                                                                             0.8
              ViT
                                                                                                                                                                        EfficientNet
                                                                                                                             0.6
                  −8   −6       −4       −2    0    2       4       6    8   Early                                                                                      ViT

                                                                                                                                   0.0       0.5        1.0   0.0         0.5        1.0
                                                                                                                                             k1                           k2



Figure SI.2: Comparison of ImageNet-1k trained EfficientNet and Vision Transformer. A) Example
principal distortions and associated log sensitivity ratio plots when comparing layers of EfficientNet-
B0 and ViT (Base-Patch16-224). B) When measured over 72 images from the ImageNet validation
set (chosen from ImageNet-9, Xiao et al., 2021), the obtained principal distortions reliably separate
the models by architecture—the layers of EfficentNet are more sensitive to distortion ϵ1 , while the
layers of ViT are more sensitive to ϵ2 . The principal distortions are qualitatively different than
those obtained when comparing AlexNet and ResNet50—for instance, the principal distortions ϵ2
(i.e., the distortion that the ViT layers are more sensitive) have notable grid artifacts corresponding
to the size of the input patches to the ViT model. C) The distortions modify or preserve the label
computed by each model, consistent with their predicted sensitivity (see Supp. Fig. SI.4 for a detailed
explanation).
                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Base Image          Base Image       Base Image         Base Image         Base Image        Base Image
             Example 1           Example 2        Example 3          Example 4          Example 5         Example 6
 AlexNet
ResNet50
           −10 −5   0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5    10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10


  s + 20


  s + 10


      s


  s + 10


  s + 20


Figure SI.3: Principal distortions for ResNet50 and AlexNet for six example base images (s, middle
row). Each row shows base images with differently scaled additive perturbations of ϵ1 and ϵ2 .
Distortions {ϵ1 , ϵ2 } are shown in isolation in the top/bottom rows, respectively. The log ratio plot
for each image is at the top of the column.


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 Proportion of images maintaining
                                                                                    1.0


                                                  same label as original image
                                                                                    0.8


                                                                                                                                             AlexNet
                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                                             ResNet50

                                                                                          0.0    0.5               1.0       0.0              0.5       1.0
                                                                                                  k1                                           k2

Figure SI.4: Adding a principal distortion to the base image changes the prediction of one DNN
but not the other. Principal distortions were generated for intermediate layers of the AlexNet and
ResNet architectures and were computed for a set of 72 base images from the ImageNet validation
set (chosen from images included in ImageNet-9, Xiao et al., 2021). For each image s and principal
distortion ϵi , the distorted images s + ki ϵi , with ki varying between 0 and 1, were classified by
the DNNs used for the principal distotion generation (AlexNet or ResNet50). The left plot shows
the proportion of images for which each DNN had the same classification for the distorted image
s + k1 ϵ1 as the base image s, for k1 varying between 0 and 1. The right plot is the same, but with
ϵ2 and k2 in place of ϵ1 and k1 .

                                                          Comparison with multiple training seeds
A                                                                 (N=72 Base Images)                                                            Figure SI.5: Principal distor-
   AlexNet (Seed 1)                                                                                                            Model Layer      tions generated for multiple ran-
                                                                                                                                  Late          dom initializations of AlexNet
   AlexNet (Seed 2)
   AlexNet (Seed 3)                                                                                                                             and ResNet50 consistently sep-
  ResNet50 (Seed 1)                                                                                                                             arate models by architecture
  ResNet50 (Seed 2)                                                                                                                             type. A) Log sensitivity ratios
  ResNet50 (Seed 3)                                                                                                                Early
                                                                                                                                                of principal distortions for net-
                                                   −10                                    −5    0              5            10                  works trained on standard Im-
                                                                                                                                                ageNet when comparing image
                                                                                                                                                representations at multiple lay-
B                                                                                    20               s + 20                                    ers of AlexNet and ResNet50,
                                                                                                                          AlexNet more          using three random initializa-
                                                                                                                           sensitive to         tions of each architecture. Prin-
                                                                                                                           , regardless of
                                       s                                                                                       seed             cipal distortions were computed
                                                                                                                                                for a set of 72 base images
                                                                                                                                                from the ImageNet validation
                                                                                                                                                set (chosen from images in-
                                                                                     20               s + 20                                    cluded in ImageNet-9, Xiao
                                                                                                                                                et al., 2021), and the mean ratio
                                                                                                                           ResNet50 more
                                                                                                                           sensitive to ,       across these 72 images is plot-
                                                                                                                         regardless of seed     ted (error bars are standard de-
                                                                                                                                                viation). B) Example base im-
                                                                                                                                                age, principal distortions, and
                                                                                                                                                distorted images. The princi-
C                                                                                                                                               pal distortions are qualitatively
  Proportion of images maintaining


                                                                                                                                                similar to those observed from
   same label as original image


                                     1.0                                                                             AlexNet (Seed 1)
                                                                                                                     AlexNet (Seed 2)
                                                                                                                                                a single architecture in Fig. 3.
                                                                                                                     AlexNet (Seed 3)           C) Proportion of images with a
                                     0.8                                                                                                        changed prediction class (com-
                                                                                                                    ResNet50 (Seed 1)
                                                                                                                    ResNet50 (Seed 2)
                                                                                                                                                pared to image s) for the dis-
                                     0.6                                                                            ResNet50 (Seed 3)           torted images s + ki ϵi . Results
                                                                                                                                                are similar to trends for sin-
                                           0.0        0.5                            1.0 0.0    0.5       1.0                                   gle seeds of models from Supp.
                                                       k1                                        k2                                             Fig. SI.4.


                                                                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              A            Base Image                     B              Base Image                       C Base Image
                         Texture Surround                               Texture Center                      Full Texture
   AlexNet
  ResNet50
              −10 −5 0 5 10 −10 −5 0 5 10 −10 −5 0 5 10       −10 −5 0 5 10 −10 −5 0 5 10 −10 −5 0 5 10     −10 −5 0 5 10


  AlexNet
    more
  sensitive


 s + 20


 s + 10


     s


 s + 10


 s + 20


 ResNet50
   more
 sensitive


Figure SI.6: Principal distortions for ResNet50 and AlexNet for base images that have been con-
structed to have either (A) texture only in the periphery and a blank center (B) texture only in the
center and a blank surround and (C) a full image of texture. The log ratio plot for each image is at
the top of the column. Panels A and B highlight that the AlexNet architecture is more sensitive to the
perturbation with power around the “stuff” of the image (i.e., the non-blank areas), while ResNet50
is more sensitive to a distortion focused on blank areas of the image, and these perturbations are not
sensitive to the choice of low contrast (“black”) or high luminance (“white”) for the blank part of
the space. Panel C highlights that in the case where there is not obvious blank area of the image, the
perturbations become harder to interpret, and this reflects the locally adaptive property of the FI to
the input image.


                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Base Image         Base Image       Base Image         Base Image        Base Image         Base Image
                  Example 1          Example 2        Example 3          Example 4         Example 5          Example 6
      AlexNet
     ResNet50
 AlexNet (SIN)
ResNet50 (SIN)
                 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0    5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10


   s + 20


   s + 10


         s


   s + 10


   s + 20


Figure SI.7: Principal distortions for standard ImageNet trained and Shape Image Net Trained (SIN)
AlexNet and ResNet50 architectures for example base images.


                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 A                                                                              B                                Principal distortion amplitudes in          C                                    bird         primate           dog
                Original        Blur Background Blur Foreground                                                      foreground for all images
                 (Orig)             (Blur BG)      (Blur FG)                                                     (ImageNet vs. SIN Experiment)
                                                                                                                                                                                       10-5


      Base
     Image
                                                                                                                                                                                       10-6


                                                                           Amplitude (per pixel) in Foreground


                                                                                                                                                      Amplitude (per pixel) in Foreground
                                                                                                        10-5                                                                                    musical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fish
                                                                                                                                                                                                                reptile
                                                                                                                                                                                              instrument


                                                                                                                                                                                       10-5


                                                                                                                                                                                       10-6


                                                                                                                                                                                              wheeled
                                                                                                                                                                                              vehicle         carnivore        insect
                                                                                                        10       -6

                                                                                                                                                                                       10-5


     AlexNet
    ResNet50                                                                                                           Orig     Blur      Blur
AlexNet (SIN)
ResNet (SIN)                                                                                                                    BG        FG                                           10-6
             −10 −5   0   5   10 −10 −5   0   5   10 −10 −5   0   5   10
                                                                                                                       (AlexNet more sensitive)                                               Orig Blur Blur Orig Blur Blur Orig Blur Blur
                                                                                                                       (ResNet50 more sensitive)                                                   BG FG          BG FG          BG FG


Figure SI.8: Control experiment dissociating foreground and background from high- and low-spatial
frequency regions. (A) Example natural base image, image with a blurred background, and image
with a blurred foreground. Images were chosen from ImageNet-9 (Xiao et al., 2021), which contains
masks of the “foreground” parts of the image. Images are 224 × 224 pixels. To construct the
blurred variants, a Gaussian filter with σ = 5 is was applied to the full image, and we used the
provided image masks to construct the Blur Background (Blur BG) condition by adding the original
image foreground to the blurred image background, and the Blur Foreground (Blur FG) condition
by adding the original image background to the blurred image foreground. The associated optimal
distortions are shown for each image, generated from the layers from AlexNet, ResNet50, SIN-
Trained AlexNet, and SIN-Trained ResNet50. In the example image, the distortion AlexNet is most
sensitive to (ϵ1 ) is biased towards higher frequency (non-blurred) parts of the image, while the
distortion ResNet50 is most sensitive to (ϵ2 ) is biased towards low-frequency (blurred) parts of the
image. We quantified this observation in (B) by masking the perturbation with the foreground mask,
and measuring the average squared value of each perturbation in this region. If a perturbation is
localized to the foreground, it will have a high perturbation magnitude on this plot. Each point on
the plot corresponds to one of 72 randomly selected images from ImageNet-9 (Xiao et al., 2021),
where 8 images were selected from each category, and the box and whisker plots are defined with the
median given by the line across the box, the box extends from Q1 to Q3, and the whiskers extend to
1.5 IQR. Although there is a slight bias for distortion ϵ1 (defined as the perturbation AlexNet is more
sensitive to), to have more power in the foreground of the image, this is likely due to the general
biases of natural images where often times the background is blurred. If we blur the background,
we see that this difference is exaggerated, while if we blur the foreground, the AlexNet perturbation
shifts to be less concentrated in the foreground while the perturbation ResNet50 is more sensitive to
(ϵ2 ) becomes more concentrated in the foreground. Points for individual categories are shown in (C),
which show the same trends, and results look similar when just including AlexNet and ResNet50
models in principal distortion generation (not shown).


                                                                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Base Image         Base Image       Base Image         Base Image        Base Image         Base Image
                 Example 1          Example 2        Example 3          Example 4         Example 5          Example 6
     AlexNet
    ResNet50
 AlexNet (AT)
ResNet50 (AT)
                −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0    5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10 −10 −5 0   5   10


   s + 20


   s + 10


        s


   s + 10


   s + 20


Figure SI.9: Principal distortions for standard ImageNet trained and adversarially trained AlexNet
and ResNet50 architectures for example base images.


                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                                                           B            20     s + 20

                 Principal Distortions:
                                                                                            AlexNet more
            Optimization constraint removed   Model Layer            s                        sensitive
                                                 Late
  AlexNet


ResNet50                                                                 20     s + 20
                                                 Early
             −10    −5     0     5      10
                                                                                            ResNet50 more
                                                                                               sensitive


Figure SI.10: Example principal distortions for ResNet50 vs. AlexNet comparison where the pixel-
wise min/max value for the perturbation has not been constrained to avoid clipping once the pertur-
bation is scaled. Similar to the results in the main text, we see that the principal distortion to which
AlexNet is more sensitive is focused on the part of the image with high-contrast texture features,
while ResNet50 is more sensitive to the perturbation targeting relatively smooth parts of the image.


                                                                27
