Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O N ROLLOUTS IN M ODEL -BASED R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING
 Bernd Frauenknecht∗, Devdutt Subhasish∗, Friedrich Solowjow, and Sebastian Trimpe
 Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering
 RWTH Aachen University
 Aachen, 52062, Germany
 firstname.lastname@dsme.rwth-aachen.de


                                               A BSTRACT

             Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) seeks to enhance data efficiency
             by learning a model of the environment and generating synthetic rollouts from
             it. However, accumulated model errors during these rollouts can distort the data
             distribution, negatively impacting policy learning and hindering long-term plan-
             ning. Thus, the accumulation of model errors is a key bottleneck in current MBRL
             methods. We propose Infoprop, a model-based rollout mechanism that separates
             aleatoric from epistemic model uncertainty and reduces the influence of the lat-
             ter on the data distribution. Further, Infoprop keeps track of accumulated model
             errors along a model rollout and provides termination criteria to limit data corrup-
             tion. We demonstrate the capabilities of Infoprop in the Infoprop-Dyna algorithm,
             reporting state-of-the-art performance in Dyna-style MBRL on common MuJoCo
             benchmark tasks while substantially increasing rollout length and data quality.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful framework for solving complex decision-
making tasks like racing Vasco et al. (2024); Kaufmann et al. (2023) and gameplay OpenAI et al.
(2019); Bi & D’Andrea (2024). However, when applying RL in real-world scenarios, a significant
challenge is data inefficiency, which hinders the practicality of standard RL methods. Model-based
reinforcement learning (MBRL) addresses this issue by learning an internal model of the environ-
ment Deisenroth & Rasmussen (2011); Chua et al. (2018); Janner et al. (2019); Hafner et al. (2020).
By generating simulated interactions through model rollouts, MBRL can make informed decisions
while substantially reducing the need for real-world data collection.
The quality of data from model-based rollouts is critical for MBRL performance. Model errors can
distort the data distribution and hurt policy learning. Long-horizon planning is desirable, however,
often infeasible as model errors accumulate over time. This effect is demonstrated in Figure 1. Even
for a simple toy example (described in Appendix B), we see the data distribution of model-based
rollouts under the state-of-the-art Trajectory Sampling (TS) Chua et al. (2018) scheme diverging
quickly from the ground truth distribution of environment rollouts. Thus, data from TS rollouts
can even be harmful to policy learning after a couple of time steps. This is largely because the TS
mechanism does not explicitly address the effect of model errors on the propagated data distribution.
To tackle this challenge, we propose Infoprop , a novel model-based rollout mechanism that miti-
gates data distortion by addressing two key questions: How to propagate? and When to stop? We
build our mechanism on explicitly leveraging the ability of common MBRL models to distinguish
between aleatoric uncertainty due to process noise and epistemic uncertainty due to lack of data
Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017); Becker & Neumann (2022). Making use of this property leads to
substantially improved data consistency as depicted in Figure 1. In particular, we
        • estimate and remove the stochasticity due to model error from the predictive distribution;
        • formulate stopping criteria based on information loss to limit error accumulation; and
    ∗
        Equal Contribution


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Trajectory Sampling
     15        Infoprop
               Ground Truth
     10

      5
St



      0

      5

     10
           0                    20             40                   60                   80    100
                                                           t

Figure 1: Comparing Data Consistency of Model-based Rollouts. Trajectories under the pro-
posed Infoprop mechanism follow the ground truth distribution of environment rollouts closely while
rolling out the same model under the common TS scheme Chua et al. (2018) results in distorted data.

      • demonstrate the potential of Infoprop as a direct plugin to standard MBRL methods using the
        example of Dyna-style MBRL. The resulting Infoprop-Dyna algorithm yields state-of-the-
        art performance in MBRL on common MuJoCo tasks, while substantially improving the data
        consistency of model-based rollouts and thus allowing for longer rollout horizons.

2     BACKGROUND

In the following, we introduce the fundamental concepts of information theory and MBRL. Ap-
pendix A provides an overview of the notation introduced and used in the remainder of the paper.

2.1       I NFORMATION T HEORY

We will estimate the degree of data corruption in Infoprop rollouts using information-theoretic ar-
guments. Information theory serves to quantify the uncertainty of a random variable (RV) Shan-
non (1948). PGiven the discrete RVs X : Ω → X and Y : Ω → Y, the marginal entropy
H(X) = − x∈X P[X = x] log2 (P[X = x]) describes      P the average uncertainty about X in bits.
Further, the conditional entropy H(X|Y = y) = − x∈X P[X|Y = y] log2 (P [X|Y = y]) gives
the uncertainty about X, given a realization of Y . Based on marginal and conditional entropy, the
reduction in uncertainty about X given a realization of Y is described by mutual information
                                     I(X; Y = y) = H(X) − H(X|Y = y),                                (1)
with I(X; Y = y) = 0 if the RVs are independent. In the following, we focus on Gaussian RVs and
use the notion of quantized entropy Cover & Thomas (2006) with details provided in Appendix D.1.

2.2       R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Reinforcement learning addresses sequential decision-making problems where the environment is
typically modeled as a discrete-time Markov decision process (MDP) represented by the tuple M =
{S, A, R, PR , PS , ξ0 , γ}. Here, S ⊆ RnS denotes the state space with St ∈ S being the RV of the
state at time t and st its realization. Similarly, A ⊆ RnA represents the action space with At ∈ A
the RV and at the realization of the action as well as R ⊆ R the set of rewards with Rt ∈ R and rt
the reward at time t. We make the common simplifying assumption Bellemare et al. (2023) that the
next state and reward are independent given the current state-action pair. Thus, a transition step in
the environment can be expressed concerning a reward kernel PR and a dynamics kernel PS as
                              Rt+1 ∼ PR (·|St , At ) and       St+1 ∼ PS (·|St , At ).               (2)
Further, initial states are distributed according to S0 ∼ ξ0 , and actions
                                                                      P∞ according to the policy
At ∼ π(·|St ). We aim to learn an optimal policy π ∗ = arg maxπ Eπ [ t=0 γ t Rt+1 ] that maximizes
the expected sum of rewards discounted by γ ∈ [0, 1), referred to as return.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.3     M ODEL - BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

There are four main categories of MBRL that all build on model-based rollouts. (i) Dyna-style
methods Sutton (1991); Janner et al. (2019) use model-based rollouts to generate training data for a
model-free agent. (ii) Model-based planning approaches Chua et al. (2018); Williams et al. (2017);
Nagabandi et al. (2018); Hafner et al. (2019) do not learn an explicit policy but perform planning
via model rollouts during deployment. (iii) Analytic gradient methods Deisenroth & Rasmussen
(2011); Hafner et al. (2020; 2021; 2023) optimize the policy by backpropagating the performance
gradient through model rollouts. (iv) Value-expansion approaches Feinberg et al. (2018); Buckman
et al. (2018) stabilize the temporal difference target using model-based rollouts.
The model architecture of an MBRL algorithm determines the set of mechanisms for model rollouts.
In this work, we focus on rolling out the particularly successful class of aleatoric epistemic separator
(AES) models Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017); Becker & Neumann (2022) that can distinguish
aleatoric uncertainty corresponding to the estimate of process noise from epistemic uncertainty.

2.4     E NVIRONMENT I NTERACTION VS . M ODEL - BASED ROLLOUTS

Model-based rollouts aim to substitute environment interaction in MBRL. Thus, we compare the
data generation process through environment interaction to the process of model-based rollouts.
We model environment dynamics as a nonlinear function µ(St , At ) with additive heteroscedastic
process noise that is normally distributed with variance Σ(St , At ). Thus, environment rollouts, as
depicted in Figure 1, are generated by iterating the dynamics
                                  St+1 = µ(St , At ) + L(St , At )Wt ,                               (3)
                           ⊤
with L(St , At )L(St , At ) = Σ(St , At ) and the process noise Wt ∼ N (0, I). Consequently, the
transition kernel 1 of the environment is defined as PS (·|St , At ) = N (µ(St , At ), Σ(St , At )).
In MBRL, however, we do not have access to PS directly but typically rely on a parametric model
with the random parameters Θt ∈ ϑ. Besides estimates of nonlinear dynamics µ̂Θt (St , At ) and
process noise Σ̂Θt (St , At ), AES models provide an estimate of the parameter distribution Θt ∼ PΘ ,
e.g. via ensembling Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017) or dropout Becker & Neumann (2022). These
models are typically propagated using the TS Chua et al. (2018) rollout mechanism via iterating
                                      St+1 = µ̂Θt (St , At ) + L̂Θt (St , At )Wt                         (4)
                                  ⊤
with L̂Θt (St , At )L̂Θt (St , At )     = Σ̂Θt (St , At ), Wt ∼ N (0, I), and Θ
                                                                                t ∼ PΘ . This results in the

TS rollouts in Figure 1 and induces the kernel P̂S,TS (·|St , At ) = N µ̂Θt (St , At ), Σ̂Θt (St , At ) .
The majority of recent MBRL approaches use the TS rollout mechanism, e.g. Chua et al. (2018);
Becker & Neumann (2022); Janner et al. (2019); Pan et al. (2020); Yu et al. (2020); Luis et al.
(2023). Pseudocode is provided in Algorithm 2 of Appendix C.

3     P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
Revisiting Figure 1 allows us to illustrate the effects of different sources of stochasticity by compar-
ing environment interaction under PS to TS rollouts under P̂S,TS . While different realizations of
process noise wt ∼ N (0, I) allow for keeping track of the environment distribution, the sampling
process θt ∼ PΘ introduces additional stochasticity that leads to an overestimated total variance in
the TS rollout distribution. This effect is amplified through the continued propagation of erroneous
predictions making data at later steps unfit for policy learning. We ask the following questions:
      (i) How can we construct a predictive distribution closely resembling environment dynamics?
     (ii) How can we quantify the degree of data corruption due to model error?
    (iii) When should model-based rollouts be terminated due to data corruption?
We address these questions by proposing the Infoprop rollout mechanism. Infoprop isolates and
removes epistemic uncertainty for an improved predictive distribution, keeps track of data corruption
using information-theoretic arguments, and terminates rollouts based on the degree of corruption.
   1
     As PR typically is a known deterministic function in the context of MBRL, while PS is the unknown
object we aim to model, the discussion henceforth focuses on approximating PS without loss of generality.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     I NFOPROP ROLLOUT M ECHANISM

In the following, we introduce the Info-
prop mechanism for model-based roll-
outs. As depicted in Figure 2, we de-
compose model predictions into a sig-
nal fraction representing the environ-
ment dynamics and noise fraction in-
troduced by model error. This perspec-
tive allows to interpret model rollouts as
communication through a noisy chan-
nel. We estimate both the signal and the
noise distribution and use these to in-
fer a belief over the environment state,
given an observation of the model state.
This belief state represents the founda-
tion of the Infoprop rollout mechanism.
                                                             Figure 2: Infoprop block diagram
4.1   T HEORETICAL S ETUP

First, we introduce additional notation to specify RVs under different transition kernels.
Definition 1 (Environment state). We define the environment state as the conditional expectation
under the environment dynamics given a realization of a state-action pair
                              Št+1 := EPS [St+1 |St = st , At = at , Wt ] .                        (5)
Thus, Št+1 is an RV, where the randomness is induced by the process noise and has an aleatoric
nature. If we additionally condition on the realization Wt = wt , we obtain a deterministic object.
Definition 2 (Model state). We define the model state as the conditional expectation under P̂S,TS
                          Ŝt+1 := EP̂S,TS [St+1 |St = st , At = at , Wt , Θt ] .                   (6)

As discussed in Section 3, stochasticity in Ŝt+1 is induced not only by Wt but also by the randomness
in the parameters Θt . We project the uncertainty in the parameter space ϑ to S via an error process.
Definition 3 (Model error process). We define a model error process
                                            ∆t := Ŝt+1 − Št+1                                     (7)
that, given a realization of process noise Wt = wt , projects uncertainty in ϑ to S
              E [∆t |Wt = wt ] = EP̂S,TS [St+1 |st , at , wt , Θt ] − EPS [St+1 |st , at , wt ] .   (8)
We refer to the projected parameter uncertainty as epistemic uncertainty.
Further, we restrict model usage to a sufficiently accurate subset E ⊆ S × A, as proposed in
Frauenknecht et al. (2024). We define E amenable to the Infoprop setting in Section 4.4 and make
the following assumptions when performing model-based rollouts in E:
Assumption 1 (Consistent estimator of aleatoric uncertainty). The model’s predictive variance Σ̂Θt
is a consistent estimator of Σ following the definition of Julier & Uhlmann (2001), i.e.

                           Σ̂Θt (St , At ) − Σ(St , At ) ≽ 0 ∀(St , At ) ∈ E.                   (9)
Assumption 2 (Unbiased estimator). The model bias µ∆ is negligible. Thus Ŝt+1 according to (4)
is an unbiased estimator of Št+1 according to (3), i.e.

                       E[Ŝt+1 |St , At ] = E Št+1 |St , At   ∀(St , At ) ∈ E.            (10)
Figure 1 empirically shows that these assumptions are reasonable. The Infoprop distribution is
slightly more stochastic than the ground truth process, which indicates that Assumption 1 holds. As
(9) states, the model does not underestimate aleatoric uncertainty; the Infoprop rollouts should be
at least as stochastic as the true process. Further, we observe no substantial bias of the Infoprop
distribution underscoring the soundness of Assumption 2. Infoprop shows a similar behavior in high
dimensional problems as reported in Section 6.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2     D ECOMPOSING THE MODEL STATE IN SIGNAL AND NOISE

We aim to isolate the stochasticity due to parameter uncertainty in Ŝt+1 . We use the model error
process (8) to project the noise in ϑ to the same space as the signal, i.e. the dynamics, which is
S. The parameter distribution Θt ∼ PΘ can induce arbitrarily complex distributions ∆t ∼ P∆ . To
simplify the analysis, we solely consider the first two moments of P∆ , namely µ∆ and Σ∆ . This
allows to reformulate the propagation equation (4) of the model state
                         Ŝt+1 = Št+1 + ∆t ≈ Št+1 + µ∆ (St , At ) + L∆ (St , At )Nt                      (11)
concerning Št+1 and the model error ∆t represented by µ∆ (St , At ) the model bias, Σ∆ (St , At ) the
epistemic variance with Cholesky decomposition L∆ (St , At ), and Nt the epistemic noise.
By Assumption 2, we have µ∆ (St , At ) = 0 ∀(St , At ) ∈ E. Consequently, we can interpret the
model rollout as communication through a Gaussian noise channel Cover & Thomas (2006) via (11).
Based on the propagation equation (11), we aim to infer the maximum likelihood estimate of Št+1
from E realizations of {E[Ŝt+1 |Nt = net ]}E
                                            e=1 , to use it as the predictive distribution for our rollout
scheme. As we cannot sample Nt directly, we instead use an equivalent definition of Ŝt+1 .
Definition 4 (Model state concerning epistemic uncertainty). Based on the model error process (8)
the model state is defined as
 Ŝt+1 = EP̂S,TS [St+1 |St = st , At = at , Wt , ∆t ] ≈ EP̂S,TS [St+1 |St = st , At = at , Wt , Nt ] (12)

Reformulating (6) concerning ∆t does not change the information content or the induced sigma-
algebra, as ∆t is a measurable function of Θt . In the simplified setting of solely considering the first
two moments of P∆ , Nt fully describes stochasticity due to model error. In reverse, we can obtain
realizations {E[Ŝt+1 |Θt = θte ]}E                                                    e E
                                  e=1 and interpret them as samples {E[Ŝt+1 |Nt = nt ]}e=1 .
                                        h               i
Lemma 1. Given E realizations of E Ŝt+1 |Θt = θte , we can estimate the environment state using
maximum likelihood as
                             h               i
                   Št+1 = E Ŝt+1 |Nt = 0 ≈ S̄t+1 = µ̄(St , At ) + L̄(St , At )Wt                  (13)

Proof. see Appendix D.2.1
Lemma 2. Following this line of thought, the maximum likelihood estimate of Σ∆ is given by
                            E
                         1 X                                                                           ⊤
      Σ̄∆ (St , At ) =

                               µ̂Θt =θte (St , At ) − µ̄(St , At ) µ̂Θt =θte (St , At ) − µ̄(St , At ) .   (14)
                         E e=1
Proof. see Appendix D.2.2
Given the maximum likelihood estimates of the environment state S̄t+1 and the epistemic variance
Σ̄∆ , we can decompose the model state Ŝt+1 in a signal and noise fraction according to (11) in E.

4.3     C ONSTRUCTING THE I NFOPROP STATE

Having decomposed Ŝt+1 into signal S̄t+1 and noise Σ̄∆ , allows us to define the Infoprop state.
Definition 5 (Infoprop state). We define the Infoprop state
                h                  i            h                                          i
    S̃t+1 := E S̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 = EP̃S,IP St+1 |St = st , At = at , Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 , Ut                 (15)

as the conditional expectation of the estimated environment state given a sample of
the  model state.  We derive the  corresponding Infoprop kernel P̃S,IP (·|St , At , Ŝt+1 ) =
N µ̃(St , At , Ŝt+1 ), Σ̃(St , At , Ŝt+1 ) with the conditional noise Ut ∼ N (0, I) in Appendix D.3.

Consequently, the Infoprop state aims to infer the signal S̄t+1 given a noisy observation ŝt+1 . Prop-
agating model-based rollouts using S̃t+1 , yields favorable properties as stated in Theorem 1.



                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       (a) Perfect model.              (b) Erroneous model.                (c) Rollout propagation.
Figure 3: Infoprop rollout mechanism. (a), (b): Generating the Infoprop state S̃t+1 from the esti-
mated predictive distribution S̄t+1 and the model sample ŝt+1 . (c) Performing an Infoprop rollout.

Theorem 1 (Infoprop state). By construction, S̃t+1 addresses questions (i) and (ii) of Section 3.

   (i) The distribution of Infoprop states is identical to the estimated environment distribution.
                                                         dist
                                                  S̃t+1 = S̄t+1                                       (16)

       Proof. see Appendix D.4.

  (ii) The sum of marginal entropies of S̃t+1 defines the information loss along an Infoprop rollout.
                                                                                      XT
            H S̄1 , S̄2 , . . . S̄T |S0 = s0 , A0 = a0 , Ŝ1 = ŝ1 , . . . ŜT = ŝT =   H S̃t+1      (17)
                                                                                   t=0

       Proof. see Appendix D.5.

Figure 3 illustrates the Infoprop rollout mechanism and provides intuition for Theorem 1. In the case
of a perfect model, i.e. Σ̄∆ = 0, depicted in Figure 3a, the realization ŝt+1 provides the information
about the process noise realization wt without ambiguity. Consequently, the belief about the environ-
ment state given the sample from the model S̃t+1 = E[S̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 ] is a deterministic object
and H(S̃t+1 ) = 0. In the general scenario of Σ̄∆ > 0 depicted in Figure 3b, the epistemic uncer-
tainty results in ambiguity about the environment state given ŝt+1 , such that H(S̃t+1 ) > 0. Notably,
conditioning S̄t+1 on ŝt+1 , results in Infoprop predictions S̃t+1 following estimated environment
distribution S̄t+1 as stated in Theorem 1 (i). This results in a data distribution that closely resem-
bles the environment dynamics as desired in question (i) of Section 3. Finally, Figure 3c depicts a
Infoprop rollout propagated via realization s̃t+1 . We measure data corruption due to model error us-
ing the conditional entropy of a rollout under the estimated environment dynamics (S̄1 , S̄2 , . . . S̄T )
given the realizations observed from the model (S0 = s0 , A0 = a0 , Ŝ1 = ŝ1 , . . . ŜT = ŝT ), i.e.
given the observed model trajectory, how sure are we on how the corresponding environment trajec-
tory would look like?. As per Theorem 1 (ii), this trajectory-based approach to uncertainty can be
addressed with the accumulated marginal entropy of S̃t+1 , addressing question (ii) of Section 3.

4.4   ROLLOUT T ERMINATION C RITERIA

Having introduced how to propagate Infoprop rollouts, the question remains when to terminate them.
In the following, we propose two termination criteria to address question (iii) of Section 3.
First, Infoprop rollouts build on the assumption that model usage is restricted to a sufficiently accu-
rate subset E ⊆ S × A, following the ideas of Frauenknecht et al. (2024).
Definition 6 (Sufficiently accurate subset). We define the sufficiently accurate subset

                  E := {(st , at ) ∈ S × A | H(S̃t+1 ) ≤ λ1 , ŝt+1 ∼ P̂S,TS (·|st , at )}            (18)

based on a threshold λ1 for the single-step information loss H(S̃t+1 ).
Second, we restrict Infoprop rollouts to sufficiently accurate paths to limit uncertainty accumulation.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 7 (Sufficiently accurate path). Based on the estimated information loss along a rollout
(17), we define the set of sufficiently accurate paths of length t′ ∈ {1, . . . , T } as
                                                                                  
                                                            t′                    
                         ′                ′              ′ X
                      P t := (st , at )tt=0 ∈ (S × A)t          H(S̃t+1 ) ≤ λ2 .              (19)
                                                                                  
                                                                  t=0



Heuristics for determining values of λ1 and λ2 depend on the class of AES model and MBRL
algorithm at hand with an example provided in Section 5. Combining the steps above yields the
Infoprop rollout mechanism illustrated in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Infoprop
Require: s0
  while t < T + 1 do
     at ∼ π(·|st )
     for e ∈ {1, . . . , E} do
         θte ∼ PΘ
     S̄t+1 (st , aht ) from (13), and Σ̄∆ (st , ait ) from (14)
                                               ′                            ′
       ŝt+1 = E Ŝt+1 |Wt = wt , Θt = θte         with wt ∼ N (0, I), θte ∼ U({θt1 , . . . , θtE })
       S̃t+1 from (51) and H(S̃t+1 ) from (24)
       if H(S̃t+1 ) > λ1 then
           break
              Pt
       else if t′ =0 H(S̃t′ +1 ) > λ2 then
           break
       else
           st ← E[S̃t+1 |Ut = ut ] with ut ∼ N (0, I)



5    AUGMENTING S TATE -O F -T HE -A RT: I NFOPROP -DYNA

While the Infoprop rollout mechanism is applicable to different kinds of MBRL with AES models,
we illustrate its capabilities in a Dyna-style architecture with probabilistic ensemble (PE) models
Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017). We design Infoprop-Dyna by integrating the Infoprop rollout
mechanism in the state-of-the-art framework proposed in Janner et al. (2019) with minor adaptions.
As discussed in Section 4.4, heuristics for λ1 and λ2 depend on the algorithm at hand. In Infoprop-
Dyna , we take the common approach Chua et al. (2018); Janner et al. (2019) of neglecting cross-
correlations between state dimensions for computational reasons. Thus, we can consider data cor-
ruption of each state dimension independently. As the predictive quality of different state dimensions
can differ substantially, we choose both thresholds as nS dimensional vectors, such that a rollout is
terminated as soon as the data corruption of any dimension overshoots the corresponding threshold.
In Dyna-style MBRL Janner et al. (2019), the dynamics model is trained on the data distribution ob-
served during environment interaction. The corresponding transitions are stored in an environment
                             (b) (b) (b)     (b)   |Denv |
replay buffer Denv = {(št , ǎt , řt+1 , št+1 )}b=1     , where (b) indicates the index in the replay
buffer. After a fixed number of interaction steps between a model-free RL agent and the environ-
ment, the dynamics model is retrained on the data in Denv , model-based rollouts are performed, and
the data is stored stored in a replay buffer Dmod to train the model-free RL agent. Consequently, we
assume the PE model to be accurate within the data distribution of Denv and build the heuristic for
λ1 and λ2 on the predictive uncertainty within the environment buffer.
After each round of retraining the PE model, we compute a set of dimension-wise Infoprop state
entropies for single-step predictions in Denv according to
                n                                                          o|Denv |
                                 (b)        (b)           k,(b)     k,(b)
            Hk = H S̄t+1
                     k                            k
                         |St = št , At = ǎt , Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 = H S̃t+1                                (20)
                                                                                             b=1


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where k ∈ {1, . . . , nS } indicates the corresponding state dimension. We define the dimension-wise
thresholds λk1 and λk2 based on the cumulative distribution function of dimension-wise entropies
                                                 1 X
                                    FHk (h) =              1[h′ ≤ h].                           (21)
                                                |Hk | ′ k
                                                     h ∈H
         th
The k element of λ1 is defined as the ζ1 quantile of the single-step entropy set
                              λk1 = inf h ∈ Hk : FHk (h) ≥ ζ1

                                                                                                   (22)
                                                                                                      ′
and limits model usage to the sufficiently accurate subset E. To restrict rollouts of length t′ to P t ,
we define the k th element of λ2 as the ζ2 quantile of the entropy set scaled by ξ
                               λk2 = ξ inf h ∈ Hk : FHk (h) ≥ ζ2 .

                                                                                                   (23)
Here, ζ2 denotes a quantile corresponding to precise predictions and ξ to the number of prediction
steps we are willing to accumulate the resulting data corruption. We choose ζ1 = 0.99, ζ2 = 0.01
and ξ = 100 for all experiments in Section 6 without further hyperparameter tuning.
We use pink noise for environment exploration Eberhard et al. (2023) to quickly expand E
Frauenknecht et al. (2024). Pseudocode is provided in Algorithm 3 of Appendix C.

6       E XPERIMENTS AND D ISCUSSION
To demonstrate the benefits of the Infoprop mechanism, we compare Infoprop-Dyna to state-of-the-
art Dyna-style MBRL algorithms on MuJoCo Todorov et al. (2012) benchmark tasks. We report
        • substantial improvements in the consistency of predicted data, especially over long horizons;
        • effective rollout termination based on accumulated model error propagation; and
        • state-of-the-art performance in Dyna-style MBRL on several MuJoCo tasks.
Furthermore, we discuss the limitations of naively integrating Infoprop into the standard Dyna-style
setup Janner et al. (2019) and point to further research questions.

6.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We compare Infoprop-Dyna to Model-Based Policy Optimization (MBPO) Janner et al. (2019) and
Model-Based Actor-Critic with Uncertainty-Aware Rollout Adaption (MACURA) Frauenknecht
et al. (2024) as well as to Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) Haarnoja et al. (2018) that represents the model-
free learner of all the Dyna-style approaches above. We build our implementation2 on the code base3
provided by Frauenknecht et al. (2024). Further details are provided in Appendix E.1

6.2      P REDICTION Q UALITY

To compare different rollout mechanisms, we train an Infoprop-Dyna agent on hopper for 120000
environment interactions and perform model rollouts from states in Denv .
First, we evaluate the consistency of Infoprop and TS rollouts, propagating 20 steps without ter-
mination. Figure 4a depicts the resulting distributions for the 11th dimension of the hopper state.
Infoprop rollouts show substantially improved data consistency compared to TS rollouts, underscor-
ing the ability of Infoprop to effectively mitigate model error propagation.
Next, we compare the rollout mechanisms of MBPO and MACURA based on TS sampling with
Infoprop-Dyna rollouts. Figure 4b shows the results for 11th dimension of the hopper and a maxi-
mum rollout length of 100 steps. MBPO rollouts are propagated for 11 steps following the schedule
proposed in Janner et al. (2019), resulting in a widely spread distribution. In contrast, MACURA
has an adaptive rollout length capped at 10 steps Frauenknecht et al. (2024), leading to better data
consistency. The improved predictive distribution and capability to estimate accumulated error of
Infoprop allows for substantially longer rollouts up to 100 steps. The Infoprop termination criteria
reliably stop distorted rollouts, resulting in consistent rollouts over long horizons. Appendix E.2
provides additional results for setting the maximum rollout length of all three approaches to 100.
    2
        https://github.com/Data-Science-in-Mechanical-Engineering/infoprop
    3
        https://github.com/Data-Science-in-Mechanical-Engineering/macura


                                                    8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   20

                                                                                                                                                10
                                       0

                                                                                                                                                 0
                                   20


                                                                                                                                         St
                 St

                                                                                                                                                10
                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MBPO
                                   60
                                                                                                                 Trajectory Sampling            20                                                                                                 MACURA
                                                                                                                 Infoprop                                                                                                                          Infoprop
                                                                                                                 Ground Truth                                                                                                                      Ground Truth
                                           0                5                     10                        15                  20              30      0                       20               40                    60                80                  100
                                                                                       t                                                                                                                     t

                                               (a) Trajectory Sampling vs. Infoprop                                                                             (b) MBPO vs. MACURA vs. Infoprop-Dyna
                                                                                                                                                        th
 Figure 4: Predictive quality of rollouts in the 11 state dimension of MuJoCo hopper. (a) Rollouts
 according to Trajectory Sampling (TS) and Infoprop . (b) Rollout schemes of MBPO and MACURA
 based on TS compared to Infoprop-Dyna .

                                       1e3              Halfcheetah                                   1e3                 Walker                                 4 1e3               Hopper                                1e3             Ant
                                  15                                                              6                                                                                                                    6
                                  10                                                              4
Return


                                                                                                                                                                 2                                                     4                             Info-Prop Dyna
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MACURA
                                   5                                                              2                                                                                                                    2                             MBPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Asymptotic SAC



                                  50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
Average Rollout Length


                                  40                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                 30
                                  30                                                                                                                            20                                                    40
                                                                                                 20
                                  20
                                                                                                 10                                                             10                                                    20
                                  10
                                   0                                                              0                                                              0                                                     0
                                                  100       200          300        400                          50         100          150      200                      25        50     75         100 120                     100             200          300
                                                           Steps                  ×103                                     Steps                ×103                                  Steps               ×103                             Steps              ×103

                                                                                       (a) Performance and average rollout length on MuJoCo tasks.
                                                        Environment Buffer(MBPO)                                                  Environment Buffer(MACURA)                                          Environment Buffer(Info-Prop Dyna)
                                   40                                                                            40                                                                     40
    Foot Hinge Angular Velocity


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10 1
                                   20                                                                            20                                                                     20
                                    0                                                                             0                                                                      0                                                                   10 2
                                   20                                                                            20                                                                     20
                                   40                                                                            40                                                                     40                                                                   10 3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Density
                                                   25         50        75    100                  125                          25         50        75     100              125                       25      50         75       100         125
                                                           Model Buffer(MBPO)                     1e3                                  Model Buffer(MACURA)                 1e3                         Model Buffer(Info-Prop Dyna)          1e3            10 4
                                   40                                                                            40                                                                     40
    Foot Hinge Angular Velocity


                                   20                                                                            20                                                                     20                                                                   10 5
                                    0                                                                             0                                                                      0
                                   20                                                                            20                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10 6
                                   40                                                                            40                                                                     40
                                                   25           50           75            100     125                          25         50           75           100     125                       25        50           75   100         125
                                                                     Steps                        1e3                                           Steps                       1e3                                       Steps                   1e3

                                                                                       (b) Adequacy of Dmod on the 11th state dimension of hopper.
 Figure 5: Evaluation on MuJoCo tasks. (a) Infoprop-Dyna shows state-of-the-art performance for
 Dyna-style MBRL on several MuJoCo tasks while considerably increasing average rollout length on
 most tasks. (b) Infoprop-Dyna shows substantially improved consistency between Denv and Dmod .


  6.3                                           P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

 As depicted in the top row of Figure 5a, Infoprop-Dyna performs on par with or better than
 MACURA, while substantially outperforming MBPO with respect to data efficiency and asymptotic
 performance. Notably, Infoprop-Dyna consistently outperforms SAC with a fraction of environment
 interaction. The bottom row of Figure 5a depicts the average rollout lengths. Infoprop-Dyna shows
 substantially increased rollout lengths compared to prior methods in all environments but ant.
 A major concern of this work is the consistency of model-based rollouts with the environment dis-
 tribution. Figure 5b depicts the data distribution in Denv and Dmod of the respective Dyna-style
 approaches throughout training for the 11th dimension of the hopper state. The distributions are
 illustrated via histograms over environment steps. It can be seen that the model data distribution
 of Infoprop-Dyna closely follows the distribution observed in the environment, while both the data
 from MBPO and MACURA show severe outliers. This is the case, even though the rollout data in
 Infoprop-Dyna is obtained from substantially longer rollouts as can be seen from Figure 5a which
 indicates the capabilities of the Infoprop rollout mechanism.

                                                                                                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.4   L IMITATIONS AND O UTLOOK

Despite the excellent quality of model-generated data with the Infoprop rollout, the limitations of
Infoprop-Dyna are most apparent on MuJoCo humanoid with results provided in Appendix E.3.
These show instabilities in learning and point to structural problems when integrating Infoprop roll-
outs naively into standard Dyna-style architectures Janner et al. (2019).
Figure 5b shows that the long rollouts of Infoprop-Dyna can cause rapid distribution shifts in Dmod ,
especially early in training. These nonstationary buffers are a well-known challenge to deep Q-
learning methods Mnih et al. (2015). Another issue is primacy bias in model learning Qiao et al.
(2023), where the model overfits to initial data and subsequently struggles to generalize, as seen in
the decreasing rollout length for ant in Figure 5a. The main problem with Infoprop-Dyna is likely
overfitting critics and plasticity loss Nikishin et al. (2022); D’Oro et al. (2023), as also reported
by Frauenknecht et al. (2024) for Dyna-style MBRL trained on high-quality data. We provide an
ablation on this observation and sketch methods to counteract this phenomenon in Appendix E.4.


7     R ELATED W ORK

The negative effects of accumulated model error on the performance of MBRL methods is a long-
studied problem Venkatraman et al. (2015); Talvitie (2016); Asadi et al. (2018b;a).
Different model architectures have been proposed to mitigate this issue, such as trajectory models
Asadi et al. (2019); Lambert et al. (2021), bidirectional models Lai et al. (2020), temporal segment
models Mishra et al. (2017) or self-correcting models Talvitie (2016). These architectures, however,
imply substantial additional effort for model learning, such that state-of-the-art performance in the
respective fields of MBRL is often reported for simpler single-step model architectures Chua et al.
(2018); Janner et al. (2019); Buckman et al. (2018).
These approaches address the problem of error accumulation by keeping model-based rollouts suf-
ficiently short. Janner et al. (2019) introduce the concept of branched rollouts that allows to cover
relevant parts of S with short model rollouts. Other methods weight rollouts of different lengths
according to their single-step uncertainty Buckman et al. (2018) or use single-step uncertainty to
schedule rollout length Pan et al. (2020); Frauenknecht et al. (2024). Infoprop allows to infer model
data consistent with the environment distribution over long rollout horizons using comparatively
simple model architectures and computationally cheap conditioning operations.
Infoprop is inspired by an information-theoretic view on RL Lu et al. (2023). Thus far, information-
theoretic arguments have been mostly used to improve the exploration Haarnoja et al. (2018); Lu
& Roy (2019); Ahmed et al. (2019); Mohamed & Rezende (2015) and generalization Tishby & Za-
slavsky (2015); Lu et al. (2020); Igl et al. (2019); Islam et al. (2023) of model-free RL methods.
While aspects of dynamical systems such as causality, modeling, and control Lozano-Duran & Ar-
ranz (2021), predictability Kleeman (2011) or dealing with noisy observations Gattami (2014) have
been studied from an information theoretic perspective, these works do not directly apply to the
MBRL setup nor extend to long model-based rollouts.


8     C ONCLUDING R EMARKS

Data consistency of model-based rollouts is a key criterion for the performance of MBRL ap-
proaches. This work proposes the novel Infoprop mechanism that substantially improves rollouts
with common AES models. We reduce the influence of epistemic uncertainty on the predictive
distribution of model-based rollouts, keep track of data corruption through propagated model error
over long horizons, and terminate rollouts based on data corruption. This allows for considerably
increased rollout lengths while substantially improving data consistency simultaneously.
While Infoprop is applicable to a broad range of MBRL methods, we demonstrate its capabilities
by naively integrating Infoprop into a standard Dyna-style MBRL architecture Janner et al. (2019)
resulting in the Infoprop-Dyna algorithm. We report state-of-the-art performance in several MuJoCo
tasks while pointing to necessary adaptions to the existing algorithmic framework to fully unleash
the potential of Infoprop rollouts.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Christian Fiedler, Pierre-François Massiani, and David Stenger for the fruitful discussions
on the work presented in this paper. This work is funded in part under the Excellence Strategy of
the Federal Government and the Länder (G:(DE-82)EXS-SF-OPSF854) and the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under the Robotics Institute Germany (RIG), which
the authors gratefully acknowledge. Friedrich Solowjow is supported by the KI-Starter grant by the
state of NRW. Further, the authors gratefully acknowledge the computing time provided to them
at the NHR Center NHR4CES at RWTH Aachen University (project number p0022301). This is
funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, and the state governments participating
on the basis of the resolutions of the GWK for national high performance computing at universities
(www.nhr-verein.de/unsere-partner).

R EFERENCES
Zafarali Ahmed, Nicolas Le Roux, Mohammad Norouzi, and Dale Schuurmans. Understanding the
  impact of entropy on policy optimization. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, 2019.
Kavosh Asadi, Evan Cater, Dipendra Misra, and Michael L. Littman. Towards a Simple Approach
  to Multi-step Model-based Reinforcement Learning. arXiv, 2018a.
Kavosh Asadi, Dipendra Misra, and Michael L. Littman. Lipschitz Continuity in Model-based
  Reinforcement Learning. arXiv, 2018b.
Kavosh Asadi, Dipendra Misra, Seungchan Kim, and Michel L. Littman.                  Combating the
  Compounding-Error Problem with a Multi-step Model. arXiv, 2019.
Philipp Becker and Gerhard Neumann. On Uncertainty in Deep State Space Models for Model-
  Based Reinforcement Learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Mark Rowland. Distributional Reinforcement Learning. MIT
 Press, 2023.
Thomas Bi and Raffaello D’Andrea. Sample-efficient learning to solve a real-world labyrinth game
  using data-augmented model-based reinforcement learning. In IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and
  Automation, 2024.
Jacob Buckman, Danijar Hafner, George Tucker, Eugene Brevdo, and Honglak Lee. Sample-
  efficient reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expansion. In Int. Conf. on Neural
  Information Processing Systems. 2018.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep Reinforcement
  Learning in a Handful of Trials using Probabilistic Dynamics Models. Adv. in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2018.
Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory 2nd Edition (Wiley Series in
  Telecommunications and Signal Processing) by Thomas M. Cover Joy A. Thomas(2006-07-18).
  Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2006.
Marc Peter Deisenroth and Carl Edward Rasmussen. PILCO: a model-based and data-efficient
 approach to policy search. In Int. Conf. on Machine Learning. 2011.
Pierluca D’Oro, Max Schwarzer, Evgenii Nikishin, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Marc G. Bellemare, and
  Aaron C. Courville. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning by breaking the replay ratio barrier.
  In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, 2023.
Onno Eberhard, Jakob Hollenstein, Cristina Pinneri, and Georg Martius. Pink noise is all you need:
  Colored noise exploration in deep reinforcement learning. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2023.
Vladimir Feinberg, Alvin Wan, Ion Stoica, Michael I. Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Sergey
  Levine. Model-Based Value Estimation for Efficient Model-Free Reinforcement Learning. Int.
  Conf. on Machine Learning, 2018.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bernd Frauenknecht, Artur Eisele, Devdutt Subhasish, Friedrich Solowjow, and Sebastian Trimpe.
  Trust the Model Where It Trusts Itself – Model-Based Actor-Critic with Uncertainty-Aware Roll-
  out Adaption. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, 2024.
Ather Gattami. Kalman meets shannon. ArXiv, 2014.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft Actor-Critic Algo-
  rithms and Applications. arXiv, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning Latent Dynamics for Planning from Pixels. In Int. Conf. on Machine Learn-
  ing. PMLR, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to Control: Learn-
  ing Behaviors by Latent Imagination. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering Atari with
  Discrete World Models. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, 2021.
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering Diverse Domains
  through World Models. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, 2023.
Maximilian Igl, Kamil Ciosek, Yingzhen Li, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Cheng Zhang, Sam Devlin,
 and Katja Hofmann. Generalization in reinforcement learning with selective noise injection and
 information bottleneck. In Int. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Riashat Islam, Hongyu Zang, Manan Tomar, Aniket Didolkar, Md Mofijul Islam, Samin Yeasar
  Arnob, Tariq Iqbal, Xin Li, Anirudh Goyal, Nicolas Heess, and Alex Lamb. Representation
  learning in deep rl via discrete information bottleneck. In Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, 2023.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: model-
 based policy optimization. In Int. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2019.
Simon Julier and Jeffrey Uhlmann. General Decentralized Data Fusion with Covariance Intersec-
  tion (CI). 2001.
Elia Kaufmann, Leonard Bauersfeld, Antonio Loquercio, Matthias Müller, Vladlen Koltun, and
  Davide Scaramuzza. Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature,
  2023.
Richard Kleeman. Information theory and dynamical system predictability. Entropy, 2011.
Hang Lai, Jian Shen, Weinan Zhang, and Yong Yu. Bidirectional Model-based Policy Optimization.
  In Int. Conf. on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2020.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Int. Conf. on Neural Information Processing
  Systems. 2017.
Nathan O. Lambert, Albert Wilcox, Howard Zhang, Kristofer S. J. Pister, and Roberto Calandra.
  Learning Accurate Long-term Dynamics for Model-based Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Conf
  on Decision and Control, 2021.
Adrian Lozano-Duran and Gonzalo Arranz. Information-theoretic formulation of dynamical sys-
  tems: causality, modeling, and control. ArXiv, 2021.
Xingyu Lu, Kimin Lee, P. Abbeel, and Stas Tiomkin. Dynamics generalization via information
  bottleneck in deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, 2020.
Xiuyuan Lu and Benjamin Van Roy. Information-theoretic confidence bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Int. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiuyuan Lu, Benjamin Van Roy, Vikranth Dwaracherla, Morteza Ibrahimi, Ian Osband, and Zheng
  Wen. Reinforcement learning, bit by bit. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 2023.
Carlos E. Luis, Alessandro G. Bottero, Julia Vinogradska, Felix Berkenkamp, and Jan Peters.
  Model-Based Epistemic Variance of Values for Risk-Aware Policy Optimization. arXiv, 2023.
Nikhil Mishra, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Prediction and Control with Temporal Segment
  Models. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, 2017.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 2015.
Shakir Mohamed and Danilo J. Rezende. Variational information maximisation for intrinsically
  motivated reinforcement learning. In Int. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.
Anusha Nagabandi, Gregory Kahn, Ronald S. Fearing, and Sergey Levine. Neural Network Dynam-
  ics for Model-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning with Model-Free Fine-Tuning. In IEEE Int.
  Conf. on Robotics and Automation. 2018.
Michal Nauman, Michał Bortkiewicz, Piotr Miłoś, Tomasz Trzcinski, Mateusz Ostaszewski, and
 Marek Cygan. Overestimation, Overfitting, and Plasticity in Actor-Critic: the Bitter Lesson of
 Reinforcement Learning. In Int. Conf. on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron C. Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, 2022.
OpenAI, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw De-
  biak, Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal
  Jozefowicz, Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé
  de Oliveira Pinto, Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon
  Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep
  reinforcement learning. 2019.
Feiyang Pan, Jia He, Dandan Tu, and Qing He. Trust the model when it is confident: masked
  model-based actor-critic. In Int. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2020.
Zhongjian Qiao, Jiafei Lyu, and Xiu Li. Mind the Model, Not the Agent: The Primacy Bias in
  Model-based RL. arXiv, 2023.
C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 1948.
Dan Simon. Optimal State Estimation. 2006. ISBN 978-0-47170858-2.
Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. DemonstratingA Walk in the Park: Learning to
  Walk in 20 Minutes With Model-Free Reinforcement Learning. Robotics, Science and Systems,
  2023.
Richard S. Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. SIGART
  Bull., 1991.
Erik Talvitie. Self-Correcting Models for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning. arXiv, 2016.
Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information bottleneck principle. IEEE
  Information Theory Workshop (ITW), 2015.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE, 2012.
Miguel Vasco, Takuma Seno, Kenta Kawamoto, Kaushik Subramanian, Peter R. Wurman, and Peter
 Stone. A Super-human Vision-based Reinforcement Learning Agent for Autonomous Racing in
 Gran Turismo. Reinforcement Learning Conference, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Arun Venkatraman, Martial Hebert, and J.. Bagnell. Improving Multi-Step Prediction of Learned
  Time Series Models. AAAI, 2015.
Grady Williams, Nolan Wagener, Brian Goldfain, Paul Drews, James M. Rehg, Byron Boots, and
  Evangelos A. Theodorou. Information theoretic MPC for model-based reinforcement learning. In
  IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 2017.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. In Adv. in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      N OTATION
A.1    R ANDOM VARIABLES
 St     Random variable of a general state
 Št    Random variable of the environment state
 Ŝt    Random variable of the model state
 S̄t    Random variable of the estimated environment state
 S̃t    Random variable of the Infoprop state
 At     Random variable of the action
 ∆t     Random variable of the model error
 Wt     Random variable of the aleatoric noise
 Nt     Random variable of the epistemic noise
 Ut     Random variable of the conditional noise
 Θt     Random variable of the model parameters

A.2    R EALIZATIONS
 st     Realization of a general state
 št    Realization of the environment state
 ŝt    Realization of the model state
 s̄t    Realization of the estimated environment state
 s̃t    Realization of the Infoprop state
 at     Realization of the action
 wt     Realization of the aleatoric noise
 nt     Realization of the epistemic noise
 ut     Realization of the conditional noise
 θt     Realization of the model parameters

A.3    T RANSITION K ERNELS
 PS (·|St , At ) = N (µ(S      t , At ), Σ(St , At ))                           Environment Transition Kernel
 P̂S,TS (·|St , At ) = N µ̂Θt (St , At ), Σ̂Θt (St , At )                       Trajectory Sampling Kernel

 P̃S,IP (·|St , At , Ŝt+1 ) = N µ̃(St , At , Ŝt+1 ), Σ̃(St , At , Ŝt+1 )     Infoprop Kernel


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    T OY E XAMPLE
In Figure 1, we illustrate the data consistency of Trajectory Sampling Chua et al. (2018) and Infoprop
in a one-dimensional random walk example with S ⊆ R and A ⊆ R. The dynamics follow (3) with
µ(St , At ) = St + At and L(St , At ) = 0.01. Actions are distributed according to At ∼ N (0, 0.1).
All rollouts start from s0 = 0 and are propagated for 100 steps. We perform 1000 rollouts under the
environment dynamics and train a Probabilistic Ensemble Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017) model
according to the information provided in Table 1. Subsequently, we perform 1000 model-based
rollouts with this model and the respective rollout mechanism.

                                  Hyperparameter                Value
                             number of ensemble members           5
                               number of hidden neurons           2
                                  number of layers                1
                                    learning rate               0.001
                                    weight decay               0.00001
                                  number of epochs                4

        Table 1: Hyperparameters used for training the model on the random walk dataset.

C    P SEUDOCODE A LGORITHMS

Algorithm 2 Trajectory Sampling Chua et al. (2018)
Require: s0
  while t < T + 1 do
     at ∼ π(·|sht )                    i
     ŝt+1 = E Ŝt+1 |Wt = wt , Θt = θt with wt ∼ N (0, I) and θt ∼ PΘ
     st ← ŝt+1


Algorithm 3 Infoprop-Dyna (Pseudocode adapted from Janner et al. (2019))
Require: Policy π, predictive AES model pΘ , environment buffer Denv , model buffer Dmod , rollout
  parameters T , ζ1 , ζ2 , ξ
  for N epochs do
      for J steps do
          Interact with the environment according to π; add to Denv
      Train model pΘ on Denv
      Perform single-step predictions with pΘ in Denv
      Compute λ1 (22) and λ2 (23)
      for M model rollouts do
          Sample s0 uniformly from Denv
          Perform Infoprop rollouts according to Algorithm 1; add to Dmod
      for G · J gradient updates do
          Update π on Denv ∪ Dmod


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     D ERIVATIONS
D.1     Q UANTIZED E NTROPY

For a RV Z ∈ Z ⊆ RnZ with Z ∼ N (µZ , ΣZ ) and discretization step size ∆z (k) of the k th
dimension, the quantized entropy Cover & Thomas (2006) is
                                                            Z    n
                                   1                        X
                         H(Z) =      log2 ((2πe)nZ |ΣZ |) −   log2 ∆z (k) .                         (24)
                                   2
                                                                k=1


D.2     M AXIMUM L IKELIHOOD P REDICTIVE D ISTRIBUTION

D.2.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
Proof. We introduce the conditional expectation over the next state under the model, given a real-
ization θte                                    h               i
                                      e
                                    Ŝt+1 := EP̂S,TS Ŝt+1 |Θt = θte .                              (25)

Further, µ̂e := µ̂Θt =θte , Σ̂e := Σ̂Θt =θte and L̂e := L̂Θt =θte such that
                                    e
                                  Ŝt+1 = µ̂e (St , At ) + L̂e (St , At )Wt .                       (26)
               e
Given E RVs Ŝt+1  we define their joint distribution
                       1                 1                                     
                           Ŝt+1                µ̂        Σ̂1 · · ·             Σ̂1E
                       ..                ..   ..           ..               .. 
                       .  ∼ N  .  ,  .                        .              . 
                             E                    E         E1                                      (27)
                           Ŝt+1                µ̂       Σ̂      ···            Σ̂E

                   =: Ŝ ∼ N µ̂, Σ̂
                 h             i
                           f
with Σ̂ef := Cov Ŝt+1
                    e
                       , Ŝt+1  . We aim to track St+1 such that

                                       HSt+1 ∼ N µ̂, Σ̂                                             (28)

where we use H = [I, I, . . . , I]⊤ ∈ RnS ·E×nS to project St+1 to the dimension of the joint Ŝ.
We define the maximum likelihood loss

                                          1              1
                                                                             −1

            L(St+1 ) = p(Ŝ|St+1 ) =           1 exp   −    Ŝ − HS t+1   Σ̂      Ŝ − HS t+1       (29)
                                       |2π Σ̂| 2         2
such that
                              1               1
           log (L(St+1 )) = − log |2π Σ̂| −         Ŝ − HSt+1 Σ̂−1 Ŝ − HSt+1 .                    (30)
                              2                  2
We aim to obtain the maximizer of the log-likelihood such that
                                     S̄t+1 = arg max log (L(St+1 )) .                               (31)
                                                   St+1

Consequently,
                         ∂                     1
                             log (L(St+1 )) = − H ⊤ Σ̂−1 Ŝ − HSt+1 := 0
                       ∂St+1                   2
                                         ⇒ H ⊤ Σ̂−1 Ŝ − H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H S̄t+1 = 0                       (32)
                                                                 −1
                                         ⇒ S̄t+1 = H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H         H ⊤ Σ̂−1 Ŝ.
As a result, we obtain                                   −1

                              µ̄ = E S̄t+1 = H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H     H ⊤ Σ̂−1 µ̂

                                                                                                    (33)


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and                                           −1
             Σ̄ = Var S̄t+1 = Var H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H     H ⊤ Σ̂−1 Ŝ


                             −1              h i                   −1
               = H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H     H ⊤ Σ̂−1 Var Ŝ Σ̂−1 H H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H                               (34)
                             −1                               −1              −1
               = H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H     H ⊤ Σ̂−1 Σ̂Σ̂−1 H H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H    = H ⊤ Σ̂−1 H


which corresponds to standard results in Kalman fusion. However, as the cross-correlations Σ̂ef
are unknown in practice, we approximate the Kalman fusion results (33) and (34) using covariance
intersection fusion Julier & Uhlmann (2001) with uniform weights, making use of Assumption 1.
This results in                                         !−1
                                             E
                                          1 X   e  −1
                                   Σ̄ =          Σ̂                                         (35)
                                          E e=1
and                                                               !
                                                 E
                                             1 X   e  −1 e
                                   µ̄ = Σ̄         Σ̂   µ̂            .                         (36)
                                             E e=1
Hence, we can estimate the environment state as
                                 S̄t+1 = µ̄(St , At ) + L̄(St , At )Wt ,                        (37)
         ⊤
with L̄L̄ = Σ̄ and Wt ∼ N (0, I).

D.2.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2
Proof. We continue here using the quantities we estimated in the previous section. To estimate Σ∆ ,
we interpret {µ̂1 }E
                   e=1 as samples from a distribution whose mean is known to be µ̄. With this, the
maximum likelihood estimate of Σ∆ can be obtained trivially as
                                             E
                                         1 X e                     ⊤
                                 Σ̄∆ =         (µ̂ − µ̄) (µ̂e − µ̄) .                           (38)
                                         E e=1



D.3     I NFOPROP S TATE

As introduced in (15), the Infoprop state is defined as
                h                   i            h                                          i
     S̃t+1 := E S̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 = EP̃S,IP St+1 |St = st , At = at , Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 , Ut     (39)

Combining (11) and Assumption 2, we have
                                  Ŝt+1 = Št+1 + L∆ (St , At )Nt .                             (40)
Plugging the respective maximum likelihood estimates into (40) yields
                                   Ŝt+1 = S̄t+1 + L̄∆ (St , At )Nt                             (41)
with
                               S̄t+1 = µ̄(St , At ) + L̄(St , At )Wt                         (42)
according to (13). As we can generally consider model uncertainty as independent from process
noise, i.e. Nt ⊥ Wt , the Infoprop state S̃t+1 = E[Št+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 ] can be computed using a
standard Kalman update.
The general form of the Kalman update Simon (2006) considers two Gaussian RVs X ∼
N (µX , ΣX ) and Y = X + N with N ∼ N (0, ΣN ) and X ⊥ N . Then, given an observation
y we can compute the conditional expectation of X

                            E [X|Y = y] ∼ N µX|Y =y , ΣX|Y =y                    (43)


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with
                                         µX|Y =y = µX + K(y − µX ),                                     (44)
                                           ΣX|Y =y = (I − K) ΣX ,                                       (45)
and
                                                                        −1
                                              K = ΣX (ΣX + ΣN )              .                          (46)
Following (15), we can compute the Infoprop state via (43) choosing
                                                   µX = µ̄(st , at ),                                   (47)
                                                 ΣX = Σ̄(st , at ),                                     (48)
                                                 ΣN = Σ̄∆ (st , at ),                                   (49)
and
                           y = µ̄(st , at ) + L̄(st , at )wt + L̄∆ (st , at )nt .                       (50)
This yields the propagation equation of the Infoprop state
       S̃t+1 = µ̃(St = st , At = at , Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 ) + L̃(St = st , At = at , Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 )Ut        (51)
with
                µ̃(st , at , ŝt+1 ) = µ̄(st , at ) + K(st , at ) L̄(st , at )wt + L̄∆ (st , at )nt ,

                                                                                                        (52)
                             Σ̃(st , at , ŝt+1 ) = (I − K(st , at )) Σ̄(st , at ),                     (53)
                                                                                    −1
                           K(st , at ) = Σ̄(st , at ) Σ̄(st , at ) + Σ̄∆ (st , at )    ,                (54)
                                                                  ⊤
                                        L̃(st , at )L̃(st , at ) = Σ̃(st , at ),                        (55)
and
                                   L̄∆ (st , at )L̄∆ (st , at )⊤ = Σ̄∆ (st , at ).                      (56)

D.4    I NDUCED S TATE D ISTRIBUTION BY THE I NFOPROP ROLLOUT

Lemma 3. As introduced in (57), the next state distribution induced by the Infoprop rollout is the
same as that given by the estimated ground truth:
                                                           dist
                                                     S̃t+1 = S̄t+1                                      (57)

Proof. We show equality in distribution via comparison of the cumulative distribution functions
(CDF) of S̃t+1 and S̄t+1 . If we can show that the CDFs are identical, i.e. P(S̃t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 ) =
P(S̄t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 ) ∀s̄t+1 ∈ S, the equality in distribution follows.
We compute P(S̃t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 ) using S̃t+1 = E[S̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 ] and marginalizing over Ŝt+1
                            Z
       P(S̃t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 ) =      P(E[S̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 ] ≤ s̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 )fŜt+1 (ŝt+1 )dŝt+1 (58)
                                    S

with fŜt+1 the probability density function of Ŝt+1 .

By construction, E[S̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 ] describes the behavior of S̄t+1 given Ŝt+1 . Consequently,
                P(E[S̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 ] ≤ s̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 ) = P(S̄t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 )          (59)
and therefore
                                        Z
                P(S̃t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 ) =           P(S̄t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 )fŜt+1 (ŝt+1 )dŝt+1 .   (60)
                                          S
The right hand side of (60) represents the law of total probability for P (S̄t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 )
                                  Z
             P(S̄t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 ) =     P(S̄t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 |Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1 )fŜt+1 (ŝt+1 )dŝt+1 .            (61)
                                          S
Therefore, we have
                             P(S̃t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 ) = P(S̄t+1 ≤ s̄t+1 ) ∀s̄t+1 ∈ S                           (62)
and can conclude
                                                          dist
                                                    S̃t+1 = S̄t+1 .                                     (63)



                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.5      I NFORMATION L OSS ALONG A I NFOPROP ROLLOUT

Lemma 4. As introduced in (17), the total information loss incurred during a Infoprop equals the
accumulated entropy of the Infoprop state:
                                                                                      −1
                                                                                     TX
           H S̄1 , S̄2 , . . . , S̄T |S0 = s0 , A0 = a0 , Ŝ1 = ŝ1 . . . ŜT = ŝT =    H S̃t+1               (64)
                                                                                            t=0


Proof.

             H S̄1 , S̄2 , . . . , S̄T |S0 = s0 , A0 = a0 , Ŝ1 = ŝ1 . . . ŜT = ŝT
                  T
                  X −1
             =           H S̄t+1 | S̄1 , S̄2 , . . . , S̄t , S0 = s0 , A0 = a0 , Ŝ1 = ŝ1 . . . ŜT = ŝT
                  t=0
                 T −1
             (a) X
              =          H S̄t+1 | S̄1 , S̄2 . . . S̄t , S0 = s0 , A0 = a0 , Ŝ1 = ŝ1 , . . . , ŜT = ŝt
                                                                                                               (65)
                  t=0
                 T −1
             (b) X
              =          H S̄t+1 | St = st , At = at , Ŝt+1 = ŝt+1
                   t=0
                  T
                  X −1
             =           H S̃t+1
                  t=0

where (a) follows from causality and (b) follows from the Markov property.


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E       E XPERIMENTS
E.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We used Weights&Biases 4 for logging our experiments and run 5 random seeds per experiment.
The respective hyperparameters for Infoprop-Dyna on MuJoCo are given below. Table 2 addresses
model learning, Table 3 the Infoprop mechanism, and Table 4 training the model-free agent.
    Table 2: Hyperparameters used to train the model of Infoprop-Dyna in the Mujoco Tasks.

                 Hyperparameter            Halfcheetah    Walker     Hopper     Ant

                  ensemble size E                                7


             number of hidden neurons                     200                   400


              number of hidden layers                            4


                    learning rate            0.0003        0.0006    0.0004     0.001


                   weight decay              0.00005       0.0007    0.0008    0.00002


             patience for early-stopping       10            9          8        9


                   retrain interval                    250 environment steps


    4
        https://wandb.ai/site


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



              Table 3: Hyperparameters of the Infoprop rollouts in the Mujoco Tasks.

                 Hyperparameter                Halfcheetah              Walker         Hopper        Ant

                 accurate quantile ζ1                                       0.99


         exceptionally accurate quantile ζ2                                 0.01


                   scaling factor ξ                                         100


                   rollout interval                          250 environment steps


                  rollout batch size                                     100000



  Table 4: Hyperparameters used to train the SAC agent of Infoprop-Dyna in the Mujoco Tasks.

                Hyperparameter            Halfcheetah        Walker           Hopper        Ant

            number of hidden neurons                  1024                         512      1024


             number of hidden layers                                    2


                   learning rate              0.0003          0.0002           0.0004      0.0005


               SAC target entropy               -6                 -7              1            0


              target update interval            1                  4               6            5


                  update steps G                              10                                20



The results for SAC, MBPO and MACURA are obtained from Frauenknecht et al. (2024).


E.2   P REDICTION Q UALITY

We provide additional results for the rollout consistency experiments introduced in Section 6.2. Fig-
ure 6 depicts model-based rollouts for the 10th dimension of hopper under MBPO, MACURA and
Infoprop-Dyna when setting the maximum rollout length of all approaches to 100. In the original ex-
periment depicted in Figure 4b the maximum rollout length was 11 for MBPO and 10 for MACURA,
following the hyperparameter settings reported in the respective publications Janner et al. (2019);
Frauenknecht et al. (2024).
We observe a vastly spread distribution of MBPO rollouts, as every rollout is propagated for 100
steps, irrespective of model uncertainty, as long as it does not reach a terminal state of the hop-
per task. MACURA rollouts have an improved consistency compared to MBPO, especially in the
beginning of the rollouts. Over long horizons, however, the TS propagation mechanism and the
single-step termination criterion cannot produce consistent data. In contrast, Infoprop-Dyna is able
to propagate consistent rollouts over long horizons.


                                                 22
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Figure 6: Rollout consistency MBPO vs. MACURA vs. Infoprop-Dyna for 100 steps. Comparison
 of the respective rollout mechanisms similar to Figure 4b but with a maximum rollout length of 100
 for all approaches.
         1e3                                      Humanoid
               Info-Prop Dyna
               MACURA
               MBPO
     8         SAC
               Asymptotic SAC


     6
Return


     4


     2


                           50        100              150             200              250             300
                                                    Steps                                             1e3

                                  Figure 7: Performance on Humanoid

 E.3       P ERFORMANCE ON H UMANOID

 Figure 7 depicts the return on MuJoCo humanoid. We observe instabilities in the performance of
 Infoprop-Dyna towards the end of training. We assume this occurs due to overfitting and plasticity
 loss in the critic of the model-free learner Nikishin et al. (2022); D’Oro et al. (2023). This is reflected
 in the peaking critic loss depicted in Figure 8 concurrently with the performance drops. We set the
 update ratio G (see Algorithm 3) to a relatively low value of 10 which explains the slower learning
 behavior than MACURA. For higher values of G, instabilities occur even earlier in the training
 process, underscoring our assumption of overfitting critics.
 Model rollout inconsistency does not appear to be the destabilizing factor, as rollout data is consis-
 tent with the environment distribution as depicted in Figure 10 and the rollout adaption mechanism
 seems to react to policy shifts induced by high critic losses through reducing the average rollout
 length as depicted in Figure 10.

 E.4       I NVESTIGATING I NSTABILITIES IN L EARNING

 Although Infoprop gives better quality data over longer rollout horizons than TS rollouts, we observe
 instabilities in learning when naively integrating Infoprop into the conventional Dyna setting. We
 hypothesize that the main cause of these instabilities is due to the agent overfitting to the higher


                                                     23
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       Humanoid
                                           Info-Prop Dyna
                              200


                              150
Critic Loss



                              100


                              50


                               0
                                     0.0                    0.5          1.0                   1.5           2.0         2.5          3.0 6
                                                                                    Agent Updates                                       ×10

                                                                  Figure 8: Critic Loss on Humanoid
                                                                    Environment Buffer(Info-Prop Dyna)
                              20
Left Elbow Angular Velocity


                              10
                                                                                                                                      10 1
                               0

                              10
                                                                                                                                      10 3
                              20
                                                     50           100               150                200         250          300


                                                                                                                                         Density
                                                                                                                               1e3
                                                                        Model Buffer(Info-Prop Dyna)
                              20                                                                                                      10 5
Left Elbow Angular Velocity


                              10

                               0
                                                                                                                                      10 7
                              10

                              20
                                                     50           100               150                200         250          300
                                                                                   Steps                                       1e3

                                    Figure 9: Comparison between Denv and Dmod for the 45th dimension of Humanoid

     quality data produced by Infoprop rollouts, followed by loss of plasticity Nikishin et al. (2022);
     D’Oro et al. (2023). To investigate this, we carried out an ablation by varying the values of ζ1 ,
     which we introduced in Equation 22. This hyperparameter controls the size of the subset E where
     the model is considered sufficiently accurate. The smaller the value of ζ1 , the more aggressive the
     filtering of single-step information losses, leading to a smaller E.
     Figure 11 shows the returns obtained on the Hopper task for three values of ζ1 . For ζ1 = 0.97,
     we see that the returns are unstable throughout training, even though this setting gives the best
     quality data. On the other hand, ζ1 = 0.9999 produces a more stable learning curve compared to


                                                                                          24
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     40                                                      Humanoid
                                   Info-Prop Dyna
                                   MACURA
                                   MBPO

                     30
Average Rollout Length



                     20


                     10



                                                50                100            150           200              250              300
                                                                                Steps                                          ×103

                                                          Figure 10: Average Rollout Length on Humanoid
                             1e3                                              Hopper
                         3


                         2
Return


                         1                                                                                            ζ1 = 0.97
                                                                                                                      ζ1 = 0.99
                                                                                                                      ζ1 = 0.9999

                                                     25                 50               75               100                   125
                                                                               Steps                                           1e3
                                                               Figure 11: Ablation Study on Hopper.

     ζ1 = 0.99, which was used for all the experiments in Section 6. This shows that better data quality
     does not necessarily lead to better training performance since if that was the case, ζ1 = 0.97 would
     have produced the best performance. A similar observation is reported in Frauenknecht et al. (2024),
     where low values of the scaling factor ξ, corresponding to accurate model rollouts, led to instabilities
     in learning.
     Our observations show that producing high-quality synthetic data in the conventional Dyna setting
     leads to issues seen in MFRL when using a high update-to-data (UTD) ratio. There have been
     recent works on regularization methods to counteract agent overfitting and loss of plasticity. One
     such approach is applying layer normalization Smith et al. (2023); Nauman et al. (2024). Figure 12
     shows the same settings as in Figure 11 but with layer normalization applied to the critic and actor
     networks. It can be seen that even for ζ1 = 0.97, the learning is stable.
     The primary aim of this paper is to introduce the conceptual framework of the Infoprop rollout,
     as well as show its application to MBRL. Hence, we do not spend additional effort on tuning the
     hyperparameters or adding regularizations since this takes us away from the main objective. We
     defer such enhancements for future work.


                                                                               25
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         1e3                     Hopper with Layer Normalization
               ζ1 = 0.97
     3         ζ1 = 0.99
               ζ1 = 0.9999


     2
Return


     1


                        25               50                75               100      125
                                                Steps                               1e3
                    Figure 12: Ablation Study on Hopper with layer normalization.


                                                 26
