Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C APTURING THE T EMPORAL D EPENDENCE OF T RAIN -
ING DATA I NFLUENCE

 Jiachen T. Wang⋆
 Princeton University

 Dawn Song              James Zou                       Prateek Mittal              Ruoxi Jia⋆
 UC Berkeley            Stanford University             Princeton University        Virginia Tech



                                              A BSTRACT

         Traditional data influence estimation methods, like influence function, assume
         that learning algorithms are permutation-invariant with respect to training data.
         However, modern training paradigms, especially for foundation models using
         stochastic algorithms and multi-stage curricula, are sensitive to data ordering, thus
         violating this assumption. This mismatch renders influence functions inadequate
         for answering a critical question in machine learning: How can we capture the
         dependence of data influence on the optimization trajectory during training? To
         address this gap, we formalize the concept of trajectory-specific leave-one-out
         (LOO) influence, which quantifies the impact of removing a data point from
         a specific iteration during training, accounting for the exact sequence of data
         encountered and the model’s optimization trajectory. However, exactly evaluating
         the trajectory-specific LOO presents a significant computational challenge. To
         address this, we propose data value embedding, a novel technique enabling efficient
         approximation of trajectory-specific LOO. Specifically, we compute a training
         data embedding that encapsulates the cumulative interactions between data and the
         evolving model parameters. The LOO can then be efficiently approximated through
         a simple dot-product between the data value embedding and the gradient of the
         given test data. As data value embedding captures training data ordering, it offers
         valuable insights into model training dynamics. In particular, we uncover distinct
         phases of data influence, revealing that data points in the early and late stages of
         training exert a greater impact on the final model. These insights translate into
         actionable strategies for managing the computational overhead of data selection by
         strategically timing the selection process, potentially opening new avenues in data
         curation research.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Data influence estimation aims to provide insights into the impact of specific data points on the
model’s predictive behaviors. Such understanding is crucial not only for model transparency and
accountability (Koh & Liang, 2017) but also plays a significant role in addressing AI copyright
debates (Deng & Ma, 2023; Wang et al., 2024) and facilitating fair compensation in data marketplaces
(Tian et al., 2022). The majority of data influence estimation techniques focus on measuring the
counterfactual impact of a training data point: how would the model’s behavior change if we removed
a specific training data point?
LOO Influence. This counterfactual impact is often characterized by the Leave-One-Out (LOO)
influence, which has a long history and is frequently utilized in various fields such as robust statistics
(Cook & Weisberg, 1980), generalization analysis (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002), and differential
privacy (Dwork et al., 2006). Inheriting from this rich classical literature across various domains, the
LOO influence in data influence studies is typically defined as LOO(z ∗ ; z (val) ) := ℓ(A(D), z (val) ) −
   ⋆
     Correspondence to Jiachen T. Wang and Ruoxi Jia (tianhaowang@princeton.edu,
ruoxijia@vt.edu).


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ℓ(A(D \ {z ∗ }), z (val) ), i.e., the model’s loss change on a validation data z (val) when the training
data point z ∗ is removed from the training set D. Here, A is the learning algorithm. For ease of
analysis, traditional literature usually assumes that the learning algorithm A is permutation-invariant
with respect to the training set D, meaning that the order of data points does not affect the learning
outcome (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002). This assumption holds for models with strongly convex loss
functions trained to converge. Within this framework, researchers have developed efficient methods to
approximate LOO. Influence function (Koh & Liang, 2017), which uses first-order Taylor expansion
to estimate the LOO, emerging as the most prominent approach. Numerous follow-up works have
further improved its scalability for large models and datasets (Guo et al., 2021; Schioppa et al., 2022;
Grosse et al., 2023; Choe et al., 2024).
However, modern training algorithms, particularly those used for foundation models, increasingly
deviate from the permutation-invariant assumption. This deviation arises from both the non-convex
nature of neural networks and the multi-stage training curricula that do not run to convergence. In
particular, due to the immense size of datasets, large language models (LLMs) often undergo just
one training epoch, meaning each data point is encountered only once during training. Consequently,
training data order significantly shapes the influence of data points on the final model (Epifano
et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2024). Due to their underlying assumption of permutation-invariance,
the order-dependence of data influence in modern training paradigms is not accurately reflected by
influence functions. For example, they assign identical influence scores to duplicate training points,
regardless of their position in the training sequence.
Therefore, in this work, we argue that designing a data influence estimation technique relevant to the
modern ML context requires rethinking how the counterfactual impact should be defined. Towards
that end, we formalize the concept of trajectory-specific LOO, which characterizes the loss change
resulting from removing a data point from the specific iteration it is used during training. In contrast
to the traditional LOO, trajectory-specific LOO explicitly accounts for the exact sequence of data
encountered, considering the timing of a target training point being trained on. An accurate evaluation
of trajectory-dependent LOO would enable us to answer many important questions that are impossible
to address with influence functions. For instance, how does a data point’s impact vary depending on
its entry timing in the training process? How do later points affect the influence of earlier points?
However, exactly evaluating the trajectory-specific LOO presents a significant computational chal-
lenge. To address this, we introduce data value embedding, a novel data influence estimation
framework designed for approximating trajectory-specific LOO. Our approach achieves several nice
properties at the same time: (1) accounting for training dynamics and reflecting how the data order
impacts model training; (2) scale efficiently to the setting of foundation models, and is faster than the
current most efficient implementation of influence function; (3) enable real-time attribution for any
query without necessitating model retraining or prior access to validation data.
Technical novelty. Our proposed data value embedding framework computes a compact representa-
tion for each data point that encapsulates the cumulative effect of subsequent training. The influence
scores for any test instance can be approximated with a simple dot product operation between the test
gradient and the data value embedding, enabling real-time computation of data influence scores. To
improve the scalability of computing data influence embedding, we develop a suite of techniques
for efficient computation and storage of data value embeddings. In particular, we introduce the
influence checkpointing technique, which enables the parallel computation of data value embeddings
at multiple checkpoints. This not only enhances computational efficiency but also allows tracking of
how a fixed data point’s value changes during the training process.
Empirical insights. Through data value embedding, we obtain several novel empirical insights into
the training dynamics of foundation models. We identified three distinct regimes of data influence
(Figure 1 (a)): a very brief high-influence region at the start, a much longer low-influence basin,
and a region in the later training stage with gradually increasing influence, resuming to a high
level. We show that performing online data selection solely in the early and late high-influence
regions (less than half of the training duration) can achieve performance improvements on par with
selecting data throughout the entire process (Figure 1 (b)). Moreover, performing data selection
(Fan et al., 2024) only in the first very brief high-influence region, lasting less than 4% of the
training duration, can achieve ≈ 50% of the performance gain enabled by continuous selection.
Since online data selection usually incurs significant computational costs, our findings suggest a
viable way of managing this overhead by strategically timing the selection process. By focusing data


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


selection efforts on these critical phases, we can substantially improve training efficiency without
compromising model performance. These temporal insights can potentially embark on new avenues
of research on budget-limited data curation.


Figure 1: (a) Average data influence scores computed from data value embedding per training batch,
measured against the final model’s loss on Pile’s validation set. Setting: Pythia-410M trained on
1% of Pile. (b) Comparison of online data selection strategies for training Pythia-410M on Pile. All
strategies use gradient cosine similarity to Pile’s validation set to select high-quality training batches
(Fan et al., 2024), and only differ in the training stages during which advanced batch selection is
applied (random selection otherwise).


2    T RAJECTORY-S PECIFIC L EAVE - ONE - OUT I NFLUENCE

In this section, we formalize the definition of trajectory-specific LOO which was originally introduced
in Hara et al. (2019) as ’SGD-influence’. Consider a data point z ∗ that is included in the training
process during the ts -th iteration. Let Bt denote thePtraining batch at iteration t. In standard SGD, the
model parameters are updated as θt+1 = θt − ηt z∈Bt ∇ℓ(θt , z) for t = 0, . . . , T − 1, where ηt is
the learning rate at iteration t. We are interested in the change in the validation loss ℓ(θT , z (val) ) when
the data point z ∗ ∈ Bts is removed from  P iteration ts . In this counterfactual  scenario,
                                                                                          P the parameter
updates proceed as θt′ s +1 = θts − ηts z∈Bt \{z∗ } ∇ℓ(θts , z) and θt+1   ′
                                                                               = θt′ − ηt z∈Bt ∇ℓ(θt′ , z)
                                                  s
for t = ts + 1, . . . , T − 1.
Definition 1 (Trajectory-Specific LOO (Hara et al., 2019)). The trajectory-specific leave-one-out
for data point z ∗ at iteration ts with respect to validation point z (val) is defined as

                        TSLOO(ts ) (z ∗ ; z (val) ) := ℓ(θT′ , z (val) ) − ℓ(θT , z (val) )

Discussion. TSLOO quantifies the change in validation loss resulting from removing z ∗ during the
specific training run determined by the sequence of mini-batches and random initialization. TSLOO
explicitly depends on the timing of when the data is used and models the interaction effects between
data points. For instance, it can show how the introduction of a certain type of example (e.g., a
challenging edge case) might amplify or diminish the influence of previously seen, related examples.
Moreover, identical data points contributing at different stages of training can receive different value
scores. A data point introduced early in training might have a significantly different impact compared
to the same point introduced later, as the model state evolves. However, traditional methods like
influence functions do not capture these temporal dynamics. The influence function is defined as
IF(z ∗ ; z (val) ) := ∇θ ℓ(θ, z (val) )⊤ H−1         ∗
                                          θ ∇θ ℓ(θ, z ) where Hθ is the Hessian with respect to the full
training loss. Because IF depends solely on the final state of the model, it invariably assigns the same
influence value to identical z ∗ s, regardless of their position in the training sequence.
Related works (extended version in Appendix A). Data attribution methods primarily fall into
two categories: LOO-based methods and Shapley value-based methods. While Shapley value-based
methods (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) offer elegant theoretical interpretation, they typically require
expensive model retraining, which limits their practical applicability. As a result, LOO-based
methods such as influence functions (Koh & Liang, 2017) have gained more attention due to their
computational efficiency. However, many studies have demonstrated that influence functions can be
highly unreliable when applied to deep learning models (Basu et al., 2020; Bae et al., 2022; Epifano


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2023). In this work, we argue that TSLOO provides a more appropriate attribution framework
for deep learning, particularly in the context of foundation models. Various research communities
have independently explored Taylor expansion-based technique (Section 3.1) for approximating
TSLOO for different purposes (Hara et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2021; Evron et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022;
Luo et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2024). However, practical adoption has been hindered
by computational demands. This work proposes a new method that overcomes the computational
bottlenecks in approximating TSLOO for large-scale models.

3     DATA VALUE E MBEDDING
While trajectory-specific LOO offers clear benefits for understanding data influence in modern ML,
its computation presents significant challenges. Exact computation is not feasible, as it would require
removing a data point from a specific training iteration and re-initiating the entire training process.
To address this challenge, we introduce the concept of data value embedding.

3.1   P RELIMINARY: U NROLLING THE E FFECT OF A T RAINING DATA P OINT IN SGD

Recall that we denote the final model as θT and the counterfactual model as θT′ , which is ob-
tained by removing z ∗ from ts -th training Piteration. We introduce an interpolation between θT
and θT′ by defining θts +1 (ε) := θts − ηts z∈Bts \{z∗ } ∇ℓ(θts , z) − ηts (1 − ε)∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ ) and
                        P
θk+1 (ε) = θk (ε) − ηk z∈Bk ∇ℓ(θk (ε), z) for subsequent iterations. Note that θT (0) = θT and
θT (1) = θT′ . Analogous to influence function-based approaches, we approximate the change in
validation loss using a first-order Taylor expansion around ε = 0: ℓ(θT′ , z (val) ) − ℓ(θT , z (val) ) ≈
∇ℓ(θT , z (val) )⊤ ∂θ∂ε T (ε)
                                  . Interestingly, the derivative ∂θ∂εT (ε)
                                                                                satisfies a recursive relation
                              ε=0                                           ε=0
detailed in Appendix C.1, and we can obtain a well-established approximation from the literature:
                                                                   " T −1                #
                                                                     Y
           ′                                               (val) ⊤
       ℓ(θT , z (val)
                      ) − ℓ(θT , z (val)
                                         ) ≈ ηts ∇ℓ(θT , z      )           (I − ηk Hk ) ∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ ). (1)
                                                                 k=ts +1

                          2
                P
where Hk =          z∈Bk ∇ ℓ(θk , z) is the Hessian and I is the identity matrix. In data attribution
literature, this approximation in (1) first appears in Hara et al. (2019) and has also been utilized in Chen
et al. (2021) and Bae et al. (2024). It estimates the influence of removing z ∗ from the ts -th iteration
                                                                                     QT −1
on the validation loss ℓ(θT , z (val) ) at the final iteration. The product term k=ts +1 (I − ηk Hk )
encapsulates the cumulative effect of the original data point’s removal as it propagates through the
entire training process. Notably, similar product terms appear frequently in related domains, including
continual learning and deep learning theory (Zou et al., 2021; Evron et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022;
2024; Ding et al., 2024).

3.2   DATA VALUE E MBEDDING

Building on (1), we extract the test-data-independent components and define "data value embedding"
for a training point z ∗ ∈ Bts as
                                                " T −1             #
                                                  Y
                       DVEmb(ts ) (z ∗ ) := ηts        (I − ηk Hk ) ∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ )              (2)
                                                  k=ts +1

This embedding encapsulates the cumulative effect of a training point across the entire learning
trajectory. By precomputing and storing these data value embeddings during or after the training
phase, we enable highly efficient computation of data influence scores. Specifically, for any given test
point z (val) , the influence of a training point z ∗ can be quickly determined by simply computing the
dot product ∇ℓ(θT , z (val) )⊤ DVEmb(ts ) (z ∗ ). Vector dot products are among the most computationally
efficient operations, especially when executed on modern GPU hardware, which is optimized for such
parallelized vector operations. Precomputing the data value embeddings eliminates the need for costly
retraining or the availability of test data in advance, making the computation of data influence nearly
instantaneous. This is particularly advantageous in real-world scenarios such as data marketplaces,
where rapid, on-demand data attribution is critical.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: An illustrative example of data value embedding for a 2-step training. The influence of
a training point z ∗ on a test point z (val) can be obtained by projecting its data value embedding on
z (val) ’s gradient vector at the final checkpoint.


Approximation Error Bound. In Appendix C.2, we derive a new theoretical analysis of the approxi-
mation error associated with the unrolled differentiation estimator for√non-convex loss functions. We
demonstrate that when  √ the learning rate schedule satisfies ηt ∈ O(1/ t) with the maximum learning
rate scaling as O(1/ T )—a common choice in the literature (Vaswani, 2017)—the approximation
error remains uniformly bounded and is independent of the total number of training steps T . While
the proof relies on certain assumptions to abstract the complexities of real-world implementation, the
theoretical result still implies the method’s applicability in practical model training.

4     E FFICIENT C OMPUTATION AND S TORAGE OF DATA VALUE E MBEDDING
While the data value embedding approach offers a promising solution for real-time data attribution
that incorporates training-specific factors, its practical implementation faces significant computational
and storage challenges. The computation of DVEmb is non-trivial, requiring per-sample gradient
calculations and per-step Hessian computations. Moreover, each DVEmbt (z ∗ ) has the same dimen-
sionality as the model parameters, making it infeasible to store individual embeddings for each
training data point on the disk. To address these challenges, we develop a series of techniques that
significantly enhance both the computational and storage efficiency of data value embedding.

4.1   R ECURSIVE A PPROXIMATION OF DATA VALUE E MBEDDING VIA G ENERALIZED
      G AUSS -N EWTON M ATRIX

We show that data value embedding can be computed recursively, beginning from the final training
iteration and working backward, when using the Generalized Gauss-Newton (GGN) approximation
for the Hessian matrix. This naturally gives rise to a backward computation algorithm for DVEmb(t) .
A widely-adopted approximation     for the Hessian matrix Hk is the Generalized Gauss-Newton (GGN)
approximation Ht ≈ z∈Bt ∇ℓ(θt , z)∇ℓ(θt , z)⊤ , particularly in the context of cross-entropy loss
                       P
(Martens, 2020). The GGN approximation is extensively used in various machine learning algorithms
because it captures the essential curvature information of the loss landscape while remaining com-
putationally feasible. For further details, see Appendix C.4. Under this approximation to Ht , the
following shows that we can compute DVEmb(ts ) (z ∗ ) for any z ∗ ∈ Bts if the data value embeddings
of data points from later training iterations (i.e., DVEmb(t) (z) for t ≥ ts + 1) is available.
Theorem 2. Given generalized Gauss-Newton approximation Ht ≈ z∈Bt ∇ℓ(θt , z)∇ℓ(θt , z)⊤ ,
                                                                           P
we have
                                                 −1
                                               T
                                                                                                   !
                                               X       X
          (ts ) ∗                   ∗                                   ⊤          ∗           (t)

   DVEmb (z ) = ηts ∇ℓ(θts , z ) − ηts                      ∇ℓ(θt , z) ∇ℓ(θts , z ) DVEmb (z)
                                            t=ts +1       z∈Bt


The proof is deferred to Appendix C.3.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Interpretation. Theorem 2 provides crucial insights into the interactions between training data points
throughout the model training process. When two points z ∗ and z are similar, their gradient similarity
term ∇ℓ(θt , z)⊤ ∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ ) increases, indicating stronger interaction between these points. To
illustrate this phenomenon, consider training a language model where an early data point z ∗ contains
content about "quantum computing". The influence of z ∗ on the final model varies depending on
the subsequent training data: if multiple similar "quantum computing" data points appear in later
iterations, z ∗ ’s influence on the final model diminishes, as these later examples could teach similar
concepts to the model. Conversely, if z ∗ remains one of the few "quantum computing" examples
throughout training, it maintains a stronger influence on the final model.
Overview of the remaining sections. Theorem 2 suggests the possibility of a backpropagation
algorithm for computing data value embeddings, contingent on the availability of per-sample gradient
vectors for all training data. To make this approach practical for large-scale applications, we address
two key challenges in the following sections: (1) Efficient computation and storage of per-sample
gradient vectors for all training data (Section 4.2). (2) Efficient computation (Sections 4.3) and
parallelization (Section 4.4) of data value embeddings using Theorem 2. Additionally, we discuss
practical extensions and considerations for real-world scenarios (Appendix C.10).

4.2   S TEP 1: S TORE P ER -S AMPLE T RAINING G RADIENT I NFORMATION AT E ACH I TERATION

During model training, we additionally store the per-sample gradient for each data point in the
training batch. However, this approach presents significant computational and storage challenges:
(1) Storage: Let p denote the number of model parameters. Each gradient vector has dimension
p, requiring O(T Bp) disk space, where B = |Bt | is the batch size. This effectively corresponds to
storing millions of model-size vectors. (2) Efficiency: Computing per-sample gradients necessitates
separate backpropagation for each z ∈ Bt , increasing computational cost by a factor of B.
Avoiding per-sample gradient computation & full gradient storage (detailed in Appendix C.5).
To mitigate both issues, we leverage a gradient decomposition and take advantage of the computations
already performed during backpropagation (Wang et al., 2025; Choe et al., 2024). By expressing
gradients as the outer product of activations and output derivatives, only a single backpropagation
on the aggregated loss is required to compute per-sample gradients, preserving the usual training
speed. Additionally, instead of storing the full gradient vectors,
                                                          √        we store the decomposed components,
potentially reducing the storage requirement to O(T B p) for non-sequential data.
Random projections for large models. For large-scale foundation models with billions of parameters,
we apply random projections to further compress the stored gradient information. Using projection
matrices, we project the activations and output derivatives to a lower-dimensional space. This
approach significantly reduces storage needs to O(T B p̃), where p̃ is the projected dimension, while
still capturing essential gradient geometric information.
We acknowledge that deriving a theoretical multiplicative guarantee here is challenging, given that
the data value embedding itself is a linear combination that could be zero. However, our ablation
study in Appendix E.5 demonstrates that our approach is relatively more robust compared to influence
functions across different projection dimensions. These results provide strong evidence of the
robustness of our method in practice, and we leave the theoretical guarantee as future work.

4.3   S TEP 2: BACKPROPAGATING DATA VALUE E MBEDDING

Having established the method for storing projected gradient vectors, we now proceed to describe the
backward computation algorithm for data value embeddings. For ease of presentation, we continue
to use full gradient vector notation. However, in practical implementations, we use the projected
gradient vectors for efficient storage. That is, ∇θ ℓ ∈ Rp̃ in the subsequent contents.
According to Theorem 2, an equivalent expression for DVEmb(ts ) (z ∗ ) is given by
                  DVEmb(ts ) (z ∗ ) = ηts ∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ ) − ηts ∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ )M(ts )
                PT −1  P
                                            (t)                ⊤

where M(ts ) :=  t=ts +1    z∈Bt DVEmb (z)∇ℓ(θt , z)                . At a high level, our algorithm
computes DVEmb(ts ) (z ∗ ) for each ts from T − 1 down to 0, while maintaining a running matrix
M(ts ) ∈ Rp̃×p̃ throughout the backpropagation process for algorithm efficiency.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Backward algorithm from the final iteration. We initialize M(T −1) = 0 as the data value
embedding coincides with the training gradient for the last iteration. For ts = T − 1, . . . , 0,
we recursively compute: (1) The data value embedding for each z ∗ ∈ Bts : DVEmb(ts ) (z ∗ ) =
ηts ∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ ) − ηts M(ts ) ∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ ), and (2) Update the weighting matrix after computing all
embeddings for the current iteration: M(ts −1) = M(ts ) + z∗ ∈Bts DVEmb(ts ) (z ∗ )∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ )⊤ . A
                                                                P

detailed algorithm pseudocode can be found in Algorithm 1.
Computing data value embedding on a per-layer basis. Moreover, by adopting an assumption
similar to that in EK-FAC regarding the independence of gradients across different layers, we can
compute data value embeddings on a per-layer basis. This approach significantly reduces the compu-
tational and memory costs. The assumption of layer-wise independence is common in the literature
on influence functions (Grosse et al., 2023), as it enables tractable analysis and efficient algorithms for
deep neural networks. While this approximation neglects cross-layer gradient correlations, it is often
justified because intra-layer interactions tend to dominate in practice. Treating layers independently
thus strikes a favorable balance between computational feasibility and approximation accuracy.
Complexity analysis. (1) Computational & Memory: The primary computational cost of our
algorithm stems from matrix multiplications and additions in updating data value embeddings and the
weighting matrix, resulting in O(BT p̃2 ) floating-point operations (flops). However, if we compute
the data value embedding per layer, flops improve to O(BT p̃2 /L) where L is the number of layers.
The update of the running matrix M(ts ) requires O(B p̃2 /L2 ) memory. In comparison, regular model
training requires O(BT p) flops and O(p) memory, where p is the number of model parameters.
Consequently, Algorithm 1 incurs significantly lower costs compared to regular training. We further
note that the influence function method requires computing the per-sample gradient for each training
data point on the final model, which is effectively equivalent to one epoch of training. As a result,
both the memory requirements and flops for the influence function method are at least equivalent
to those of model training, which are much larger than our algorithm’s requirements. (2) Storage:
Each DVEmb(t) (z ∗ ) has dimension O(p̃), resulting in a total storage requirement of O(BT p̃) for data
value embeddings across all training points. While this can be substantial, disk storage is relatively
inexpensive in modern computing environments. Moreover, the reduced dimensionality achieved
through projection significantly mitigates the storage burden compared to storing full-dimensional
embeddings. A summary of the complexity comparison with the most efficient implementation of the
influence function (Choe et al., 2024) is provided in Table 2 in Appendix C.9.



4.4   PARALLELIZED E XTENSION FOR I NFLUENCE E MBEDDING C OMPUTATION (OVERVIEW )

The backpropagation algorithm introduced in Section 4.3 operates with a runtime complexity of
O(T ), as it sequentially computes DVEmb(ts ) for ts = T − 1, . . . , 0. While being significantly more
efficient than the influence function, which requires re-computing all training gradients on the final
model (see Section 5.2 and Table 2), it can still be costly for long training periods. Here, we introduce
influence checkpointing, a parallelized extension for Algorithm 1.
Influence Checkpointing. We reduce computational costs by allowing concurrent computation
of data value embeddings at multiple checkpoints during training. By selecting K evenly spaced
training steps, we can efficiently compute data value embeddings for each intermediate checkpoint in
parallel. By carefully computing and storing necessary results, we can efficiently reconstruct the data
value embedding for the final model. This reduces the overall computational cost by K times. The
detailed algorithm description, pseudocode, and complexity analysis are deferred to Appendix C.7.
Data Value Dynamics During Training. In addition to its computational benefits, the influence
checkpointing algorithm enables a powerful capability: tracking the evolution of data influences
throughout the entire model training process. If the intermediate checkpoints θt1 , . . . , θtK−1 was
saved—a common practice in foundation model pretraining—we can analyze how the influence
of a fixed data point changes on different intermediate checkpoints. As a result, we gain a more
fine-grained and dynamic view of how the influence of a fixed data point propagates to the subsequent
training steps, providing deeper insights into the model’s learning behavior over time. This capability
opens up new avenues for understanding and optimizing machine learning model training.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: The correlation between ground-truth LOO when the MLP is trained for 3 epochs and the
estimation obtained by (a) the data value embedding method and (b) the influence function for single
epoch removal. (c) and (d) present the corresponding correlations for all-epoch removal. Additional
results for models being trained for a longer time can be found in Appendix E.2.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed data value embedding method. First,
we assess its fidelity in accurately reflecting data importance using small-scale experimental setups
(Section 5.1), as well as its computational efficiency (Section 5.2). We then apply data value
embedding to analyze the training dynamics during foundation model pretraining (Section 5.3 and
Appendix E.4). The implementation details and additional results are deferred to Appendix E.

5.1   F IDELITY E VALUATION

To validate the effectiveness of our proposed data value embedding algorithm, we assess its accuracy
in approximating TSLOO scores. Additionally, in Appendix E.2.1, we compare to a variety of data
attribution baselines on the standard benchmarks of mislabel data detection and data selection.
Computing ground-truth LOO requires retraining the model multiple times, each time excluding a
single data point while keeping all other training specifics, such as batch order, unchanged. Given
the computational intensity, we conduct our experiments on the MNIST (LeCun et al., 1989) using a
small MLP trained with standard SGD. We consider two settings: (1) Single epoch removal, where a
data point is excluded from training during a single epoch but still in other training epochs. Here, we
remove the data point from the last epoch. (2) All-epoch removal, where a data point is excluded in
all epochs. In this case, the approximation provided by data value embedding is obtained by summing
the data value embeddings of the data point from all epochs, as discussed in Appendix C.10.
Figure 3 shows that data value embedding has a high Spearman correlation with the ground-truth
LOO. This superior performance is consistent across both settings. We note that the influence function
scores remain constant for both settings, as influence functions do not account for specific training
runs and cannot differentiate between single- and multi-epoch removals. Moreover, influence function
exhibits a very weak correlation with LOO, a phenomenon that has been reported in many literature
(Søgaard et al., 2021; Basu et al., 2020; Bae et al., 2022; Epifano et al., 2023).

5.2   C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY

In this section, we compare the storage, memory, and computational efficiency of data value embed-
ding with LoGRA (Choe et al., 2024), the most efficient implementation of the influence function so
far. LoGRA first computes per-sample training gradients on the final model for all training data points
z ∗ ∈ D, where D represents the dataset. Like our algorithm, LoGRA also uses random projection
and stores the projected Hessian-adjusted gradient H−1              ∗
                                                      T ∇ℓ(θT , z ) to the disk, and the influence
function can be computed via dot-product with test data gradient.
Table 1 shows the result of computing data influence for Pythia-410M trained on 1% of the Pile
dataset. Both algorithms first compute and store Hessian-adjusted gradients/data value embedding,
and then compute the data influence with respect to any given test point. As we can see, LoGRA
and data value embedding have similar disk storage requirements, as both approaches save vectors
of dimension p̃ for each data point. For peak GPU memory in the storage step, LoGRA requires
recomputing gradients for all training data on the final model θT , which is effectively equivalent to
one epoch of model training. In contrast, the data value embedding computation algorithm operates


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


only on projected vectors, which takes much less GPU memory (0.84 vs 63.6GB). Consequently,
the computational efficiency for computing data value embeddings is also much higher (over 15×
faster). When computing data influence, since both approaches simply take the dot product between
test data’s (projected) gradient and H−1         ∗           (t) ∗
                                      T ∇ℓ(θT , z ) or DVEmb (z ) or data value embedding, the
GPU memory usage and efficiency are the same.

                        Storing H−1         ∗
                                 T ∇ℓ(θT , z ) / data value embedding   Compute Influence (dot-product)
                        Storage   Peak GPU Mem.          Throughput     Peak GPU Mem.      Throughput
       LoGRA            170GB          63.6GB               41.6           16.31GB            640
Data Value Embedding    171GB     64.6GB / 0.84GB*         667.52          16.31GB            640
Table 1: Memory and compute efficiency analysis for LoGRA (Choe et al., 2024) and data value
embedding. Throughput is measured as the number of data points per second for storing and influence
computation. The experiment is conducted on one A100 GPU with 80GB VRAM. The projection
dimension is set to 1024. *Since data value embedding technique contains two different steps in
storing relevant information for data attribution (storing gradient during training & compute and store
data value embedding after training), we include the peak GPU memory usage for both steps.


5.3   A NALYZING T RAINING DYNAMICS OF F OUNDATION M ODELS

In this section, we showcase data value embedding as a powerful tool for analyzing the training
dynamics of foundation model pretraining with Pythia-410M trained on 1% of Pile dataset as an
example. Results for additional datasets/models and the analysis for fine-tuning are in Appendix E.3.
Value of training data from different stages in LLM pretraining. We first visualize the distribution
of data influence scores on the final model across different training batches. For a fair comparison,
we normalize the influence scores for each batch by their learning rate. Figure 1 (a) illustrates the
results for training Pythia-410M on the Pile dataset. As we can see, the data influence on the final
model can be categorized into three distinct regimes: (1) High-impact Warmup Phase: This phase
occurs during the very early training stage and is characterized by exceptionally high data influence
scores. It corresponds to a brief window at the onset of training where the loss reduces rapidly.
(2) Low-impact Basin: This regime spans the early-to-middle training stage, where data influence
scores are significantly lower. This period coincides with a slowdown in the rate of loss decrease,
transitioning into a phase of relative stability. (3) Gradual Ascent: In this phase, we observe that the
later a data point participates in the training, the higher its influence score becomes.
Explanation: (1) Parameter initialization and warmup training are important for final model
performance. During the very early stages of training, the gradient norms are large, which
leads to significant parameter updates. Furthermore, the subsequent gradients’ magnitude de-
crease rapidly, causing data points from the High-impact Warmup Phase to maintain substantial
influence throughout the training process, even as their immediate impact diminishes over time.
Figure 4 visualizes this phenomenon. The purple
curve shows that training data points from the High-
impact Warmup Phase, while experiencing large
drops in influence as training progresses, still main-
tain higher influence than later data points. This
observation aligns with the well-known effect that
model initialization and/or warm-up training plays
a crucial role in training performance (He et al.,
2015; Hanin & Rolnick, 2018), effectively initial-
izing model parameters and gradually preparing
the model for more complex learning tasks. (2) In-
fluence saturation from future data. As training
progresses into a smoother loss regime, the gradient Figure 4: Evolution of influence scores across
norms become relatively stable and decrease slowly. training checkpoints. The x-axis shows train-
This makes the influence decay from subsequent ing iterations, and the y-axis shows the average
training much more significant for these data points influence of training examples on each check-
compared to those from the High-Impact Warmup point. Examples are grouped according to the
Phase. Since earlier data points experience more iterations they are being trained on.
future training iterations, their influence decreases more over time. The red curve in Figure 4 demon-


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


strates this trend, showing influence scores for these points gradually decreasing during training and
eventually falling below those of later training data points. One might initially think this phenomenon
is connected to catastrophic forgetting, where the model appears to "forget" the influence of data from
earlier training phases as it progresses. However, we note that a data point’s influence score decreases
the most when future data points are similar to it, which is different from catastrophic forgetting.
Intuitively, if future points are identical, the presence of the earlier data point in training becomes less
relevant to the model’s behavior. A more detailed explanation is deferred to Appendix E.3.
Implications for data selection strategies. These observations suggest that for pretraining, data
selection is most critical during the very early and later stages of training. To validate this insight,
we train Pythia-410M on Pile with different online data selection strategies, as shown in Figure 1
(b). Specifically, we use an online data selection strategy (adapted from Fan et al. (2024)) that forms
each training batch by selecting data points whose gradients align well with those from a validation
batch sampled from Pile (see Appendix E.3.2 for details). This selection process requires computing
gradient similarities, introducing significant overhead at each iteration where it is applied. Therefore,
identifying the most critical training phases for applying this selection process becomes crucial for
computational efficiency. Remarkably, Figure 1 (b) demonstrates that the performance of a strategy
where we only perform data selection in the first 2000 iterations and after 20000 iterations closely
matches the performance when data selection is performed in all iterations. Moreover, it reduces
computational costs by more than 5 times. This corroborates our practical insights for designing
efficient data selection strategies in LLM pretraining: by focusing data selection efforts on the
critical early and late stages of training, we can potentially achieve optimal model performance while
significantly reducing computational overhead.

6    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this paper, we introduced Data Value Embedding, a novel approach to data attribution tailored for
foundation models. Our method addresses critical limitations of existing techniques by capturing the
temporal dynamics of training and enabling real-time attribution without the need for model retraining.
The experiments demonstrate the efficacy of data value embedding in providing accurate and efficient
data influence scores and unveiling unique insights into the training dynamics of foundation models.
SGD as a proxy for Adam. The data value embedding in (2) is specifically tailored for SGD. It
is not directly extendable to other popular optimizers like Adam due to their normalization terms.
Nonetheless, using SGD as a proxy for Adam allows for efficient data influence estimation, which
is the approach that is usually adopted in practice and has proved to be effective in our experiment,
providing a practical and effective solution for the current scope of our work. While using as a proxy
for Adam has proved to be effective in our experiment, extending data value embedding to Adam and
other optimizers remains an exciting direction for future research.
Training curriculum design. Our findings on the varying influence of data points across training
stages suggest the potential for designing optimal training curricula. Future work could explore
leveraging data value embedding to design curricula that maximize learning efficiency. This could
involve dynamically adjusting the presentation order and frequency of data points based on their
predicted influence at different training stages.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants IIS-2312794, IIS-
2313130, OAC-2239622, CNS-2131938, CNS-2424127, Amazon-Virginia Tech Initiative in Efficient
and Robust Machine Learning, the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative, Cisco, OpenAI and Google.
We thank Tong Wu, Meng Ding, Haizhou Shi, and Weida Li for their helpful feedback on the
preliminary version of this work.

R EFERENCES
Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger B Grosse. If influence functions
  are the answer, then what is the question? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:17953–17967, 2022.
Juhan Bae, Wu Lin, Jonathan Lorraine, and Roger B Grosse. Training data attribution via approximate
  unrolling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:66647–66686, 2024.
Elnaz Barshan, Marc-Etienne Brunet, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Relatif: Identifying explanatory
  training samples via relative influence. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 1899–1909. PMLR, 2020.
MS Bartlett. Approximate confidence intervals. Biometrika, 40(1/2):12–19, 1953.
Samyadeep Basu, Philip Pope, and Soheil Feizi. Influence functions in deep learning are fragile.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14651, 2020.
Olivier Bousquet and André Elisseeff. Stability and generalization. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 2:499–526, 2002.
Hongge Chen, Si Si, Yang Li, Ciprian Chelba, Sanjiv Kumar, Duane Boning, and Cho-Jui Hsieh.
  Multi-stage influence function. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:12732–
 12742, 2020.
Yuanyuan Chen, Boyang Li, Han Yu, Pengcheng Wu, and Chunyan Miao. Hydra: Hypergradient data
  relevance analysis for interpreting deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7081–7089, 2021.
Sang Keun Choe, Hwijeen Ahn, Juhan Bae, Kewen Zhao, Minsoo Kang, Youngseog Chung, Adithya
  Pratapa, Willie Neiswanger, Emma Strubell, Teruko Mitamura, et al. What is your data worth to
  gpt? llm-scale data valuation with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13954, 2024.
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Characterizations of an empirical influence function for
  detecting influential cases in regression. Technometrics, 22(4):495–508, 1980.
Junwei Deng and Jiaqi Ma. Computational copyright: Towards a royalty model for ai music generation
  platforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06646, 2023.
Junwei Deng, Ting-Wei Li, Shichang Zhang, and Jiaqi Ma. Efficient ensembles improve training data
  attribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17293, 2024.
Meng Ding, Kaiyi Ji, Di Wang, and Jinhui Xu. Understanding forgetting in continual learning with
 linear regression. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
  private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography conference, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Jacob R Epifano, Ravi P Ramachandran, Aaron J Masino, and Ghulam Rasool. Revisiting the fragility
  of influence functions. Neural Networks, 162:581–588, 2023.
Itay Evron, Edward Moroshko, Rachel Ward, Nathan Srebro, and Daniel Soudry. How catastrophic
   can catastrophic forgetting be in linear regression? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
   4028–4079. PMLR, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Simin Fan, Matteo Pagliardini, and Martin Jaggi. Doge: Domain reweighting with generalization
  estimation. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the long
  tail via influence estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2881–2891,
  2020.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
  Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for
  language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019.
Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, et al. Studying large language model generalization
  with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03296, 2023.
Han Guo, Nazneen Rajani, Peter Hase, Mohit Bansal, and Caiming Xiong. Fastif: Scalable influence
  functions for efficient model interpretation and debugging. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 10333–10350, 2021.
Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. How to start training: The effect of initialization and architecture.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Satoshi Hara, Atsushi Nitanda, and Takanori Maehara. Data cleansing for models trained with sgd.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Data-
  models: Predicting predictions from training data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00622, 2022.
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nezihe Merve Gurel, Bo Li, Ce Zhang,
  Costas J Spanos, and Dawn Song. Efficient task-specific data valuation for nearest neighbor
  algorithms. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 2019.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.
Frederik Kunstner, Philipp Hennig, and Lukas Balles. Limitations of the empirical fisher approx-
  imation for natural gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Yongchan Kwon, Eric Wu, Kevin Wu, and James Zou. Datainf: Efficiently estimating data influence
  in lora-tuned llms and diffusion models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Yann LeCun, Bernhard Boser, John Denker, Donnie Henderson, Richard Howard, Wayne Hubbard,
  and Lawrence Jackel. Handwritten digit recognition with a back-propagation network. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 2, 1989.
Yuetian Luo, Zhimei Ren, and Rina Barber. Iterative approximate cross-validation. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 23083–23102. PMLR, 2023.
James Martens. New insights and perspectives on the natural gradient method. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 21(146):1–76, 2020.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843, 2016.
Elisa Nguyen, Minjoon Seo, and Seong Joon Oh. A bayesian approach to analysing training data
  attribution in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sung Min Park, Kristian Georgiev, Andrew Ilyas, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Trak:
  attributing model behavior at scale. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 27074–27113, 2023.
Daryl Pregibon. Logistic regression diagnostics. The annals of statistics, 9(4):705–724, 1981.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 19920–19930, 2020.
Andrea Schioppa, Polina Zablotskaia, David Vilar, and Artem Sokolov. Scaling up influence functions.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 8179–8186, 2022.
Nicol N Schraudolph. Fast curvature matrix-vector products for second-order gradient descent.
  Neural computation, 14(7):1723–1738, 2002.
Anders Søgaard et al. Revisiting methods for finding influential examples.             arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.04683, 2021.
Zhihua Tian, Jian Liu, Jingyu Li, Xinle Cao, Ruoxi Jia, and Kui Ren. Private data valuation and fair
  payment in data marketplaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08723, 2022.
A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Jiachen T Wang and Ruoxi Jia. Data banzhaf: A robust data valuation framework for machine
   learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6388–6421.
   PMLR, 2023a.
Jiachen T Wang and Ruoxi Jia. A note on" efficient task-specific data valuation for nearest neighbor
   algorithms". arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04258, 2023b.
Jiachen T Wang, Zhun Deng, Hiroaki Chiba-Okabe, Boaz Barak, and Weijie J Su. An economic
   solution to copyright challenges of generative ai. Technical report, 2024.
Jiachen T Wang, Prateek Mittal, Dawn Song, and Ruoxi Jia. Data shapley in one training run. In The
   Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Jingfeng Wu, Difan Zou, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Sham Kakade. The power and
   limitation of pretraining-finetuning for linear regression under covariate shift. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 35:33041–33053, 2022.
Jingfeng Wu, Difan Zou, Zixiang Chen, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Peter Bartlett. How
   many pretraining tasks are needed for in-context learning of linear regression? In The Twelfth
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Yizi Zhang, Jingyan Shen, Xiaoxue Xiong, and Yongchan Kwon. Timeinf: Time series data
  contribution via influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15247, 2024.
Eric R Ziegel. The elements of statistical learning, 2003.
Difan Zou, Jingfeng Wu, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Sham Kakade. Benign overfitting
  of constant-stepsize sgd for linear regression. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4633–4635.
  PMLR, 2021.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     E XTENDED R ELATED W ORKS
Here, we provide a general overview of the literature that is relevant to the trajectory-specific LOO.
We refer the readers to Appendix A of Wang et al. (2025) for the overview of the related works for
Data Shapley and other data attribution techniques.

A.1   LOO I NFLUENCE VS LOOCV

It is important to distinguish our LOO influence measure from traditional Leave-One-Out Cross-
Validation (LOOCV) (Ziegel, 2003). While both involve removing individual data points, they serve
different purposes and yield different interpretations. LOOCV is a model evaluation technique that
estimates generalization performance by averaging prediction errors on held-out examples, where
smaller errors indicate better model performance. In contrast, LOO influence measures how removing
a specific training point affects the model’s behavior on validation data, quantifying each training
example’s importance to the learning process. While LOOCV requires training N separate models to
evaluate generalization (where N is the dataset size), LOO influence focuses on understanding the
counterfactual impact of individual training points on model behavior. This distinction is crucial as
we aim to understand data importance rather than model performance.

A.2   I NFLUENCE F UNCTION AND F RIENDS

Influence function (Koh & Liang, 2017) has emerged as an important tool for interpreting and
analyzing machine learning models. As the influence function requires computing the Hessian
inverse, many subsequent works are focusing on improving the scalability of the influence function
for large-scale models (Guo et al., 2021; Schioppa et al., 2022; Grosse et al., 2023). More recently,
Kwon et al. (2023) developed an efficient influence function approximation algorithm that is suitable
for LoRA fine-tuning, and Zhang et al. (2024) extends the influence function to time-series datasets.
In a similar spirit to us, Chen et al. (2020) a multi-stage extension of influence function to trace a
fine-tuned model’s behavior back to the pretraining data. However, they changed the original loss
function and added a regularization term to account for intermediate checkpoints. The most closely
related to our work is Choe et al. (2024). Similar to us, they also make use of the low-rank gradient
decomposition and random projection to enable efficient computation and storage of per-sample
gradient. However, their approach still requires computing per-sample gradient vectors for all training
data on the final model checkpoint, which is effectively equivalent to one model retraining and takes
a significantly longer time than data value embedding.
Influence function and Newton step. The influence function formula bears a striking resemblance
to the Newton step in optimization, as both involve the product of an inverse Hessian and a gradient.
As a result, much data attribution literature simply describes the influence function as "one Newton
step". There is a subtle difference in their expressions and motivations. For large dataset, one Newton
step approximates the influence function under certain regularity conditions. A single Newton step
from the full model parameters toward the leave-one-out solution was proposed as an influence
measure by Pregibon (1981) and has since been leveraged for data attribution (Park et al., 2023). The
high-level argument is that while obtaining the exact leave-one-out model requires fully minimizing
the leave-one-out loss, taking one Newton step from the optimal model θ∗ trained on the full dataset
often provides sufficient information to distinguish the relative influence of different data points.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     L IMITATIONS OF THE E XISTING DATA ATTRIBUTION T ECHNIQUES FOR
      F OUNDATION M ODELS
B.1    I NFLUENCE F UNCTION

Influence functions (Cook & Weisberg, 1980; Koh & Liang, 2017) are a classical technique from
robust statistics, adapted for machine learning to measure how the removal of a single data point
affects the performance of a trained model. Influence functions quantify the sensitivity of a model’s
predictions to specific data points, offering insights into the importance of individual training samples.
In the machine learning framework, they are particularly useful for diagnosing model behavior,
understanding dataset quality, and identifying mislabeled or harmful data points. The core idea of
influence functions is to approximate the effect of removing a data point from the training set without
needing to retrain the model. Instead of actually excluding a point and retraining, influence functions
leverage the model’s final parameters and compute the impact of a point’s removal based on the
gradient and Hessian inverse of the loss function at the final model state. Formally, the influence of a
training data point zi on the loss ℓ(θ, z (val) ) at a validation point z (val) is defined as:

                              IF(zi ) := −∇θ ℓ(θ, z (val) )⊤ H−1 ∇θ ℓ(θ, zi )
                                                                    PN
where θ is the final model parameter after training, H = N1 i=1 ∇2θ ℓ(θ, zi ) is the Hessian of the
total training loss at θ, ∇θ ℓ(θ, z (val) ) and ∇θ ℓ(θ, zi ) are the gradients of the loss at the validation
point and the training point, respectively.
Limitation: Neglecting Training Phases and Unrealiable Approximation to LOO. A key limita-
tion of influence function techniques is their exclusive focus on the final model parameters, thereby
ignoring the intermediate dynamics of the training process. By assessing data contributions solely
based on the final trained model, influence functions fail to capture how each data point influenced
the model’s updates throughout training. This narrow focus introduces inaccuracies, as it overlooks
the cumulative effects of model fluctuations during the training iterations. Consequently, influence
functions can be less accurate in evaluating data contributions, particularly in large-scale models
where the training process plays a significant role. For instance, in modern training paradigms for
large language models (LLMs), models are typically pretrained on a broad corpus and subsequently
fine-tuned on specialized domains. Influence functions, however, cannot differentiate between the
impacts of data points during pretraining and fine-tuning phases. Relying solely on the final model
parameters after fine-tuning, they miss how pretraining data contributed to learning general language
structures or how fine-tuning data adapted the model to specific domains. This inability to account for
different training stages results in incomplete and often noisy estimates of data contributions, thereby
reducing the precision of attribution in multi-stage training processes.
Moreover, our analysis in Section D demonstrates that the influence function approximates the
expected data influence across different training trajectories only under overly simplistic conditions,
which are often violated in practice. These conditions, such as assuming identical intermediate model
checkpoints and Hessian matrices, almost never hold in real-world training scenarios where model
evolve significantly. This highlights the inadequacy of influence functions in accurately capturing
data contributions, underscoring the necessity for more comprehensive data attribution methods that
consider the entire training trajectory.
Neglecting Training Phases Necessitates Unreasonable Assumptions and Often Require Model
Retraining. Additionally, the focus on the final model necessitates assumptions of convergence and
strong convexity to ensure reliable results. In many real-world settings, where models are non-convex
and may not fully converge, these assumptions are often violated, leading to further inaccuracies in
the data contribution estimates. As the influence function score is often found to be highly noisy in
practice (Basu et al., 2020; Søgaard et al., 2021; Bae et al., 2022; Epifano et al., 2023), it typically
necessitates multiple model retraining to produce reasonable results (Deng et al., 2024), which can
undermine their original computational efficiency advantage.

B.2    I N -RUN DATA S HAPLEY

In-Run Data Shapley (Wang et al., 2025) is a data attribution technique designed to evaluate the
contribution of individual data points during a single training run of machine learning models. It


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


builds on the traditional Data Shapley framework, which stems from cooperative game theory. The
Shapley value, originally proposed by Lloyd Shapley in 1953, distributes total utility fairly among
all contributing players based on their marginal contributions. Applying this concept to machine
learning, Data Shapley attributes the contribution of each data point in a training dataset by assessing
its influence on model performance. However, standard Data Shapley methods face limitations
in scalability because they require numerous retraining iterations on different data subsets. These
computational demands make them impractical for large-scale models such as foundation models. To
address these challenges, In-Run Data Shapley was introduced as a scalable alternative that avoids the
need for repeated retraining. Instead, it leverages the iterative nature of model training, specifically
neural networks, where parameters are updated in small increments. By tracking gradient updates at
each training step, In-Run Data Shapley calculates the contribution of individual data points toward
the final model without retraining. It approximates the Shapley value using local utility functions
tied to specific gradient updates and extends these to the full training process, capturing cumulative
contributions. This method reduces the computational overhead to a level comparable with standard
training runs while maintaining the theoretical fairness and interpretability of Shapley values.
Limitation: Requirement of Validation Data in Advance. One of the key limitations of In-Run Data
Shapley is its reliance on the availability of validation data prior to the start of training. The technique
calculates data contribution by examining the impact of training points on model performance as
measured against the validation set. Thus, access to this validation data throughout the training
process is necessary to compute meaningful Shapley values at each iteration. This restriction can
limit the applicability of In-Run Data Shapley in scenarios where validation data is not immediately
available, such as in certain real-time learning environments or when the validation set is defined only
after training. Potential workarounds, such as saving intermediate model checkpoints to calculate
contributions post-training, add complexity to the process and might be unreliable.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A LGORITHM D ETAILS
C.1    D ERIVATION D ETAILS FOR S ECTION 3.1

Suppose z ∗ is a data point that participates in the training during the first iteration. Denote Bt as the
training batch in the t-th iteration. For standard Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), we have:
                                                       X
                                     θk+1 = θk − ηk         ∇ℓ(θk , z)                                 (3)
                                                              z∈Bk
for k = 0, . . . , T − 1, where ηk is the learning rate at iteration k.
For validation data z (val) , we aim to estimate the change in ℓ(θT , z (val) ) by removing z ∗ from the
first iteration. Specifically, we want to estimate ℓ(θT′ , z (val) ) − ℓ(θT , z (val) ) where:
                                                     X
                                   θ1′ = θ0 − η0               ∇ℓ(θ0 , z)                             (4)
                                                          z∈B0 \{z ∗ }
and                                                              X
                                        ′
                                       θk+1 = θk′ − ηk               ∇ℓ(θk′ , z)                           (5)
                                                              z∈Bk
for k = 1, . . . , T − 1.
To approach this problem, we define an interpolation between θT and θT′ :
                                       X
                   θ1 (ε) := θ0 − η0          ∇ℓ(θ0 , z) − η0 (1 − ε)∇ℓ(θ0 , z ∗ )                         (6)
                                           z∈B0 \{z ∗ }
where θT (ε) is defined accordingly. Note that θT (0) = θT and θT (1) = θT′ .
By taking the first-order Taylor expansion at ε = 0, we have:
                 ℓ(θT′ , z (val) ) − ℓ(θT , z (val) ) = ℓ(θT (1), z (val) ) − ℓ(θT (0), z (val) )
                                                        ∂
                                                     ≈    ℓ(θT (ε), z (val) )
                                                       ∂ε                     ε=0
                                                                          ∂θ  T (ε)
                                                     = ∇ℓ(θT , z (val) )⊤                                  (7)
                                                                              ∂ε ε=0

Now, we derive ∂θ∂ε
                 T (ε)
                                  by observing the following recursive relation for all k ≥ 1:
                            ε=0
                            ∂θk+1 (ε)   ∂θk (ε)      X                 ∂θk (ε)
                                      =         − ηk   ∇2 ℓ(θk (ε), z)                                     (8)
                               ∂ε         ∂ε                             ∂ε
                                                             z∈Bk
                                        ∂θk (ε)
                                       =        (I − ηk Hk (ε))                               (9)
                                          ∂ε
                              2
                   P
where Hk (ε) = z∈Bk ∇ ℓ(θk (ε), z) is the Hessian and I is the identity matrix. Additionally, for
the first iteration where z ∗ participates, we have
                                         ∂θ1 (ε)
                                                  = η0 ∇ℓ(θ0 , z ∗ )                        (10)
                                            ∂ε
Expanding the recursion and substituting it back into our original expression, we get:
                                                  ∂
     ℓ(θT (1), z (val) ) − ℓ(θT (0), z (val) ) ≈    ℓ(θT (ε), z (val) )|ε=0
                                                 ∂ε
                                                                       "T −1             #
                                                                         Y
                                                              (val) ⊤
                                               = η0 ∇ℓ(θT , z      )         (I − ηk Hk ) ∇ℓ(θ0 , z ∗ )
                                                                                 k=1
                                                                             |           {z            }
                                                                                   cumulative effect

This final expression gives an estimate of the influence of removing z ∗ from the first iteration on the
                                                QT −1
loss on z (val) at the final iteration. The term k=1 (I − ηk Hk ) represents the cumulative effect of all
training iterations on the initial influence. This product captures how the impact of the initial change
propagates through the entire training process, accounting for the learning rate and the training data
at each subsequent step.


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2     E RROR G UARANTEE FOR U NROLLING - BASED A PPROACH

In this section, we derive the approximation error guarantee of the unrolling differentiation estimator
                                                  " T −1               #
                             ∂θT (ε)                 Y
                 ∆θ−z∗ :=            ε = 0 = ηts          (I − ηk Hk ) ∇ℓ(θts , z ∗ ),
                                ∂ε
                                                     k=ts +1

for non-convex loss functions. A very loose bound for ∥θT − θT′ − ∆θ−z∗ ∥ has been derived in Hara
et al. (2019). Here, we improve the error bound by additionally considering the decay of the learning
rate and the spectral norm of Hessian matrices as training progresses. Notably, we establish a uniform
bound on the gap.
Assume that ℓ(z; θ) is twice differentiable with respect to the parameter θ, and we train the model for
T iterations. We make the following assumptions:

      1. Learning Rate Schedule: The learning rate ηt at iteration t follows the schedule ηt = η√
                                                                                                max
                                                                                                  t
         where ηmax = √CT for some constant C. Justification: The decaying learning rate schedule
         ηt = η√ max
                  t
                      is a common choice in neural network training in famous literature (Vaswani, 2017).
         This schedule allows for larger step sizes during the initial phases of training, facilitating
         rapid convergence, while gradually reducing the step sizes to fine-tune the model  parameters

         and ensure stability as training progresses. The max learning rate ηmax = O √1T ensures
         that the cumulative step sizes remain bounded over T iterations, which is crucial for deriving
         meaningful error bounds. This approach balances the trade-off between exploration and
         convergence, making it well-suited for training deep neural networks where maintaining
         stability is essential.
      2. Hessian Spectral Norm Decay: There exists a constant Λ > 0 such that the Hessian matrices
         satisfy Ht ⪯ √Λt I for all t ≥ 1. Justification: The assumption that the spectral norm of
         the Hessian matrices decays as Ht ⪯ √Λt I is grounded in the observation that, as training
         progresses, the optimization landscape often becomes flatter around minima. This reduction
         in curvature implies that the Hessian’s eigenvalues decrease, leading to smaller spectral norms.
         Such behavior is typical in many deep learning scenarios where initial training steps navigate
         regions of high curvature, followed by stabilization in flatter regions as the model converges.
         Additionally, this assumption aligns with empirical findings in deep learning literature (),
         where Hessian’s spectral norm has been observed to decrease over time, thereby facilitating
         more stable and efficient convergence. By incorporating this decay, we account for the
         diminishing influence of curvature on parameter updates, which is critical for tightening the
         error bounds in our analysis.

Under these assumptions, we proceed to derive a uniform bound on the approximation error ∥θT −
θT′ − ∆θ−z∗ ∥. This bound provides theoretical guarantees for the effectiveness of the unrolling-based
approach in estimating the influence of removing a training data point on the final model parameters.
The derivation leverages the decaying learning rate and the diminishing spectral norm of the Hessian
matrices to tighten the error bounds compared to previous work (Hara et al., 2019).
Theorem 3. Assume that ℓ(z; θ) is twice differentiable, that the Hessian ∇2θ ℓ(z; θ) is L-Lipschitz
continuous with respect to θ, and that the gradient norm is bounded, i.e., ∥∇θ ℓ(z; θ)∥ ≤ G for all z
and θ. Furthermore, assume that the learning rate ηt at iteration t follows the schedule ηt = η√   max
                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                       ,
where ηmax = √CT for some constant C > 0. Then, for the unrolling differentiation estimator ∆θ−z∗ ,
the approximation error satisfies
                                                           32 2 3 CΛ
                               ∥(θT − θT′ ) − ∆θ−z∗ ∥ ≤       G C Le                                (11)
                                                            3

Proof. By Cauchy’s Mean Value Theorem, for each iteration s ∈ {ts , . . . , T − 1}, there exists
r ∈ [0, 1] such that for θs∗ := rθs′ + (1 − r)θs , we have
                             X
                                 (∇θ ℓ(z; θs′ ) − ∇θ ℓ(z; θs )) = H∗s (θs′ − θs ),
                            z∈Bs


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where H∗s :=             2       ∗                                   ∗             ∗
               P
                   z∈Bs ∇θ ℓ(z; θs ). Define Zs := (I − ηs Hs ) and Zs := (I − ηs Hs ). Then, we have
            ′
           θs+1 − θs+1 = Zs (θs′ − θs ) + ηs (Hs − H∗s )(θs′ − θs ) = Zs (θs′ − θs ) + Ds ,
where Ds := ηs (Hs − H∗s )(θs′ − θs ). Recursively applying these equalities over s ∈ {ts , . . . , T − 1},
we obtain
                                                     T
                                                     X −1 TY−1
                              θT′ − θT = ∆θ−z∗ +                Zk Ds .
                                                             s=ts k=s+1

Hence, the approximation error is given by
                                                               T
                                                               X −1 TY
                                                                     −1
                             ∥(θT − θT′ ) − ∆θ−z∗ ∥ =                        Zk Ds .
                                                               s=ts k=s+1

To bound this, we proceed as follows. Given the learning rate schedule ηt = η√
                                                                             max
                                                                               t
                                                                                 = √CT t , and the
assumption that Ht ⪯ √Λt I, we have

                                                        Λ       CΛ
                          ∥Zk ∥ = ∥I − ηk Hk ∥ ≤ 1 + ηk √ = 1 + √ .
                                                         k     k T
For large T and k ≥ s ≥ ts ≥ 1, the term kCΛ√ is small. Thus, we can bound the product of the
                                             T
norms as
                   −1                    −1                      T −1
                  TY                   T
                                                 !                       !
                                       X CΛ                 CΛ X 1
                       ∥Zk ∥ ≤ exp            √    ≤ exp √                 .
                                             k T              T        k
                     k=s+1                     k=s+1                             k=s+1

Using the harmonic series approximation,
                                        T −1
                                        X       1         T
                                                  ≤ ln       ≤ ln(T ).
                                                k         s
                                        k=s+1

Thus,
                                   −1
                                  TY
                                                             CΛ ln T
                                         ∥Zk ∥ ≤ exp          √            ≤ eCΛ .
                                k=s+1
                                                                T

Therefore, we have
                                   T
                                   X −1 TY
                                         −1                        T
                                                                   X −1
                                                 Zk Ds ≤ eCΛ               ∥Ds ∥.
                                   s=ts k=s+1                      s=ts


Next, we bound ∥Ds ∥:
                   ∥Ds ∥ = ∥ηs (Hs − H∗s )(θs′ − θs )∥ ≤ ηs ∥Hs − H∗s ∥ · ∥θs′ − θs ∥.
Since ∇2θ ℓ(z; θ) is L-Lipschitz continuous with respect to θ, we have
                                        ∥Hs − H∗s ∥ ≤ L∥θs′ − θs ∥.
Additionally, we have
                                           s                   s          √
                                           X                  X    C        s
                         ∥θs′ − θs ∥ ≤ 2         ηt G = 2G        √ ≤ 4GC √ ,
                                           t=1                t=1
                                                                   Tt      T
                             Ps    1    √
where we used the bound        t=1 t ≤ 2 s.
                                  √

Thus,
                                                     √  2    √
                                                       s       s
                                  ∥Ds ∥ ≤ ηs L · 4GC √    = Γ 1.5
                                                       T     T
where Γ = 16G2 C 3 L.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Substituting this bound into the sum, we obtain
                                     T −1 TY
                                           −1                                T −1       √
                                     X
                                                                       CΛ
                                                                             X             s
                                                    Zk D s ≤ e                      Γ         .
                                    s=ts k=s+1                               s=ts
                                                                                        T 1.5

We now evaluate the summation:
                       T −1 √                       T
                       X              s           1 X√                    1   2       2
                                      1.5
                                          ≤                      s≤          · T 1.5 = ,
                            s=t
                                T               T 1.5 s=1               T 1.5 3       3
                                s

                             PT       √
where we used the bound         s=1        s ≤ 23 T 1.5 .
Therefore,
                            T −1 TY
                                  −1
                            X                                          2   32 2 3 CΛ
                                            Zk Ds ≤ eCΛ Γ ·              =    G C Le .
                            s=ts k=s+1
                                                                       3    3



C.3      C OMPUTING DATA VALUE E MBEDDING R ECURSIVELY

Theorem  4 (Restate for Theorem 2). Given generalized Gauss-Newton approximation Ht ≈
                            ⊤
P
  z∈Bt ∇ℓ(θ t , z)∇ℓ(θt , z) , we have

                                         −1
                                       T
                                                                                 !
                                       X    X
          (t) ∗                   ∗                       ⊤         ∗       (k)

    DVEmb (z ) ≈ ηt ∇ℓ(θt , z ) − ηt            ∇ℓ(θk , z) ∇ℓ(θt , z ) DVEmb (z)
                                                  k=t+1         z∈Bk


Proof.
DVEmb(t) (z ∗ )
     " T −1              #
       Y
= ηt         (I − ηk Hk ) ∇ℓ(θt , z ∗ )
         k=t+1
       " T −1               #
         Y
= ηt            (I − ηk Hk ) (I − ηt+1 Ht+1 )∇ℓ(θt , z ∗ )
         k=t+2
       " T −1               #                                                                    
         Y                                        X
≈ ηt            (I − ηk Hk ) I − ηt+1                      ∇ℓ(θt+1 , z)ℓ(θt+1 , z)⊤  ∇ℓ(θt , z ∗ )
         k=t+2                                  z∈Bt+1
       " T −1               #                                                " T −1                   #            !
         Y                                              X                      Y
                                            ∗
= ηt            (I − ηk Hk ) ∇ℓ(θt , z ) − ηt                        ηt+1                (I − ηk Hk ) ∇ℓ(θt+1 , z) ∇ℓ(θt+1 , z)⊤ ∇ℓ(θt , z ∗ )
         k=t+2                                        z∈Bt+1                  k=t+2
       " T −1               #
         Y                                              X
                (I − ηk Hk ) ∇ℓ(θt , z ∗ ) − ηt                      ∇ℓ(θt+1 , z)⊤ ∇ℓ(θt , z ∗ ) DVEmb(t+1) (z)

= ηt
         k=t+2                                        z∈Bt+1
                           −1
                         T
                                                                             !
                         X          X
                 ∗                                          ⊤            ∗
                                                                         (k)

= ηt ∇ℓ(θt , z ) − ηt                        ∇ℓ(θk , z) ∇ℓ(θt , z ) DVEmb (z)
                        k=t+1       z∈Bk

The transition from the penultimate to the final line involves generalizing the summation over Bt+1
to include all batches from t + 1 to T − 1, effectively unrolling the recursive computation. In other
words, the “data value embedding” for data points in tth iteration can be approximated by its gradient
subtracted by a linear combination of the data value embedding in the later iterations, where the
weight of each embedding is determined by the gradient similarity ∇ℓ(θk , z)⊤ ∇ℓ(θt , z ∗ ).


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4    G ENERALIZED G AUSS -N EWTON A PPROXIMATION TO H ESSIAN

In this section, we justify the use of Generalized Gauss-Newton (GGN) as the approximation to
the Hessian matrix. Similar derivation can be found in many literature and textbooks, such as
Bartlett (1953); Schraudolph (2002). This approach has also been used in other data attribution and
optimization techniques for approximating Hessian matrices (Martens, 2020; Kwon et al., 2023;
Grosse et al., 2023).
The cross-entropy loss function for classification with one-hot encoded labels is defined as:
                                                      C
                                                      X
                                       L(y, f ) = −         yi log(fi )
                                                      i=1

where y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yC ]⊤ is the one-hot encoded true label vector and f = [f1 , f2 , . . . , fC ]⊤
is the vector of predicted probabilities from the model. In this paper, we restrict our focus to the
cross-entropy loss, as it is the most commonly used loss function, and many LLMs are pre-trained
with the cross-entropy loss function.
                                                         ∂L
By chain rule, the derivative of L with respect to fi is ∂f i
                                                              = − yfii . Since y is a one-hot vector, only
the correct class k has yk = 1, while all other yi = 0 for i ̸= k. This simplifies the gradient to:
                                                         1 ∂fk
                                            ∇θ L = −
                                                         fk ∂θ
Thus, the gradient depends only on the derivative of fk (the predicted probability for the correct class)
with respect to θ. The Hessian H is the second derivative of the loss with respect to θ:
                                                                             ⊤
                                                                                    1 ∂ 2 fk

                         ∂              ∂       1 ∂fk         1 ∂fk ∂fk
           H = ∇2θ L =      (∇θ L) =         −            = 2                   −
                         ∂θ            ∂θ       fk ∂θ        fk ∂θ      ∂θ          fk ∂θ2
                                                                          2
Applying the product rule and assuming the second derivative ∂∂θf2k is negligible (which is common
when fk is approximately linear in θ near the current parameter values), the Hessian simplifies to:
                                                           ⊤
                                             1 ∂fk ∂fk
                                      H≈ 2
                                            fk ∂θ      ∂θ
Moreover, this approximation matches the outer product of the gradient of loss with respect to model
parameter θ:
                                                                 ⊤
                                            ⊤     1 ∂fk ∂fk
                                  ∇θ L∇θ L = 2
                                                 fk ∂θ       ∂θ
Therefore, the gradient outer product exactly approximates the Hessian matrix under the assumption
       2
that ∂∂θf2k is negligible.
Remark 1. We note that the specific definition of GGN depends on how we split the loss function. As
highlighted by Kunstner et al. (2019), the GGN is ambiguous as it crucially depends on the "split"
given by the inner and outer functions. For the cross-entropy loss, the canonical split treats the
loss as an (b) = − log p(yn |b) and bn (θ) = f (xn , θ), which allows the GGN to capture curvature
information to some extent. However, the alternative split used in our paper may not retain useful
second-order information. Nevertheless, most recent works in influence function approximation
have used this approach for approximating the Hessian thus far (with the exception of Grosse et al.
(2023)). An important open question is understanding the gap between this approximation and
Hessian regarding the task of data attribution.

C.5    G RADIENT D ECOMPOSITION T ECHNIQUE

To mitigate the computational cost from per-sample gradient computation, we leverage a gradient
decomposition and take advantage of the computations already performed during backpropagation
(Wang et al., 2025; Choe et al., 2024). We illustrate this technique with a simple linear layer, where
the output is s = aW, with W ∈ Rd1 ×d2 being the weight matrix, a = (a(1) , . . . , a(B) )⊤ as the
input, and s = (s(1) , . . . , s(B) )⊤ representing the pre-activation tensor. For non-sequential data,


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a ∈ RB×d1 , s ∈ RB×d2 . Denote a sample batch as B = {z1 , . . . , zB }. By chain rule, we can express
the gradient of an individual loss ℓ(i) := ℓ(w, zi ) with respect to W as
                        ∂ℓ(i)  ∂ℓ(i)  ∂s(i)  ∂ℓ(i)         ∂ℓ
                              = (i) ⊗       = (i) ⊗ a(i) = (i) ⊗ a(i)                                (12)
                        ∂W     ∂s     ∂W     ∂s           ∂s
             PB   (j)
where ℓ :=   j=1 ℓ    is the aggregated loss, and the last step is because other data points’ losses
                                                                             (i)
have no dependency on si . Note that the individual’s output gradient ∂ℓ   ∂s(i)
                                                                                 = ∂s∂ℓ(i) is readily
available during the backpropagation pass in terms of ℓ. Therefore, this method requires only a single
backpropagation on ℓ, maintaining the training speed equivalent to standard training.
                                                                                       (i)
                                                                                          d1 ×d2
In terms of storage improvement, rather than storing the full gradient vectors ∂ℓ∂W ∈ R          for
                                                        (i) ∂ℓ
                                                                     d1 +d2
each data point zi , we instead store the smaller pair a , ∂s(i) ∈ R        . This reduces memory
                                     √
requirements from O(pT B) to O( pT B) for non-sequential data. For sequential data where
a ∈ RB×S×d1 , s ∈ RB×S×d2 , if S 2 > d1 d2 , it is more memory-efficient to directly store the
per-sample gradient vectors, so the storage requirement remains as O(pT B).

C.6   R ANDOM PROJECTIONS FOR LARGE MODELS
                                                                                                  √
For large-scale foundation models with billions of parameters, even the reduced storage of O( pT B)
can be substantial. In such cases, we apply random projections to compress the stored information
further. We use two projection matrices, Pa ∈ Rr×d1 and Ps ∈ Rr×d2 , to project a and ∂ℓ      ∂s to lower
dimensional space Rr respectively. The projected gradient can then     be  reconstructed  directly   from
the projected activations and output derivatives: (Pa ⊗ Ps ) a ⊗ ∂ℓ                    ∂ℓ

                                                                  ∂s   =  (P a a) ⊗ Ps ∂s   .

C.7   PARALLELIZED E XTENSION FOR I NFLUENCE E MBEDDING C OMPUTATION

The backpropagation algorithm introduced in Section 4.3 for computing data value embeddings
operates with a runtime complexity of O(T ), as it sequentially computes DVEmb(ts ) for ts =
T − 1, . . . , 0. While being significantly more efficient than the influence function, which requires re-
computing all training gradients on the final model (see Section 5.2 and Table 2), it can still be costly
for long training periods. Here, we present influence checkpointing technique, a parallelized extension
for Algorithm 1. This extension reduces computational cost by enabling concurrent computation
of embeddings at multiple checkpoints throughout the training process. Besides the computational
efficiency benefits, it also enables the study of how the influence of individual data points evolves
throughout model training, providing valuable insights into the learning process.
Influence Checkpointing. We pick K evenly spaced training steps 0 < t1 < t2 < ... < tK = T .
We then concurrently execute the backpropagation algorithm for value embedding, initiating from
each of these intermediate steps. This process yields data value embeddings for each corresponding
intermediate checkpoint θt1 , . . . , θtK−1 , θtK . We extend our notation for data value embedding and
denote DVEmb(ts →tℓ ) (z ∗ ) as the data value embedding of z ∗ ∈ Bts for the intermediate checkpoint
θtℓ . Note that DVEmb(ts ) = DVEmb(ts →T ) for the final model, and we must have ts < tℓ , as later
training batches cannot influence earlier checkpoints.
Consider initiating the backpropagation algorithm in Section 4.3 at step tℓ and stop at step tℓ−1 , we
will obtain data value embeddings DVEmb(ts →tℓ ) for ts = tℓ−1 , . . . , tℓ − 1. We additionally denote
              Qtb −1
K(ta →tb ) := t=t   a
                      (I − ηt Ht ). From the definition on Equation (2), the final data value embedding
DVEmb(ts →T ) (z ∗ ) can be computed from DVEmb(ts →tℓ ) (z ∗ ) as follows:

                         DVEmb(ts →T ) (z ∗ ) = DVEmb(ts →tℓ ) (z ∗ )⊤ K(tℓ →T )                     (13)

Hence, to recovery of DVEmb(ts →T ) (z ∗ ), we additionally store the matrix K(tℓ−1 →tℓ ) between steps
tℓ−1 and tℓ during the backpropagation for each tℓ . Consequently, for any ts such that tℓ0 ≤ ts <
                            QK
tℓ0 +1 , we have K(tℓ →T ) = ℓ=ℓ0 +1 K(tℓ−1 →tℓ ) , allowing us to compute DVEmb(ts →T ) (z ∗ ) based
on (13). A detailed algorithm pseudocode is provided in Algorithm 2. The complexity analysis of
this algorithm is the same as the original data value embedding algorithm in Table 2, but the actual
runtime is being reduced by a factor of K due to parallelism.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Data Value Dynamics During Training. In addition to its computational benefits, the influence
checkpointing algorithm enables a novel capability: tracking the evolution of data influences through-
out the entire model training process. If the intermediate checkpoints θt1 , . . . , θtK−1 was saved—a
common practice in foundation model pretraining—we can analyze how the influence of indi-
vidual data points changes as training progresses. Specifically, for any training step ts where
                                                                       (ts →tκ ) ∗
tℓ0 ≤ ts < tℓ0 +1 , we can compute the data value embedding  QDVEmb             (z ) for any checkpoint
                       (ts →tκ ) ∗            (ts →tℓ ) ∗ ⊤     κ         (tℓ−1 →tℓ )
κ ≥ ℓ0 + 1 as DVEmb             (z ) = DVEmb           (z )     ℓ=ℓ0 +1 K              . This formulation
allows us to estimate data influence scores not only for the final model checkpoint θT but for any
intermediate checkpoints θtκ . As a result, we gain a more fine-grained and dynamic view of how
data influences evolve during training, providing deeper insights into the model’s learning behavior
over time. To our knowledge, this is the first data attribution method to offer such a principled and
practical framework for studying data influence dynamics throughout the training process. This
capability opens up new avenues for understanding and optimizing machine learning model training.

C.8   P SEUDOCODE

Algorithm 1 Backpropagation for computing data value embedding from the final checkpoint
                                                  −1                                         −1
Require: Training steps T , learning rates {ηt }Tt=0 , training data gradients {∇ℓ(θt , z)}Tt=0,z∈B t
 1: // Initialization
 2: M(T −1) ← 0.
 3:
 4: // Recursion steps
 5: for t = T − 1 down to 0 do
 6:     for z ∈ Bt do
 7:         DVEmb(t) (z) ← ηt ∇ℓ(θt , z) − ηt M(t) ∇ℓ(θt , z)
 8:     if t > 0 then
             M(t−1) ← M(t) + z∈Bt DVEmb(t) (z)∇ℓ(θt , z)⊤
                            P
 9:
                           −1
10: return {DVEmb(t) (z)}T
                         t=0,z∈Bt


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Parallel Influence Checkpointing for Data Value Embedding
                                                                           −1
Require: Training steps T , number of checkpoints K, learning rates {ηt }Tt=0 , loss gradients
                T −1                     T −1
    {∇ℓ(θt , z)}t=0,z∈Bt , Hessians {Ht }t=0
                                                −1
Ensure: Data value embeddings {DVEmb(t) (z)}Tt=0,z∈B  t
 1: Select K evenly spaced checkpoints 0 = t0 < t1 < t2 < . . . < tK = T
 2: for ℓ = 1 to K do
 3:     Run BACKPROPAGATE S EGMENT(tℓ−1 , tℓ )
 4:
 5: // Compute final embeddings
 6: for ℓ = 1 to K do
 7:     for ts = tℓ−1 to tℓ − 1 do
 8:         for z ∈ Bts do
                                                    QK
 9:             DVEmb(ts ) (z) ← DVEmb(ts →tℓ ) (z)⊤ k=ℓ+1 K(tk−1 →tk )
                             −1
10: return {DVEmb(t) (z)}T  t=0,z∈Bt
11:
12: procedure BACKPROPAGATE S EGMENT(ta , tb )
13:     Initialize and M(tb −1) as in the original algorithm
14:     K(tb →tb ) ← I
15:     for t = tb − 1 down to ta do
16:         for z ∈ Bt do
17:              DVEmb(t→tb ) (z) ← ηt ∇ℓ(θt , z) − ηt M(t) ∇ℓ(θt , z)
18:         if t > ta then
                 M(t−1) ← M(t) + z∈Bt DVEmb(t→tb ) (z)∇ℓ(θt , z)⊤
                                P
19:
20:         K(t→tb ) ← K(t+1→tb ) (I − ηt Ht )
                                   b −1
21:     return {DVEmb(t→tb ) (z)}tt=t a ,z∈Bt
                                              , K(ta →tb )


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.9    C OMPLEXITY S UMMARY

In this section, we compare the storage, memory, and computational efficiency of data value embed-
ding with LoGRA (Choe et al., 2024), the most efficient implementation of the influence function
to date. LoGRA is currently the only method that supports real-time, on-demand data influence
computation when new test data is introduced. Similar to our algorithm, LoGRA initially computes
per-sample training gradients on the final model for all training data points z ∗ ∈ D, where D repre-
sents the dataset. It then stores the projected Hessian-adjusted gradients H−1         ∗            ∗
                                                                            T ∇ℓ(θT , z ) for each z ,
and also assumes layer gradient independence.
While the random projection step in LoGRA is akin to our approach, LoGRA’s requirement to
recompute gradients for all training data on the final model θT is computationally intensive, effectively
equivalent to one epoch of model training. In contrast, data value embedding captures the training
data gradients during the original training process. As discussed in Appendix C.10, the training and
disk storage can be handled asynchronously. This means that the gradient storage step in the data
value embedding algorithm does not incur additional efficiency costs.

                              Storing H−1         ∗
                                       T ∇ℓ(θT , z ) / data value embedding          Compute Influence (dot-product)
                       Storage         Memory                    FLOPS√                 Memory                 FLOPS
       LoGRA           O(|D|p̃)         O(p)                |D|p + |D| pp̃/L
                                                            √                       O((Btest + Btrain )p̃)   O(Btest Btrain p̃)
Data Value Embedding   O(T B p̃)   O(p)/O(B p̃2 /L2 )*   T B pp̃/L/O(T B p̃2 /L)*   O((Btest + Btrain )p̃)   O(Btest Btrain p̃)

Table 2: Summary of the storage, memory, and FLOPS complexity for LoGRA (Choe et al., 2024), the
most efficient implementation of the influence function to date. Here, p denotes the model dimension,
p̃ is the projected dimension, T represents the number of training iterations, and B is the batch size.
|D| is the dataset size, with the relationship T B = |D| × #epochs. L is the number of layers. Btest
and Btrain refer to the test and training batch sizes during influence computation, respectively, which
are independent of the batch size B used during model training. *Since the data value embedding
technique involves two distinct steps for storing relevant information for data attribution (storing
gradients during training & computing/storing data value embeddings after training), we include the
complexity for both steps. For the gradient storage step, the complexity refers to the additional cost
beyond regular training.


C.10    P RACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS & P OTENTIAL E XTENSIONS

In this section, we discuss some practical extensions and considerations for implementing data value
embedding for real-world scenarios.
Optimizing I/O operations for seamless training. During each training iteration, computed gradient
representations need to be transferred from GPU to CPU and then written to disk. To prevent this
process from blocking the main training loop, we implement several optimizations: (1) Asynchronous
I/O operations: To avoid the gradient storing process blocking the main training loop, we make
GPU operations and GPU-CPU transfers asynchronous by using CUDA streams. This allows GPU
computations to continue while data is being transferred. We also offload the disk write process to
a separate thread or process, allowing the main training loop to proceed without waiting for disk
operations to complete. (2) Gradient accumulation: Instead of writing gradients to disk after every
iteration, we can accumulate them over multiple iterations and then write them in bulk. This reduces
the frequency of disk I/O operations, improving overall efficiency.
Approximating data value embeddings from checkpoints alone. In situations where only in-
termediate model checkpoints are accessible and per-training-step (projected) gradient vectors are
unavailable—such as when modifying the training loop’s implementation is impossible or when disk
storage is limited—we can adapt our approach by assuming that there is only one gradient update step
between each checkpoint, similar to assumptions made in other data attribution literature (Pruthi et al.,
2020). Under this assumption, we compute the gradient for each training point at the checkpoint
immediately following its corresponding training iteration. These estimated gradients are then used to
execute the backpropagation algorithm, enabling the computation of data value embeddings without
requiring gradient saving during the original training run.
Dataset-level attribution through embedding aggregation. In practical applications, stakeholders
often require valuation at the dataset level rather than for individual data points. To address this need,


                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a natural extension of our approach is to compute the data value embedding for a dataset by summing
the data value embeddings of all constituent data points from the same source. This method offers
a significant advantage over the summation of expected LOO scores, as it inherently accounts for
complex inter-data interactions throughout the training process. However, data value embeddings
are derived based on first-order Taylor approximations. While these approximations are accurate
for estimating small perturbations to the model, making them suitable for predicting the effects
of removing individual training points, their accuracy may diminish when aggregating over larger
sets of data points. The potential discrepancy between individual-level accuracy and dataset-level
aggregation presents an interesting avenue for future research.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     I NFLUENCE F UNCTION AS AN I NADEQUATE A PPROXIMATION FOR THE
      E XPECTED L EAVE -O NE -O UT S CORE

Expected LOO. The expected LOO is an alternative to traditional LOO that has been discussed in the
past literature (Feldman & Zhang, 2020). The expected LOO is the trajectory-specific LOO averaged
over all possible training runs characterized by different random        initializations and mini-batch
selections. Formally, it is defined as ELOO(z ∗ ; z (val) ) := Eω ℓ(θT′ (ω), z (val) ) − ℓ(θT (ω), z (val) )


where θT (ω) and θT′ (ω) denote the final model parameters obtained with and without z ∗ , respectively,
under the randomness ω which encodes the choices of training batch order and parameter initialization.
While the expected LOO offers a general assessment of a data point’s influence by averaging over
multiple training runs, it may obscure the variability introduced by stochastic training dynamics. In
contrast, by accounting for factors such as random initialization and mini-batch selection in a specific
run, we argue that the trajectory-specific LOO provides a fine-grained assessment of a data point’s
impact for the trained model. This is particularly important in practical scenarios, such as deploying a
specific model for production, where stakeholders are interested in the valuation of data with respect
to that specific deployed model rather than the general learning algorithm.
While the influence function provides valuable insights, it overlooks the specific training trajectory.
This raises the question: Can the influence function be interpreted as an estimate of the trajectory-
specific leave-one-out score?
We consider the following training batch sampling process. Let σ := (B0 , . . . , BT −1 ) represent a
fixed sequence of training batches formed from the leave-one-out dataset D \ z ∗ . The training point
z ∗ is uniformly likely to be added to any one of the training batches in σ. Additionally, denote
σ (ts ) := (B0 , . . . , Bts ∪ {z ∗ }, . . . , BT −1 ) as the training batch sequence where z ∗ is incorporated
                                     (σ (ts ) )
into the ts -th batch. Let θk                     denote the model parameters at the k-th iteration when training with
                   (ts )              (σ (ts ) )
batch sequence σ           , and let Hk          denote the Hessian matrix at the k-th iteration when training
on sequence σ (ts ) .
When the specific training iteration ts where the training point of interest z ∗ is added is unknown, it is
natural to estimate the expected influence score across all possible scenarios. The expected influence
score for z ∗ based on the unrolling differentiation approximation is given by:
                        "                                      " T −1                          #                        #
                                    (σ (ts ) ) (val) ⊤                           (σ (ts ) )            (σ (ts ) ) ∗
                                                                 Y
          Ets ∼[T −1]       ηts ∇ℓ(θT         ,z    )                   (I − ηk Hk          )      ∇ℓ(θts        ,z )       (14)
                                                                 k=ts +1


Theorem 5 (Influence Function Approximation). Under the following assumptions: (1) Model
                        (σ (ts ) )
Approximation: θk      ≈ θT for all ts and k = 0, . . . , T − 1; (2) Hessian Approximation:
 (σ (ts ) )    (∗)  1
            ≈ HT := T z∈D ∇2 ℓ(θT , z) for all k; (3) Constant Learning Rate: ηt = η for all
                      P
Hk
t = 0, . . . , T − 1; the expected influence score in Equation (14) simplifies and converges to the
standard influence function formulation for large T :
                                                                                      !−1
                                                                 X
                         (14) ≈ ∇ℓ(θT , z (val) )⊤                     ∇2 ℓ(θT , z)         ∇ℓ(θT , z ∗ )
                                                                 z∈D


Implications. The derivation demonstrates that, under the stated approximations, influence function
effectively approximates the expected influence score derived from the unrolling differentiation
approach as T becomes large. This approximation indicates that the influence function may not
fully represent the true leave-one-out score because it relies on simplifying assumptions—such as
approximating all model checkpoints and Hessian matrices to be identical—that often do not hold in
practical training scenarios. In real-world settings, model parameters evolve significantly throughout
training, learning rates are typically scheduled to change over time, and the Hessian matrices can vary
considerably between iterations. These factors undermine the validity of the assumptions, thereby
limiting the effectiveness of the influence function as an approximation for the leave-one-out score.


                                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                   (σ (tr ) )
Proof. Assume that all we have access to is the final model checkpoint θT := θT      for a specific
realization where ts = tr ∼ [T − 1]. Under this assumption, the best approximation we can make is:
                                         (σ (ts ) )      (σ (ts ) )
                                       θT             ≈ θk            ≈ θT
for any ts and k = 0, . . . , T − 1. Additionally, we approximate the Hessian matrices as:
                                   (σ (ts ) )    (∗)  1 X 2
                                 Hk           ≈ HT :=       ∇ ℓ(θT , z)                         (15)
                                                      T
                                                               z∈D

and assume a constant learning rate ηt = η for all t = 0, . . . , T − 1.
With these approximations, Equation (14) simplifies to:
                              "                   " T −1            #           #
                                                                (∗)
                                                     Y
                                          (val) ⊤                            ∗
            (14) = Ets ∼[T −1] η∇ℓ(θT , z      )         (I − ηHT ) ∇ℓ(θT , z )                 (16)
                                                             k=ts +1
                                                    h                 i
                                                            (∗)
                   = η∇ℓ(θT , z (val) )⊤ Ets ∼[T −1] (I − ηHT )T −1−ts ∇ℓ(θT , z ∗ )            (17)
                                          T −1
                     η                    X               (∗)

                   =   ∇ℓ(θT , z (val) )⊤        (I − ηHT )T −1−ts ∇ℓ(θT , z ∗ )                (18)
                     T                    ts =0
                     η                               −1
                                                (∗)
                   ≈ ∇ℓ(θT , z (val) )⊤ ηHT             ∇ℓ(θT , z ∗ )                           (19)
                     T
                                                           !−1
                                          X
                               (val) ⊤
                   = ∇ℓ(θT , z      )            2
                                               ∇ ℓ(θT , z)      ∇ℓ(θT , z ∗ )                   (20)
                                         z∈D

The approximation in the fourth step arises from summing the geometric series of matrices. For η
                                       PT −1         (∗)        (∗)
sufficiently small and T large, we have s=0 (I − ηHT )s ≈ (ηHT )−1 .


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

E.1   BASELINE & I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Fidality Evaluation (Section 5.1). Given the computational intensity, we conduct our experiments
on a subset (10%) of the MNIST using an MLP with two layers with 128 neurons in the hidden
layer. We train the model with standard SGD with a learning rate 10−2 for 10 epochs. We randomly
pick 100 data points and compute their ground-truth trajectory-specific LOO score. For the single
epoch removal, we remove the data point from the last epoch. For this experiment, we do not use
random projection and use the full gradients. For the comparison with influence function, we use the
state-of-the-art implementation from LoGRA (Choe et al., 2024) with the damping term set to be
10−3 following Bae et al. (2022).
Large-scale Experiments in Section 5.2, 5.3 and E.4. Our experiments focus on two language
models: Pythia-410M and GPT2-Small. We train these models on two commonly used datasets in
the literature for large-scale language model training: (1) A 1% subset of the Pile dataset (Gao et al.,
2020), and (2) Wikitext-103 (Merity et al., 2016). We note that our choice of model architecture size
is primarily constrained by the available GPUs in our current setup. However, this limitation does not
diminish the significance of our findings. With enough computational resources (e.g., 8 H100 GPUs),
our method is readily applicable to perform data attribution for billion-scale model training.
For both settings, the sequence length is set to 1024. The learning rate is set at a maximum of
3 × 10−4 . We use AdamW as the optimizer with a weight decay of 0.1, and beta values set to 0.9
and 0.95. Gradients are clipped at a maximum value of 1.0 to maintain stability during training. The
batch size is set to 16, with a learning rate warmup of 2000 iterations followed by cosine decay.
For all experiments, for storage reasons, we compute and store projected gradients and data value
embedding on linear layers of the model only, with the projection dimension set to 1024 per layer.
However, we stress that this is not restricted by computation but by disk storage limit.

E.2   A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR F IDELITY E VALUATION (S ECTION 5.1)

Evaluation on more epochs. Here, we show additional results for the fidelity experiment in Section
5.1, where the model is being trained for a longer time (10 epochs), in which case the model is closer
to convergence. Figure 5 shows that even in this case, data value embedding still has a high Spearman
correlation with the ground-truth LOO in both settings, and the influence function exhibits almost no
correlation with the LOO score.


Figure 5: The correlation between ground-truth LOO when the MLP is trained for 10 epochs and the
estimation obtained by (a) the data value embedding method and (b) the influence function for single
epoch removal. (c) and (d) present the corresponding correlations for all-epoch removal.

Evaluation on different architectures. To demonstrate that our method’s effectiveness extends
beyond simple MLPs, we evaluate data value embedding on a CNN architecture consisting of two
convolutional layers (with 32 and 64 filters, respectively, each followed by 2x2 max pooling) and
a final linear layer. We train the model on MNIST using SGD with learning rate 10−2 for 10
epochs. Following the same experimental setup as with MLP, we randomly select 100 data points
and compute their ground-truth trajectory-specific LOO scores for both single-epoch and all-epochs
removal settings. Figure 6 shows that data value embedding maintains strong correlation with ground-
truth LOO scores, achieving Spearman correlations of 0.818 for single-epoch removal (Figure 6
(a)) and 0.682 for all-epochs removal (Figure 6 (b)). These results demonstrate that our method can
effectively approximate data influence across different neural architectures.


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Scatter plot showing the correlation between ground-truth LOO and data value embedding
method when training a small CNN on MNIST for 10 epochs, where (a) is for single epoch removal
(b) for all-epoch removal setting.


E.2.1   E FFECTIVENESS ON M ISLABELED DATA D ETECTION AND DATA S ELECTION
In addition to comparing our results with ground-truth training run-specific LOO, we further evaluate
the performance of our data value embedding algorithm in the task of mislabeled data detection
and data selection, two standard benchmarks in data attribution literature. We compare several
data attribution baselines, including Retraining-based Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019), KNN-
Shapley (Jia et al., 2019), Influence Function (Koh & Liang, 2017), Trak (Park et al., 2023), Empirical
Influence Functions (Feldman & Zhang, 2020), and Datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022).
Experiment settings. We use ImageNet-pretrained ResNet18 as the architecture in the experiment.
Given the computational intensity of retraining-based methods, we conduct our experiments on a
subset of 1,000 samples from CIFAR-10 dataset. We use Adam with a learning rate 0.001, weight
decay of 1e-4, and label smoothing of 0.1 over 50 epochs. The learning rate is reduced by a factor of
0.1 every 10 epochs. The batch size is set to 64. For retraining-based techniques (Retraining-based
Data Shapley, Empirical Influence Functions, Datamodels), we estimate the corresponding attribution
scores with 1000 model training runs. For Trak, we set the projection dimension to be 2048. For
KNN-Shapley, we set K = 5 and use the features extracted from the last linear layer of ResNet18.
Both experiments included 10% random label noise to reflect the challenges of real-world data.
Remark 2. The mislabeled data detection and data selection benchmark here mainly serves to
evaluate the fidelity of our algorithm in settings where ground-truth LOO computation is infeasible.
However, we stress that data value embedding is not specifically designed for those tasks. Rather, it is
developed as an interpretability tool and a mechanism for real-time data valuation, with potential
applications in data marketplaces and addressing AI copyright disputes (Wang et al., 2024).

I. Mislabeled Data Detection.
Table 3 shows that KNN-Shapley achieves the highest accuracy in detecting mislabeled data, likely
due to its sensitivity to label inconsistencies. Retraining-based methods (Retraining-based Data
Shapley, Empirical Influence Functions, Datamodels) exhibit the lowest performance, which can be
attributed to the inefficiency of Monte Carlo sampling and the inherent stochasticity during retraining,
as discussed in Wang & Jia (2023a). Among techniques requiring only a single training run, Trak
underperforms relative to other methods. This observation aligns with findings from its original
paper (Park et al., 2023), which suggests that ensemble methods are often necessary for optimal
performance. Notably, data value embedding and influence function achieve comparable performance,
outperforming all other techniques except KNN-Shapley. The strong performance of these methods
likely stems from their deterministic nature, which provides more consistent and reliable results.
II. Data Selection.
Table 4 demonstrates that Data Value Embedding outperforms all existing data valuation methods in
the task of data selection. Retraining-based methods (Data Shapley, Empirical Influence Functions,
Datamodels) show limited effectiveness due to the high variance introduced by Monte Carlo sampling
and learning stochasticity. While the influence function and Trak do not require model retraining,
their performance is constrained by assumptions that often do not hold in practice, such as model
convergence and strong convexity. KNN-Shapley provides stable valuation results. However, it
assigns similar scores to similar data points, potentially reducing dataset diversity among the selected
data subset. In contrast, Data Value Embedding considers both data characteristics and temporal


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Method                             Performance (Mean ± Std)
                     Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019)                       0.582 (0.029)
             Empirical Influence Function (Feldman & Zhang, 2020)              0.552 (0.017)
                         Datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022)                       0.520 (0.008)
               KNN-Shapley (Jia et al., 2019; Wang & Jia, 2023b)               0.760 (0.018)
                             Trak (Park et al., 2023)                          0.511 (0.012)
                    Influence Function (Koh & Liang, 2017)                     0.654 (0.054)
                         Data Value Embedding (ours)                           0.667 (0.031)

Table 3: AUROC scores of mislabeled data detection task with various data attribution techniques on
CIFAR10 dataset. The higher the AUROC score is, the better the method is. The results are across
three different training runs (the randomness comes from construction of corrupted datasets), where
we show the standard deviation in ().


ordering in training, allowing similar data points to receive different scores based on when they
appear in the training sequence. This temporal awareness helps maintain dataset diversity while
identifying valuable samples.

                                                            20%            40%             60%             80%
                      Random                           0.350 (0.010)   0.461 (0.010)   0.525 (0.004)   0.559 (0.003)
        Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019)            0.317 (0.047)   0.468 (0.010)   0.527 (0.004)   0.570 (0.008)
Empirical Influence Function (Feldman & Zhang, 2020)   0.342 (0.004)   0.466 (0.016)   0.530 (0.009)   0.568 (0.010)
            Datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022)            0.342 (0.004)   0.465 (0.004)   0.534 (0.010)   0.559 (0.005)
            KNN-Shapley (Jia et al., 2019)             0.354 (0.017)   0.478 (0.007)   0.525 (0.015)   0.563 (0.005)
                Trak (Park et al., 2023)               0.329 (0.021)   0.443 (0.030)   0.517 (0.016)   0.572 (0.009)
       Influence function (Koh & Liang, 2017)          0.320 (0.033)   0.450 (0.028)   0.530 (0.015)   0.580 (0.004)
            Data Value Embedding (ours)                0.391 (0.007)   0.518 (0.008)   0.566 (0.005)   0.604 (0.009)

Table 4: Test accuracies when training ResNet18 on high-value data points selected by various data
attribution techniques. To be able to compare with techniques that require model retraining, for each
training run we randomly sample a size-1000 subset of CIFAR10 dataset (with 10% data points
being mislabeled). The results are across three different training runs (the randomness comes from
construction of corrupted datasets), where we show the standard deviation in ().


E.3     A DDITIONAL DISCUSSION AND RESULTS FOR S ECTION 5.3

E.3.1    E XPLANATION OF INFLUENCE TREND
1. Parameter initialization and warmup training are important for the final model perfor-
mance. The blue curve in Figure 7 (b) illustrates the trend of average training data gradient norm
throughout the training process. We observe that gradient norms are typically large and unstable
during early training (ts ≤ 2000). As training progresses, these normsP    decrease rapidly, leading to
a significant reduction in the eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix Ht ≈ z∈Bt ∇ℓ(θt , z)∇ℓ(θt , z)⊤ .
Consequently, when ∥∇ℓ(θts )∥ is significantly larger than later training gradients, the norm of data
                   QT
value embedding       t=ts +1 (I − ηt Ht )∇ℓ(θts ) remains substantial. This results in early-stage data
points maintaining significant influence until the end of training. Figure 7 (a) further illustrates this
phenomenon. The purple curve shows that training data points from the High-impact Warmup Phase,
while experiencing large drops in influence as training progresses, still maintain higher influence than
later data points. This observation aligns with the well-established effect that model initialization
and/or warm-up training plays a crucial role in training performance, effectively initializing model
parameters and gradually preparing the model for more complex learning tasks.
2. Influence saturation from future data. As the model enters a relatively smooth loss regime
(ts > 2000 in Figure 7 (b)), the training data gradient norm decreases much more slowly. In this
                                             QT
phase, the magnitude deflation effect from t=ts (I − ηt Ht ) remains significant for relatively small
ts , while the training gradient norm ∥∇ℓ(θts )∥ does not differ significantly between earlier and later
                                    QT
training points. This results in      t=ts (I − ηt Ht )∇ℓ(θts ) < ∥∇ℓ(θta )∥ for ta > ts , creating a
low-impact basin during the early-to-middle training stage. In this basin, influence scores are lower
than those of data points from both the very early and later training stages. The red curve in Figure 7


                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) demonstrates this trend, showing influence scores for these points gradually decreasing during
training and eventually falling below those of later training data points. This pattern aligns with
the phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting, where the model appears to "forget" the influence of
data from this middle phase as training progresses. One might initially think this phenomenon is
connected to catastrophic forgetting, where the model appears to "forget" the influence of data from
earlier training phases as it progresses. However, we note that a data point’s influence score decreases
the most when future data points are similar to it, which is different from catastrophic forgetting.
Intuitively, if future points are identical, the presence of the earlier data point in training becomes less
relevant to the model’s behavior.
In Figure 7(b), we consider a simplified setting where we approximate Hessian with GGN ma-
trix and assume all trainingPgradients are orthogonal across different iterations. Under these as-
                                                         ⊤
sumptions, Hk ≈ Gk =           z∈Bk ∇ℓ(θk , z)∇ℓ(θk , z) becomes a sum of rank-1 matrices that
have non-overlapping eigenspaces. Given the orthogonality assumption, we have Gt Gs = 0
                                  QT                                     PT
for t ̸= s, and the product t=ts (I − ηt Gt ) simplifies to I − t=ts ηt Gt . Since each
Gt = z∈Bt ∇ℓ(θt , z)∇ℓ(θt , z)⊤ is a sum of rank-1 matrices along orthogonal directions, the
        P
                                                             PT        P                   2
trace of this product can be analytically computed as p − t=ts ηt z∈Bt ∥∇ℓ(θt , z)∥ , where
p is the dimension of parameter space. Furthermore, if we assume ∇ℓ(θts ) follows a Gaussian
                         PT
distribution, then (I − t=ts ηt Gt )∇ℓ(θts ) follows a scaled chi distribution since it’s the norm
of a Gaussian vector after linear transformation by an orthogonal projection matrix. This enables us
to analytically compute its expected value, as shown by the green curve in Figure 7 (b).


Figure 7: (a) (same as Figure 4 in the main paper) Influence scores of data points from different
training stages on intermediate model checkpoints throughout training. The x-axis denotes the number
of training iterations, and the y-axis represents the influence score of selected data points on the
model at each checkpoint. (b) The blue curve shows the average gradient changes as model training
progresses. The orange and green curves are analytical curves under a simplified setting, where the
                                       QT
orange curve is the analytical trace of t=ts (I − ηt Ht ) as ts increases, and the green curve shows
the norm of data value embedding for Gaussian-distributed gradient under this simplified setting.


E.3.2    A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR F IGURE 1 ( B )

In Figure 1(b), we compare different strategies for applying online data selection during model
training. The online selection process identifies high-quality training batches by (1) sampling a
candidate pool of training points with size 2B, where B is the desired batch size, (2) computing
the gradient cosine similarity between each candidate point and a small validation batch (randomly
sampled from the full validation set), and (3) selecting the B points with the highest similarity scores
to form the next training batch. This procedure incurs significant computational overhead, requiring
additional forward and backward passes for similarity computation at each selection step. When not
performing online selection (i.e., during the "random selection" phases), we simply sample training
batches randomly. Notably, the model processes the entire training dataset regardless of the selection
strategy - what varies is only how batches are prioritized during different training phases. The
"Early+Late" strategy applies online selection only during iterations 1-2000 and after iteration 20000,
while using random selection in between. This selective approach achieves 96% of the performance


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


improvement of continuous selection while reducing the computational overhead by more than 5×,
suggesting that precise batch selection is most critical during the early and late training phases.

E.3.3    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
Figure 8 presents additional results on the data influence scores of training data across different stages
of LLM pretraining, using more datasets and model architectures. We observe that the data influence
scores on the final model can consistently be categorized into three distinct regimes throughout
pretraining.
Figure 9 shows the results when using pretrained models downloaded from Huggingface. In this
scenario, the situation diverges across different datasets. Notably, when we continually pretrain on the
Pile dataset, no gradual ascending phase is observed at the end. However, when GPT-2 has already
been pre-trained, continuing pretraining on Wikitext-103 once again exhibits a gradual ascending
phase. This is likely because Wikitext-103 is a relatively small dataset, and fine-tuning it for three
epochs can easily lead to overfitting, as illustrated in Figure 10 (d).


Figure 8: Average data influence scores per training batch, measured against the final model’s loss
where (a) GPT2 trained on 1% of Pile, and (b) GPT2 trained on WikiText-103M for 3 epochs.


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Average data influence scores per training batch, measured against the final model’s loss
where (a) Pretrained GPT2 trained on 1% of Pile, and (b) Pretrained GPT2 trained on WikiText-103M
for 3 epochs.


                              Figure 10: Loss curve for the training.



                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4   Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION

We conduct a qualitative analysis to examine the similarities between a test data point z (val) and the
most valuable data points identified by data value embedding. In this experiment, we set z (val) to be
identical to one of the training data points, making the most similar data point its own repetition. In
data valuation literature, the influence score of a training point on its repetition is usually referred
to as "self-influence" (Koh & Liang, 2017) and is being used to measure memorization (Feldman &
Zhang, 2020). Intuitively, the self-influence should be the highest among all training points.
Figure 11 shows representative results from training GPT-2 on Wikitext-103 over three epochs, where
the test data is about military video game . As observed, for model checkpoints after the 2nd and 3rd
epochs, the test data point’s repetition achieves the highest influence score, as expected. However,
for the model checkpoint after the 1st epoch, the most valuable data points are not the repetition but
rather a similar data about war history . This discrepancy occurs because, during the first epoch of
training, the repetition of the test data point resides in the low-value basin identified in Section 5.3,
resulting in a lower self-influence score as subsequent training progresses. Additionally, we observe
that the influence function may incorrectly identify irrelevant data points as highly influential (e.g.,
the Popular Music completely irrelevant to military video game but being identified as the second
most valuable data), possibly due to its bias towards data points with high gradient norms, as also
noted in Barshan et al. (2020). This limitation underscores the advantages of data value embedding
in providing more accurate and context-aware data influence assessment.


Figure 11: Visualization of (left) the evolution of the top-3 most valuable training data points
identified by data value embedding throughout 3 training epochs and (right) the top-3 most valuable
training data points identified by influence function. We use GPT-2 trained on Wikitext-103, with the
test point being a repetition of a training data point related to a military video game. The common
words between the test and training data are highlighted in orange .


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.5   A BLATION S TUDY: E RROR FROM P ROJECTION D IMENSION

We examine the error introduced by the random projection of gradient vectors, as discussed in
Section 4.2. Specifically, we evaluate the Spearman correlation between data influence scores when
using per-layer projection dimensions in {256, 1024, 2304} and compare these to a larger per-layer
projection dimension of 4096. Since computing the ground truth without projection is infeasible,
we use projection dimension 4096 as a reference point for comparison. Additionally, we compare
our results to LoGRA (Choe et al., 2024), the most efficient current implementation of the influence
function, which also employs random projection to store data attribution information. Due to the
computational and disk storage constraints, these experiments were conducted using GPT-2, trained
on 5% of the Wikitext-103 dataset. The results, shown in Figure 12 (a), indicate that our data value
embedding method achieves a higher Spearman correlation compared to the influence function. While
our results demonstrate a clear advantage, a more in-depth analysis of the observed improvements
would be an interesting direction for future research.


Figure 12: (a) Comparison of Spearman correlation between data influence scores as a function of
projection dimension.


E.6   E XAMPLES OF BAD DATA

To demonstrate Data Value Embedding’s capability in identifying potentially problematic training
examples, we examined the training data points from the Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020) that received
the most negative influence scores under the same experiment settings in Section 5.3. Figure 13 and
14 show these examples and their influence scores.
Our analysis revealed several types of training data that could potentially harm model performance.
First, we find quite a few code-related samples that, while syntactically valid, provide minimal
educational value for language modeling. These include YAML configurations with simple numeric
arrays, raw binary data represented as hexadecimal strings, and pixel-by-pixel image data in array
format. Such examples contain little information about code structure or programming patterns while
introducing noise into the training process.
Beyond code snippets, we found examples of text data that could potentially bias the model’s
learning. For instance, math problems (Figure 13’s last example) that follow identical question
formats could bias the model toward specific phrasings (e.g., "What is . . .") rather than developing
diverse language understanding. We also identified articles that, while containing meaningful content
about important topics like data privacy, suffer from poor formatting with missing punctuation and
paragraph breaks (Figure 14’s second example). Such poorly formatted content, while topically
relevant, could potentially degrade the model’s ability to learn proper text formatting, punctuation
usage, and document structure.


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Influence Score: -0.25

      ██████████████████████████████████
      ████████████████████████████████████
      ██████████████████████████████████████
      ███████████████████████████████████████
      █████████████████████████████████████████
      ███████████████████████████████████████████
      █████████████████████████████████████████████
      ███████████████████████████████████████████████
      ████████████████████████████████████████████████

     Influence Score: -0.15

      \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
      \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
      \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
      \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
      \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
      \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
      \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\
      \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\A Rockefeller Center security worker
      may have to hire his own guard now.

     Influence Score: -0.11
      What is (84/(-49) - 153/630*-5)*2/139?
      -1/139
      Evaluate ((-4)/22 + (-21801)/429)*(-462)/(-1386).
      -17
      Calculate -4*((-8855)/682 + 13).
      -2/31
      -8 + (-6)/(-23 + 1530/66)
      -41
      What is the value of (-79)/(2765/2660) + 7/21*0?
      -76
      Evaluate (2 - 0 - 752/(-96)*-9) + 1050/(-300).
      -72
      What is the value of (-360)/(-344) - (-57 + 139821/2451)?
      1
      What is the value of ((-5)/(-3))/(186/(1180170/(-225)))?
      -47
      Evaluate (-17043)/529 + 13 - -19.
      -5/23
      What is 119*(-64)/(-5440) - (-32)/(-5)?
      -5
      (8 + (-4200)/504)/((-1)/(-1 + 110/108))
      1/162


     Influence Score: -0.079

      Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â
       Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Dona
      ld R. Ross
      Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â
       Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Just
      ice

      Date Submitted:Â Â Â Â Â Â February 22, 2005
      Date Decided:Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â February 23, 2005


Figure 13: Examples of training data from the Pile dataset identified as potentially problematic by
our method, along with their influence scores. The examples include configuration files that provide
minimal learning value for language modeling, as well as repetitive mathematical problems with
identical question formats.


                                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Influence Score: -0.078
      exit $status;
      %YAML:1.0
      x1:
        - 0
        - 4
        - 11
        - -4
        - 24
        - -3
        - -4
        - -7
        - -5
        - -2
        - 8
        - 1
        - -2
        - -5
        - -5
        - -8
        - 2
        - -8


     Influence Score: -0.054

      effectively they can direct them to goods and services that they are likely to buy The more companies know about their users the more competitive they are in the market
      Custom-tailored capitalism is what has made Google Facebook Amazon and others the richest companies in the world This profit incentive has turned big tech into a
      competitive field of mass intelligence gathering The better and more comprehensive the data the higher profits will be But this business model what I consider spying
      machines has enormous potential to violate civil liberties Big tech is already being used abroad to enhance the power of repressive regimes as my work and others has
      shown While it is not presently a direct threat to US democracy I worry that the potential for future abuses exists so long as big tech remains largely unregulated Big
      techs spy machines Current news is rife with examples of data abuses In April NBC News broke a story detailing how Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg had used data gathered
      by the platform to support his friends and defeat his rivals This is not Facebooks first privacy PR nightmare In 2018 data firm Cambridge Analytica used a Facebook app
      to collect data profiles of over 87 million people which was later used to distribute targeted political advertising during elections Facebook is not alone in the data
      collection boom This May it was revealed that Snapchat employees were using the apps data to obtain location data pictures and email addresses without users consent A
      new book by former Harvard business professor Shoshana Zuboff goes into great detail of the practices of what she calls surveillance capitalism Zuboff writes Once we
      searched Google Now Google searches us The practice goes beyond someones taste in music or what they purchase on Amazon Apps created to help people through mental
      illness or quit smoking sell data to big tech companies These users could be potential targets for social stigmatization or targeted advertising that exacerbates heath
      problems rather than solving them In December The New York Times published an exposé on what one can learn about someone using their collated data from apps and
      smartphones By blending location tracking with other online behavior researchers were able to put together a detailed portrait of the most intimate details of users
      lives such as where their children go to school or who was cheating on their diet They could even tell which area of a nuclear power plant an individual worked in
      information that is typically classified Because of these revelations data that big tech collects poses a national security problem One open source researcher used data
      from Strava a fitness app to map US military bases around the world as soldiers tracked their runs Our devices are constantly telling companies where we are and what we
      are doing That is not always a good thing Anton Garin shutterstockcom For the worst-case scenarios look abroad Big tech is a highly unregulated sector of the economy


     Influence Score: -0.054
      the cancer, resulting in higher recurrence rate.1fdac852bf37e58cd7fcac827c4465e2 frame00000000
      c30a05ad45c5164fbce03d62f28a7097 frame00000001
      173e929536b25d8dd375f9edb5df975e frame00000002
      262a928f6e1207d43bdb042011b1df21 frame00000003
      2b3b51176e8e81bb0439f629c1644176 frame00000004
      82ae076eba8f3a9075f8418b2f952bbe frame00000005
      6b8b5b64a2c24a2496a4bde8565ebc94 frame00000006
      2fd5f983139d1c5bca831915aedde5e3 frame00000007
      dd4e895d4325c17a57bce5b6a9b2bcf5 frame00000008
      5a0f59a2d2babc972f7442416ab008e6 frame00000009
      184f8ea4bda4fb25a2a4eb56316d58fe frame00000010
      06b839c9accd10708463b4fccb9658b2 frame00000011
      fc6621eb8173d3dd4ae40f67c2096800 frame00000012
      2c940b5b83a1e886fed3ea2402912fab frame00000013
      32465d0e45fd98f790121acc2ef7adbf frame00000014
      c46a77d7590c7e97c50242e87d80e6ea frame00000015
      f3d886e5d11567a05237079421815ebc frame00000016
      f2f30e564467a020ec37c2daf79f8f48 frame00000017
      f77b9a152fffa8b69e46ae9575ee0edd frame00000018
      343b484a3b963bf1a2e403b6c2854ec9 frame00000019
      d7302b75ed2462bdeef092fc0dc2feeb frame00000020



     Influence Score: -0.047
      int glui_img_checkbox_1_dis[] = {     13, 13,    /* width, height */
          255,255,255, 255,255,255, 255,255,255,      255,255,255, 255,255,255,
          255,255,255, 255,255,255, 255,255,255,      255,255,255, 255,255,255,
          255,255,255, 255,255,255, 255,255,255,      128,128,128, 192,192,192,
          192,192,192, 192,192,192, 192,192,192,      192,192,192, 192,192,192,
          192,192,192, 192,192,192, 192,192,192,      192,192,192, 192,192,192,
          255,255,255, 128,128,128,     64, 64, 64,   192,192,192, 192,192,192,
          192,192,192, 192,192,192, 192,192,192,      192,192,192, 192,192,192,
          192,192,192, 192,192,192, 192,192,192,      255,255,255, 128,128,128,
           64, 64, 64, 192,192,192, 192,192,192,      192,192,192,   64, 64, 64,
          192,192,192, 192,192,192, 192,192,192,      192,192,192, 192,192,192,
          192,192,192, 255,255,255, 128,128,128,       64, 64, 64, 192,192,192,
          192,192,192,   64, 64, 64,    64, 64, 64,    64, 64, 64, 192,192,192,
          192,192,192, 192,192,192, 192,192,192,      192,192,192, 255,255,255,
          128,128,128,   64, 64, 64, 192,192,192,      64, 64, 64,   64, 64, 64,
           64, 64, 64,   64, 64, 64,    64, 64, 64,   192,192,192, 192,192,192,
          192,192,192, 192,192,192, 255,255,255,      128,128,128,   64, 64, 64,
          192,192,192,   64, 64, 64,    64, 64, 64,   192,192,192,   64, 64, 64,
           64, 64, 64,   64, 64, 64, 192,192,192,     192,192,192, 192,192,192,
          255,255,255, 128,128,128,     64, 64, 64,   192,192,192,   64, 64, 64,


Figure 14: Additional examples of training data identified as potentially problematic, showing text
content with poor formatting (missing punctuation and paragraph breaks) and low-information code
snippets with repetitive numeric arrays.


                                                                                        38
