Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING D ISTRIBUTIONS OF C OMPLEX F LUID
S IMULATIONS WITH D IFFUSION G RAPH N ETWORKS
                               Mario Lino1 Tobias Pfaff2          Nils Thuerey1
                       1                                         2
                           Technical University of Munich         Google DeepMind


                                              A BSTRACT
         Physical systems with complex unsteady dynamics, such as fluid flows, are of-
         ten poorly represented by a single mean solution. For many practical applica-
         tions, it is crucial to access the full distribution of possible states, from which
         relevant statistics (e.g., RMS and two-point correlations) can be derived. Here,
         we propose a graph-based latent diffusion (or alternatively, flow-matching) model
         that enables direct sampling of states from their equilibrium distribution, given
         a mesh discretization of the system and its physical parameters. This allows for
         the efficient computation of flow statistics without running long and expensive
         numerical simulations. The graph-based structure enables operations on unstruc-
         tured meshes, which is critical for representing complex geometries with spatially
         localized high gradients, while latent-space diffusion modeling with a multi-scale
         GNN allows for efficient learning and inference of entire distributions of solutions.
         A key finding is that the proposed networks can accurately learn full distributions
         even when trained on incomplete data from relatively short simulations. We apply
         this method to a range of fluid dynamics tasks, such as predicting pressure dis-
         tributions on 3D wing models in turbulent flow, demonstrating both accuracy and
         computational efficiency in challenging scenarios. The ability to directly sample
         accurate solutions, and capturing their diversity from short ground-truth simula-
         tions, is highly promising for complex scientific modeling tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Numerically solving partial differential equations is essential in many scientific and engineering
fields (Karniadakis & Sherwin, 2013), with fluid dynamics being of particular interest across a wide
range of disciplines (Verma et al., 2018; Kochkov et al., 2021). Nevertheless, the high computational
cost often limits the practical application of these methods and the exploration of large parameter
spaces. While advances in deep learning have produced promising surrogate models, these typically
focus on predicting mean flows (Lino et al., 2023) or trajectories (Kim et al., 2019; Stachenfeld
et al., 2021). For long trajectories, such methods often suffer from instability issues (Lippe et al.,
2024). Besides, in many applications, the primary interest is not in individual trajectories or mean
flows but in the statistical properties and probability distributions of unsteady flow fields in statistical
equilibrium (Pope, 2000). For instance, RMS fluctuations must be accounted for in the design of
airfoils or when deciding the relative placement of aerodynamic components (Caros et al., 2022;
Jané-Ippel et al., 2023), and turbulence research inherently revolves around flow field statistics.
While specialized techniques exist for certain applications – such as unsteady Reynolds-averaged
simulations, which approximate the mean flow (Alfonsi, 2009; Pope, 2004) – obtaining accurate
distributions and statistics in the general case still requires extensive, time-consuming simulations.
Often, long simulations are needed, and in turbulent flows, very small time-steps are necessary. Ad-
ditionally, a significant portion of compute time is spent during the warm-up phase, before reaching
statistical equilibrium (Moin & Kim, 1982), and in complex systems, such as weather simulations,
reliable results require running ensembles of perturbed simulations (Maher et al., 2021).
To address this, we leverage a diffusion model that directly learns the distribution of equilibrium
flow states, enabling efficient sampling from the flow state distribution and allowing for the in-
expensive computation of any desired distributional metric. Unlike prevalent grid-based diffusion
models (Song et al., 2021; Lienen et al., 2024), our approach employs a graph-based representation,
operating directly on meshes. This allows for the accurate representation of complex geometries


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the adaptive allocation of resolution (Pfaff et al., 2021) – a crucial advantage for complex 3D
scenarios, which would otherwise require computationally expensive operations on a dense 3D grid.
However, integrating graph neural networks (GNNs) with diffusion models for large systems
presents challenges, particularly due to limitations in the efficiency of message passing for prop-
agating features across the graph, which can hinder global denoising. To address this, we introduce
an efficient multi-scale GNN architecture to model the denoising transitions and propose working
on a compressed latent mesh. Operating in this latent space not only reduces inference time but also
mitigates the introduction of undesired high-frequency noise in the solutions. Additionally, we find
that the underlying distributions can be accurately learned from short simulations, even when these
simulations lack sufficient diversity to fully represent the flow statistics. We demonstrate that our
approach can accurately capture full distributions where other methods, such as Gaussian mixture
models or variational autoencoders (VAEs), suffer from noise and mode collapse. In addition, it
exhibits strong generalization and can be significantly more efficient than numerical simulations.

2    R ELATED WORK
Numerous deep learning algorithms have been proposed to address scientific problems (Guest et al.,
2018; Jumper et al., 2021; Pathak et al., 2022), with fluid flow problems receiving considerable atten-
tion within this field (Morton et al., 2018; Bar-Sinai et al., 2019; Lino et al., 2023). At the same time,
probabilistic models, such as Gaussian mixture models and generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014), have enabled the modeling of probability distributions over plausible
states of physical systems based on collections of system snapshots (Maulik et al., 2020; Drygala
et al., 2022; Kim & Lee, 2020). Recently, denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) have
emerged as a powerful class of probabilistic models, initially applied to image generation (Ho et al.,
2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021), where GANs have struggled to capture the full diversity of the
data distribution (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). These models have found significant utility in physical
modeling as well, with applications such as flow field super-resolution and reconstruction (Shu et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023), uncertainty estimation in under-resolved simulations (Liu & Thuerey, 2024),
and enhancing the long-term stability of autoregressive rollouts (Lippe et al., 2024; Rühling Cachay
et al., 2024; Kohl et al., 2024). More closely related to our work, Gao et al. (2024) and Lienen et al.
(2024) leveraged DDPMs to model the probability distribution of fully-developed flows.
However, most of these studies relied on CNNs to parameterize the denoising process, which gen-
erally restricts system representation to Cartesian grids. GNNs, on the other hand, offer greater
flexibility and allow for the discretization of systems using unstructured meshes (Pfaff et al., 2021;
Lino et al., 2022). While GNNs have shown efficacy in modeling steady and unsteady simulations
involving complex geometries and uneven spatial gradients (Belbute-Peres et al., 2020; Lam et al.,
2023), their use in combination with DDPMs remains relatively unexplored.
Recent efforts have applied DDPMs to graph structures for tasks such as molecule synthesis (Xu
et al., 2022; Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Trippe et al., 2023; Vignac et al., 2023), protein generation
(Wu et al., 2024), and inverse protein folding (Yi et al., 2024). More aligned with our work, Wen
et al. (2023) combined DDPMs and GNNs to forecast the probability distribution of future system
states. Their approach was applied to traffic and air quality prediction, where the system’s evolution
was conditioned on past states and the underlying graph structure. However, their work applied
data compression only along the temporal dimension, neglecting – along with previous work –
spatial compression. As a result, these approaches were restricted to small graphs. In contrast,
our work targets systems with thousands of nodes in both 2D and 3D. This required modeling the
denoising process by multi-scale GNNs. These typically follow a U-Net like architecture (Gao & Ji,
2019), with specialized pooling and unpooling layers (Lino et al., 2022). Additionally, by shifting
the generative problem to a compressed latent space, we let the model focus on more meaningful
features, while any residual noise in the generated samples is reduced when transforming them
back to physical space, unlike previous GNN-based DDPMs. We also address a promising, yet
overlooked, topic: extrapolating the full distribution of system states from incomplete simulations.

3    L EARNING TO S AMPLE FROM D ISTRIBUTIONS OF S IMULATIONS
We propose Diffusion Graph Networks (DGNs), a model that learns the probability distribution
of dynamical states of physical systems, defined by their discretization mesh and their physical

                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a)                                                                                  (b)      Training data vs. learned Std.
                                                           PDF
           transient   statistical equilibrium
             stage              stage
                                                        PDF
                                                                                                           Training
                                                    PDF                              Ground-truth
                                                                                                          data Std.
Y(t)                                                                                     Std.
                                                                         Z1(t)
                                                 PDF for
                              T                   each              Z2(t)
                                                 system
                                                                 Z3(t)                                     LDGN
                        Learn full distribution of i
                                                                                                            Std.
                       states from short trajectories

                                           t
Figure 1: (a) We learn the probability distribution of the systems’ converged states provided only
a short trajectory of length δ << T per system. (b) A preview of our turbulent wing experiment.
The distribution learned by our LDGN model accurately captures the variance of all states (bottom
right), despite seeing only an incomplete distribution for each wing during training (top right).


parameters, by applying the DDPM framework to the mesh nodes. Additionally, we introduce a
second model variant, the Latent DGN (LDGN), which operates in a pre-trained semantic latent
space rather than directly in the physical space.1
We represent the system’s geometry using a mesh with nodes VM and edges EM , where each node
i is located at xi . The system’s state at time t, Y (t), is defined by F continuous fields sampled at
the mesh nodes: Y (t) := {yi (t) ∈ RF | i ∈ VM }, where yi (t) ≡ y(xi , t). Simulators evolve the
system through an infinite sequence of states, Y = {Y (t0 ), Y (t1 ), . . . , Y (tn ), . . . }, starting from
an initial state Y (t0 ). We assume that after an initial transient phase, the system reaches a statistical
equilibrium (see Figure 1a). In this stage, statistical measures of Y , computed over sufficiently
long time intervals, are time-invariant, even if the dynamics display oscillatory or chaotic behavior
(Wilcox, 1998). The states in the equilibrium stage, Z ⊂ Y, depend only on the system’s geometry
and physical parameters, and not on its initial state.
In many engineering applications, such as aerodynamics and structural vibrations, the primary focus
is not on each individual state along the trajectory, but rather on the statistics that characterize the
system’s dynamics (e.g., mean, RMS, two-point correlations). However, simulating a trajectory of
converged states Z long enough to accurately capture these statistics can be very computationally
expensive, especially for real-world problems involving 3D chaotic systems. To address this, we
aim to directly sample converged states Z(t) ∈ Z without simulating the initial transient phase.
Subsequently, we can analyze the system’s dynamics by drawing multiple samples.
Given a dataset of short trajectories from N systems, Z = {Z1 , Z2 , ..., ZN }, our goal is to learn a
probabilistic model of Z that enables sampling of a converged state Z(t) ∈ Z, conditioned on the
system’s mesh, boundary conditions, and physical parameters. Crucially, this model must capture
the underlying probability distributions even when trained on trajectories that are too short to fully
characterize their individual statistics. Although this is an ill-posed problem, we hypothesize that,
given sufficient training trajectories, it is possible to uncover their statistical correlations and shared
patterns, enabling interpolation across the condition space.

3.1          D IFFUSION G RAPH N ETWORKS
We use the DDPM framework (Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) to generate states Z(t)
by denoising a sample Z R ∈ R|VM |×F drawn from an isotropic Gaussian distribution. The system’s
conditional information is encoded in a directed graph G := (V, E), where V ≡ VM and the mesh
edges EM are represented as bi-directional graph edges E. Node attributes Vc = {vic | i ∈ V}
and edge attributes Ec = {ecij | (i, j) ∈ E} encode the conditional features, including the relative
positions between adjacent node, xj − xi . Domain-specific details on the node and edge encodings
can be found in Appendix C and Table 4.
In the diffusion (or forward) process, node features from Z 1 ∈ R|V|×F topZ R ∈ R|V|×F are
generated by sequentially adding Gaussian noise: q(Z r |Z r−1 ) = N (Z r ; 1 − βr Z r−1 , βr I),

       1
           Code is available at https://github.com/tum-pbs/dgn4cfd.


                                                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where βr ∈ (0, 1), and Z 0 ≡ Z(t). Any Z r can be sampled directly via:
                                            √       √
                                   Z r = ᾱr Z 0 + 1 − ᾱr ϵ,                                         (1)
                           Qr
with αr := 1 − βr , ᾱr := s=1 αs and ϵ ∼ N (0, I) (Ho et al., 2020). The denoising process re-
moves noise through learned Gaussian transitions: pθ (Z r−1 |Z r ) = N (Z r−1 ; µr−1
                                                                                  θ     , Σr−1
                                                                                           θ     ), where
the mean and variance are parameterized as (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021):

              1               βr
    µr−1 =  √       Z  r
                         − √        ϵ r
                                          ,   Σ r−1
                                                     = exp    v r
                                                                  log β r + (1 − v r
                                                                                     ) log β̃ r   ,   (2)
     θ
              αr             1 − ᾱr θ          θ               θ                  θ


with β̃r := (1 − ᾱr−1 )/(1 − ᾱr )βr . Here, ϵrθ ∈ R|V|×F predicts the noise ϵ in equation (1), and
vθr ∈ R|V|×F interpolates between the two bounds of the process’ entropy, βr and β̃r .
DGNs predict ϵr−1
              θ    and vθr−1 using a message-passing-based GNN (Battaglia et al., 2018). This
        r
takes Z as input, and it is conditioned on graph G, its node and edge features, and the diffusion
step r:
                            [ϵr−1
                              θ   , vθr−1 ] ← DGNθ (Z r , G, Vc , Ec , r).                    (3)
We train the DGN using the loss function in equation (14). The full denoising process requires R
evaluations of the DGN to transition from Z R to Z 0 , though more efficient sampling techniques
exist (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Song et al., 2021).
The DGN follows the widely used encoder-processor-decoder GNN architecture (Sanchez-
Gonzalez et al., 2020; Pfaff et al., 2021). In addition to the node and edge encoders, our encoder
includes a diffusion-step encoder, which generates a vector remb ∈ RFemb that embeds the diffusion
step r. The node encoder processes the conditional node features vic , alongside remb . Specifically,
the diffusion-step encoder and the node encoder operate as follows:
      remb ← ϕ ◦ L INEAR ◦ S IN E MB(r),   vi ← L INEAR ([ϕ ◦ L INEAR(vic ) | remb ]) ,   ∀i ∈ V,    (4)
where ϕ denotes the activation function and S IN E MB is the sinusoidal embedding function (Vaswani
et al., 2017). The edge encoder applies a linear layer to the conditional edge features ecij . The
encoded node and edge features are RFh -dimensional vectors (Femb = 4 × Fh ). We condition each
message-passing layer on r by projecting remb to an Fh -dimensional space and adding the result to
the node features before each of these layers – i.e., vi ← vi + L INEAR(remb ). Details on message
passing can be found in Appendix B.1.
Previous work on graph-based diffusion models has used sequential message passing to propagate
node features across the graph (Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2023). However, this ap-
proach fails for large-scale fluid flows, such as the ones studied in this paper, as denoising of global
features becomes bottlenecked by the reach of message passing (Section 5). To address this, we
adopt a multi-scale GNN for the processor, applying message passing on G and multiple coarsened
versions of it in a U-Net fashion (Lino et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2023). This design leverages the
U-Net’s effectiveness in removing both high- and low-frequency noise (Si et al., 2023). To obtain
each lower-resolution graph from its higher-resolution counterpart, we use Guillard’s coarsening
algorithm (Guillard, 1993), originally developed for fast mesh coarsening in CFD applications. As
in the conventional U-Net, pooling and unpooling operations, now based on message passing, are
used to transition between higher- and lower-resolution graphs. These operations are detailed in
Appendix B.3.

3.2    L ATENT D IFFUSION G RAPH N ETWORKS

Inspired by latent diffusion models for CNNs (Rombach et al., 2022), we extend the DGN frame-
work to operate in a lower-dimensional graph-based representation that is perceptually equivalent to
Z. This space is defined as the latent space of a Variational Graph Auto-Encoder (VGAE) trained to
reconstruct Z(t). We refer to a DGN trained on this latent space as a Latent DGN (LDGN).
In this configuration, the VGAE captures high-frequency information (e.g., spatial gradients and
small vortices), while the LDGN focuses on modeling mid- to large-scale patterns (e.g., the wake
and vortex street). By decoupling these two tasks, we aim to simplify the generative learning pro-
cess, allowing the LDGN to concentrate on more meaningful latent representations that are less


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: (a) Our VGAE consists of a condition encoder, a (node) encoder, and a (node) decoder.
The multi-scale latent features from the condition encoder serve as conditioning inputs to both the
encoder and the decoder. (b) During LDGN inference, Gaussian noise is sampled in the VGAE
latent space and, after multiple denoising steps conditioned on the low-resolution outputs from the
VGAE’s condition encoder, transformed into the physical space by the VGAE’s decoder.


sensitive to small-scale fluctuations. Additionally, during inference, the VGAE’s decoder helps re-
move residual noise from the samples generated by the LDGN. This approach significantly reduces
sampling costs since the LDGN operates on a smaller graph rather than directly on G.
For our VGAE, we propose an encoder-decoder architecture with an additional condition encoder to
handle conditioning inputs (Figure 2a). The condition encoder processes Vc and Ec , encoding these
into latent node features Vcℓ and edge features Ecℓ across L graphs {G ℓ := (V ℓ , E ℓ ) | 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L},
where G 1 ≡ G and the size of the graphs decreases progressively, i.e., |V 1 | > |V 2 | > · · · >
|V L |. This transformation begins by linearly projecting Vc and Ec to a Fae -dimensional space and
applying two message-passing layers to yield Vc1 and Ec1 . Then, L − 1 encoding blocks are applied
sequentially:
             ℓ+1 ℓ+1
                          ← MP ◦ MP ◦ G RAPH P OOL Vcℓ , Ecℓ , for l = 1, 2, . . . , L − 1,

            Vc , Ec                                                                                (5)
where MP denotes a message-passing layer and G RAPH P OOL denotes a graph-pooling layer (see the
diagram on Figure 9a).
The encoder produces two FL -dimensional vectors for each node i ∈ V L , the mean µi and standard
deviation σi that parametrize a Gaussian distribution over the latent space. It takes as input a state
Z(t), which is linearly projected to a Fae -dimensional vector space and then passed through L −
1 sequential down-sampling blocks (message passing + graph pooling), each conditioned on the
outputs of the condition encoder (Figure 9b):
  V ← G RAPH P OOL ◦ MP ◦ MP V + L INEAR Vcℓ , L INEAR Ecℓ , for l = 1, 2, . . . , L − 1; (6)


and a bottleneck block:
                       V ← MP ◦ MP V + L INEAR VcL , L INEAR EcL .

                                                                                                   (7)
The output features are passed through a node-wise MLP that returns µi and σi for each node
i ∈ V L . The latent variables are then computed as ζi = BATCH N ORM(µi + σi ϵi ), where ϵi ∼
N (0, I). Finally, the decoder mirrors the encoder, employing a symmetric architecture (replacing
graph pooling by graph unpooling layers) to upsample the latent features back to the original graph
G (Figure 9c). Its blocks are also conditioned on the outputs of the condition encoder. The message
passing and the graph pooling and unpooling layers in the VGAE are the same as in the (L)DGN.
The VGAE is trained to reconstruct states Z(t) ∈ Z with a KL-penalty towards a standard normal
distribution on the learned latent space. Once trained, the LDGN can be trained following the ap-
proach in Section 3.1. However, the objective is now to learn the distribution of the latent states
ζ, defined on the coarse graph G L , conditioned on the outputs VcL and EcL from the condition en-
coder. As illustrated in Figure 2b, during inference, the condition encoder generates the conditioning
features Vcℓ and Ecℓ (for l = 1, 2, . . . , L), and after the LDGN completes its denoising steps, the
decoder transforms the generated ζ0 back into the physical feature-space defined on G.
Unlike in conventional VGAEs (Kipf & Welling, 2016), the condition encoder is necessary because,
at inference time, we need an encoding of Vc and Ec on graph G L , where the LDGN operates. This


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Pressure               (b) Flow fields around an Ellipse         (c) Pressure distribution on a wing
          distribution on
          an ellipse


      p(x, y, t)
                                    u(x, y, t)                v(x, y, t)


                                                                                                 wind
                                                 p(x, y, t)                                             p(x, y, z, t)


Figure 3: (L)DGNs can generate diverse states of dynamic mesh-based simulations given the mesh
geometry and simulation parameters. We demonstrate this by learning: (a) the pressure on an ellipse
in 2D laminar flow (E LLIPSE task), (b) the velocity and pressure fields resulting from that flow
(E LLIPSE F LOW task), and (c) the pressure on a wing in 3D turbulent flow (W ING task).


encoding cannot be directly generated by the encoder, as it also requires Z(t) as input, which is
unavailable during inference. An alternative approach would be to define the conditions directly in
the coarse representation of the system provided by G L , but this representation lacks fine-grained
details, leading to sub-optimal results (see Appendix D.3 for details).

4    E XPERIMENTAL D OMAINS
We consider three experimental domains: (i) pressure on the wall of an ellipse in 2D quasi-periodic
laminar flow (E LLIPSE task), (ii) velocity and pressure fields around that ellipse (E LLIPSE F LOW task),
and (iii) pressure on a wing in 3D turbulent flow (W ING task). The E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW data
were adapted from Lino et al. (2022), while the dataset for the W ING task was generated using
Detached Eddy Simulation (DES) with OpenFOAM’s PISO solver.
The E LLIPSE F LOW task involves a canonical fluid dynamics problem: predicting the velocity u and
pressure p fields around an elliptical cylinder (Figure 3b). While this task benefits from spatial refine-
ment near the surface of the ellipse, the E LLIPSE task fully leverages the graph-based representation
by focusing solely on the surface of the immersed object (Figure 3a). The W ING experiments target
wings in 3D turbulent flow, characterized by intricate vortices that spontaneously form and dissipate
on the wing surface (Figure 3c). This task is particularly challenging due to the high-dimensional,
chaotic nature of turbulence and its inherent multi-scale interactions across a wide range of scales.
The geometry of the wings varies in terms of relative thickness, taper ratio, sweep angle, and twist
angle. These simulations are computationally expensive, and using GNNs allows us to concentrate
computational effort on the wing’s surface, avoiding the need for costly volumetric fields. A regular
grid around the wing would require over 105 cells, in contrast to approximately 7,000 nodes for the
surface mesh representation. The surface pressure can be used to determine both the aerodynamic
performance of the wing and its structural requirements. Fast access to the probabilistic distribution
of these quantities would be highly valuable for aerodynamic modeling tasks.

5    R ESULTS
Our main findings indicate that DGNs and LDGNs can generate high-quality fields and accurately
reproduce the distribution of converged states, even when trained on incomplete distributions. Both
models outperformed the baselines – a vanilla GNN, a Bayesian GNN, a Gaussian regression GNN,
a Gaussian mixture GNN, and a VGAE – in terms of sample accuracy and distributional accuracy.
LDGNs showed improvement over DGNs, particularly in distributional accuracy and suppressing
undesired high-frequency noise.
Unless otherwise specified, all models were trained on 10 consecutive states per system for the
E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW domains, and 250 consecutive states (shortly after the data-generating
simulator reached statistical equilibrium) for the W ING domain. For the E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW
domains, this covers approximately 26-48% of the time points required to capture a full vortex-
shedding cycle, while for the W ING domain, it represents about 10% of the time points needed to


                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  (a) LDGN samples and matching G.T.           (b) G.T. and learned PDFs for 10-time-step trainining trajectories

                                                  d


Figure 4: For a system on dataset E LLIPSE -I N D IST, (a) samples from the LDGN and ground truth,
and (b) probability density function from the DGN, LDGN, baseline models, and ground truth. The
DGN and LDGN show the best distributional accuracy.

            (a) Ground truth and predicted u fields              (b) Ground truth and predicted p distribution

          Ground truth


              G.T.                                           Ground
                                                                                          GM-GNN
                                                              truth


                                                                DGN
                                                                                           LDGN


Figure 5: Samples from the DGN, LDGN, baseline models, and ground truth on (a) dataset
E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST, and (b) dataset W ING -T EST. The DGNs and LDGNs achieve the highest
sample accuracy, with the DGNs showing good accuracy but retaining some high-frequency noise.


achieve statistically stationary variance. To assess the performance, we compared to ground-truth
trajectories spanning three complete periods and a time interval long enough to achieve stationary
variance, respectively. To accelerate sampling, we adopted the strategy from Song & Ermon (2020),
which considers only a subset of the denoising steps. We used 50 steps, evenly distributed.
Sample accuracy Visually, the fields generated by our DGNs and LDGN models are faithful to
the ground truth, as can be seen in Figures 4a and 5. In the E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW domains,
it is possible to compare each sampled state with the states from a simulated trajectory and find
its equivalent state (the one with the highest correlation), since these trajectories are smooth and
periodic. For these domains, we report the coefficient of determination (R2 ) between the generated
samples and their ground-truth equivalents as a measure of the models’ sample accuracy. In the
E LLIPSE task, the LDGN achieved the highest accuracy, closely followed by the DGN (Table 5),
and, in the E LLIPSE F LOW task, the DGN was the best performing model, followed by the LDGN
(Table 6).
Although the DGN and LDGN models’ accuracy is comparable, high-frequency noise is evident
in the samples generated by the DGN model (Figure 5). To quantify high-frequency noise, we
computed the graph Fourier transform of the predicted fields and assessed the energy associated
with the 10 highest graph eigenvalues for all systems in the E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST and W ING -T EST
datasets. We found that the DGNs consistently over-estimated high-frequency content in generated
samples, while LDGN samples remained close to the ground truth, with on average 3x reduced high-
frequency error (See Appendix D.4 for detailed numbers). This discrepancy is due to the fact that
DGNs are required to handle high-frequency details directly, whereas LDGNs leverage a VGAE to
transform potentially noisy latent features back to physical space. The VGAE, being robust to noisy
latent features, effectively mitigates such noise.


                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Distributional accuracy High sample accuracy does not necessarily imply that a model is learn-
ing the true distribution. In fact, these properties often conflict. For instance, in VGAEs, the
KL-divergence penalty allows control over whether to prioritize sample quality or mode cover-
age. To evaluate how well models capture the probability distribution of system states, we use the
Wasserstein-2 distance. This metric can be computed in two ways: (i) by treating the distribution at
each node independently and averaging the result across all nodes, or (ii) by considering the joint
distribution across all nodes in the graph. We denote these metrics as W2node and W2graph , respec-
tively. The node-level measure (W2node ) provides insights into how accurately the model estimates
point-wise statistics, such as the mean and standard deviation at each node. However, it does not
penalize inaccurate spatial correlations, whereas the graph-wise measure (W2graph ) does. To ensure
stable results when computing these metrics, the target distribution for the E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE -
F LOW tasks is represented by 60 to 100 consecutive states, depending on the period length, while
the predicted distribution is represented by 200 samples. For the W ING task, the target distribution
is represented by 2,500 consecutive states, and the predicted one by 3,000 samples.
In our experiments, the training trajectories are in-
                                                                      Inferred Std. on a test case
tentionally short. For instance, in the E LLIPSE -T RAIN
and E LLIPSE F LOW-T RAIN datasets, the trajectories are
too short to cover one full oscillation period, meaning                              GM-GNN
                                                               Ground
they do not explicitly provide full statistical informa-        truth                   DGN
                                                                                              GM-GNN


                                                                                                LDGN


tion about the systems. In the W ING -T RAIN dataset,
while the trajectories are long enough to capture the
mean flow, they fall short of capturing the standard          DGN                      LDGN

deviation, spatial correlations, or higher-order statis-
tics. Despite these challenges, the DGN, and espe-
cially the LDGN, are capable of accurately learning Figure 6: The LDGN’s standard deviation
the complete probability distributions of the training is the closest to the ground-truth.
trajectories and accurately generating new distribution
for both in- and out-of-distribution physical settings. This capability is highlighted in Figure 7a,
which shows the probability density function (PDF) for a training trajectory of the E LLIPSE -T RAIN
dataset (top right) and the PDF learned by the LDGN for the same system (bottom right). Similarly,
Figure 1b demonstrates how the LDGN accurately captures the standard deviation across all possible
states (bottom right), even though this information is not provided in the training dataset. This excel-
lent distributional accuracy was likewise observed for test data, Figures 4b and 6. As demonstrated
in Figure 4b, this is a rare property – (L)DGN is the only method which could faithfully represent
the ground-truth distribution, while other methods show either collapse or wrong weighting.
The Wasserstein-2 distances for all datasets are summarized in Tables 7 to 9. The LDGN consis-
tently outperforms other models, followed by the DGN. Experiments in Appendix D.5 suggest that
the ability of the diffusion-based models to learn the full distribution from short trajectories likely
stems from their capacity to recognize common physical patterns across different systems, leverag-
ing this knowledge to enhance its understanding of each individual trajectory. Unlike models that
rely on sampling from a compressed latent space or make assumptions about probability distribu-
tions for parameters or outputs, their gradual denoising approach minimizes overfitting based on
only the training data. This allows them to extrapolate the training trajectories and generalize to new
physical settings more effectively. The LDGN variant outperforms the DGN thanks to learning the
distributions in a more meaningful latent space that is less sensitive to small-scale fluctuations.

Generalization We tested generalization to out-of-distribution Reynolds numbers, ellipse thick-
ness and ellipses rotated by 10-degrees in the E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW tasks. The DGN and LDGN
models generally exhibit good generalization, as shown by their sample and distributional accuracy
in the out-of-distribution datasets, which is comparable to their performance on the in-distribution
datasets (Tables 5 to 8). However, we observed that both types of accuracy degrade as the variance
of the ground-truth trajectories increases, even within the in-distribution datasets, as seen in Fig-
ure 12. This is understandable, as higher diversity of states makes it more difficult for the model to
identify common features among systems that are close in parameter space, thereby affecting sam-
ple quality. Additionally, low-probability states in high-variance trajectories are rarely encountered
during training, and can differ significantly from those in lower-variance trajectories, such as states
of separated flow near the ellipse’s leading edge. As a result, these states may be overlooked by the
models, leading to reduced distributional accuracy.

                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Influence of the number of states per training trajectory A key strength of the DGN and LDGN
models is their ability to learn all possible states of a system from incomplete data. In the E LLIPSE
task, we used 10 consecutive time-steps per training trajectory, while the full periods of these tra-
jectories range from 21 to 38 time-steps. We found that the distributional accuracy of the DGN and
LDGN models is only slightly affected by further reducing the length of the training trajectories,
and, interestingly, this accuracy remains relatively close to the accuracy of training runs with com-
plete periods. This behavior is illustrated in Figure 7b, which shows the W2node and W2graph metrics
for the DGN and LDGN models, as well as for four baseline models, on the E LLIPSE -I N D IST dataset.
In this figure, the darker gray region indicates training trajectories that are always longer than the
oscillation period, while in the lighter gray region at least one trajectory exists that is long enough.
To the left of this area, it can be observed that the W2node of most baselines drops sharply due to the
missing information. In contrast, the DGN and LDGN models are barely affected. It is also worth
noting that the Gaussian mixture model (GM-GNN) achieves the lowest W2node among all models
when trained on long trajectories. However, this baseline does not model spatial correlations, which
explains its consistently high W2graph values.
Computational efficiency Direct comparisons between very different implementations are inher-
ently difficult. Nonetheless, to provide rough estimates of the performance characteristics for our
W ING experimental domain, the ground-truth simulator, running on 8 CPU threads, required 2,989
minutes to simulate the initial transient phase plus 2,500 equilibrium states – sufficient to obtain
a converged variance. In contrast, the LDGN model took only 49 minutes on 8 CPU threads and
2.43 minutes on a single GPU to generate 3,000 samples. If we consider the generation of a single
converged state (for use as an initial condition in another simulator, for example), the speedup is
four orders of magnitude on the CPU and five orders of magnitude on the GPU. Thanks to its latent
space, the LDGN model is not only more accurate, but also 8× faster than the DGN model, while
requiring only about 55% more training time. Performance details are available in Appendix D.1.
This significant efficiency advantage suggests that these models could be particularly valuable in
scenarios where computational costs are otherwise prohibitive.
Multi-scale vs. single-scale DGN A key distinction of our GNN architecture is the use of a
multi-scale GNN, while all previous works applied message passing directly on the input graph
(Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024; Yi et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2023). DDPMs are known
to benefit from hierarchical and global denoising transitions, which enable the model to capture
and process information at multiple spatial resolutions (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Si et al., 2023).
While the previously used single-scale GNNs may suffice for smaller systems, we observed that
they failed on larger systems, such as those in the E LLIPSE F LOW and W ING domains, due to the
limited reach of their receptive field. For a fair comparison to heterogeneous previous work, we have
considered a single-scale version of our DGN (with the same parametrization and hyperparameters).
In the E LLIPSE task (approximately 70 nodes per graph), our proposed four-scale DGN significantly
outperformed its single-scale counterpart in both sample and distributional accuracy, as shown in


Figure 7: (a) The LDGN accurately learns the full probability distribution of the E LLIPSE system
states, despite being trained on short trajectories (10 consecutive snapshots) that do not cover all
possible states. (b) The distributional error of the DGN and LDGN models is not significantly
affected by short training trajectories. They consistently exhibit the lowest W2graph distance.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11 of the appendix. In the E LLIPSE F LOW task (∼2.3k nodes per graph) and the W ING task
(∼6.8k nodes), the single-scale version did not produce feasible solutions (see Figure 15). We
observed that, in the E LLIPSE F LOW task, performance improves as the number of scales is increased
, with the five-scale model yielding the best results, as also shown in Table 11. This model is also
the most computationally efficient, outperforming the two-scale version by 25%.
Comparison to probabilistic baselines We compare to a Bayesian GNN, a Gaussian mixture
model (GM-GNN), a Gaussian regression model (GR-GNN), and a VAE on the E LLIPSE task; to a
GM-GNN and a VAE on the E LLIPSE F LOW task; and to a GM-GNN on the W ING task.
Bayesian GNN: Although the Bayesian GNN provided reasonable predictions for both in- and out-
of-distribution datasets, and achieved higher sample and distributional accuracy than other baselines,
its performance was still substantially inferior to that of the DGN and LDGN models (see Tables 5
and 7). Additionally, the probability distribution of the outputs incorrectly resembles a Gaussian
distribution (Figure 5). Another significant drawback is its high training cost (approximately 8
times slower than the DGN training), making it impractical for larger physical systems.
Gaussian Mixture Model: The GM-GNN represents a learned distribution as a combination of mul-
tiple Gaussian distributions. For each node it provides the mean, variance, and weight characterizing
each Gaussian distribution. Once the trained GNN is evaluated for a given conditional input, sam-
pling is efficient. However, since it is performed independently for each node, the resulting samples
are spatially discontinuous (Figure 5) and fail to represent the underlying distribution (Figure 4b).
This leads to low sample accuracy (Tables 5 and 6) and a high W2graph (Tables 7 to 9). Interestingly,
in the E LLIPSE task, the GM-GNN outperforms the DGN and LDGN models in terms of W2node , a
metric that does not penalize discontinuous samples, when trained on complete trajectories (grey
region in Figure 7b). However, when trained on shorter trajectories, its performance clearly deteri-
orates (white region in Figure 7b). This suggests that the GM-GNN is less capable at learning the
shared physical features across different systems. In comparison, the DGN and LDGN models are
much better suited for learning from partial distributions, which is especially relevant for 3D chaotic
systems due to the high cost of data generation. We also considered the GR-GNN as a special case
of the GM-GNN. It represents the learned distribution as a single Gaussian. However, it generally
exhibited a worse performance than the GM-GNN.
Variational Autoencoder: Finally, a VGAE was also considered as a baseline model. This model
mirrors the architecture of the VGAE proposed for the LDGN (Section 3.2). but with the number
of message-passing and graph-pooling layers matching the totals used in the (L)DGN models. This
baseline achieved a sample accuracy closer to that of the DGN and LDGN models (Tables 5 and
6). In the E LLIPSE task, it successfully learned the distribution of states when trained on short
trajectories (Figures 4b and 7b). However, in the more complex E LLIPSE F LOW task, it suffered from
mode collapse despite careful selection of the latent space size and the KL penalty (Table 8). We
believe that training on short trajectories caused the decoder to become overly dependent on the
input conditions rather than on the latent features. In contrast, the VGAE in the LDGN models did
not encounter this issue, as their latent space is less compressed.

6   C ONCLUSIONS
We have introduced physical- and latent-space graph-based diffusion models that enable direct sam-
pling of physical states in large, geometrically complex dynamical systems from their equilibrium
distribution. This approach allows for the efficient computation of flow statistics without the need for
long and expensive numerical simulations. Our latent-space model produces high-quality solutions
without undesired high-frequency noise in a fraction of the time compared to the physical-space
model. Notably, it accurately learns full distributions even when trained on incomplete data from
short simulations, marking an important step towards more efficient probabilistic modeling. How-
ever, our method has limitations that suggest interesting directions for future work. For example,
the samples produced by our method are not temporally correlated, and it would be valuable to ex-
tend the model with temporal conditioning. Additionally, incorporating physical constraints (e.g.,
through guidance) could further improve the quality of the generated solutions (Huang et al., 2024;
Lino et al., 2024). Another promising direction is improving sampling speed, which could poten-
tially be achieved through flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023) – see Appendix D.7. Despite these
challenges, we believe our work represents a significant step towards leveraging diffusion models in
real-world engineering applications.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
M.L. and N.T. acknowledge the support of the European Research Council (ERC) Consolidator
Grant SpaTe (No. CoG-2019-863850). The authors gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for
Supercomputing e.V. (www.gauss-centre.eu) for providing computing time on the GCS Supercom-
puter SuperMUC at the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (www.lrz.de). M.L. also expresses gratitude
to Qiang Liu for his valuable advice and discussions on diffusion models.

R EFERENCES
Giancarlo Alfonsi. Reynolds-averaged navier-stokes equations for turbulence modeling. Applied
  Mechanics Reviews, 62(4):040802, 2009.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Yohai Bar-Sinai, Stephan Hoyer, Jason Hickey, and Michael P Brenner. Learning data-driven dis-
  cretizations for partial differential equations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  116(31):15344–15349, 2019.
Peter W Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Lai, Danilo Rezende, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Inter-
  action networks for learning about objects, relations and physics. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 37, 2016.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al.
  Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv:1806.01261, 2018.
Filipe de Avila Belbute-Peres, Thomas D. Economon, and J. Zico Kolter. Combining differentiable
   PDE solvers and graph neural networks for fluid flow prediction. In Proceedings of the 37th
   International Conference on Machine Learning ICML 2020, 2020.
Chris D Cantwell, David Moxey, Andrew Comerford, Alessandro Bolis, Gabriele Rocco, Gianmarco
  Mengaldo, Daniele De Grazia, Sergey Yakovlev, J-E Lombard, Dirk Ekelschot, et al. Nektar++:
  An open-source spectral/hp element framework. Computer physics communications, 192:205–
  219, 2015.
Yadi Cao, Menglei Chai, Minchen Li, and Chenfanfu Jiang. Efficient learning of mesh-based phys-
  ical simulation with bi-stride multi-scale graph neural network. In Proceedings of the 40th Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3541–3558. PMLR, 2023.
Lidia Caros, Oliver Buxton, Tsuyoshi Shigeta, Takayuki Nagata, Taku Nonomura, Keisuke Asai,
  and Peter Vincent. Direct numerical simulation of flow over a triangular airfoil under martian
  conditions. AIAA Journal, 60(7):3961–3972, 2022. doi: 10.2514/1.J061454.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Claudia Drygala, Benjamin Winhart, Francesca di Mare, and Hanno Gottschalk. Generative model-
  ing of turbulence. Physics of Fluids, 34(3), 2022.
Meire Fortunato, Tobias Pfaff, Peter Wirnsberger, Alexander Pritzel, and Peter Battaglia. Multiscale
 MeshGraphNets. In ICML 2022 Workshop on AI for Science, 2022.
Han Gao, Xu Han, Xiantao Fan, Luning Sun, Li-Ping Liu, Lian Duan, and Jian-Xun Wang. Bayesian
  conditional diffusion models for versatile spatiotemporal turbulence generation. Computer Meth-
  ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 427:117023, 2024.
Hongyang Gao and Shuiwang Ji. Graph U-Nets. In Proceedings of the 36th International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 2083–2092. PMLR, 2019.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networs. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 27, 2014.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dan Guest, Kyle Cranmer, and Daniel Whiteson. Deep learning and its application to lhc physics.
  Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science, 68(1):161–181, 2018.
Hervé Guillard. Node-nested multi-grid method with Delaunay coarsening. Technical report, IN-
  RIA, 1993.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Emiel Hoogeboom, Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Clément Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant dif-
  fusion for molecule generation in 3D. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8867–8887. PMLR, 2022.
Jiahe Huang, Guandao Yang, Zichen Wang, and Jeong Joon Park. DiffusionPDE: Generative PDE-
   Solving Under Partial Observation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17763, 2024.
C Jané-Ippel, N Bempedelis, R Palacios, and S Laizet. High-fidelity simulations of wake-to-wake
  interaction in an atmospheric boundary layer over a complex terrain. In Journal of Physics:
  Conference Series, volume 2505, pp. 012033. IOP Publishing, 2023.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Zidek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
George Karniadakis and Spencer Sherwin. Spectral/hp element methods for computational fluid
  dynamics. Oxford University Press, 2013.
Byungsoo Kim, Vinicius C Azevedo, Nils Thuerey, Theodore Kim, Markus Gross, and Barbara
  Solenthaler. Deep fluids: A generative network for parameterized fluid simulations. In Computer
  Graphics Forum. Wiley Online Library, 2019.
Junhyuk Kim and Changhoon Lee. Deep unsupervised learning of turbulence for inflow generation
  at various reynolds numbers. Journal of Computational Physics, 406:109216, 2020.
Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Variational dropout and the local reparameteri-
  zation trick. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling.             Variational Graph Auto-Encoders.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1611.07308, 2016.
Günter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, and Sepp Hochreiter. Self-normalizing
  neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Dmitrii Kochkov, Jamie A Smith, Ayya Alieva, Qing Wang, Michael P Brenner, and Stephan
 Hoyer. Machine learning–accelerated computational fluid dynamics. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences, 118(21):e2101784118, 2021.
Georg Kohl, Li-Wei Chen, and Nils Thuerey. Turbulent flow simulation using autoregressive condi-
  tional diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01745, 2024.
Remi Lam, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Matthew Willson, Peter Wirnsberger, Meire Fortunato, Fer-
  ran Alet, Suman Ravuri, Timo Ewalds, Zach Eaton-Rosen, Weihua Hu, et al. Learning skillful
  medium-range global weather forecasting. Science, 382(6677):1416–1421, 2023.
Tianyi Li, Alessandra S Lanotte, Michele Buzzicotti, Fabio Bonaccorso, and Luca Biferale. Multi-
  scale reconstruction of turbulent rotating flows with generative diffusion models. Atmosphere, 15
  (1):60, 2023.
Marten Lienen, David Lüdke, Jan Hansen-Palmus, and Stephan Günnemann. From zero to tur-
 bulence: Generative modeling for 3d flow simulation. In Proceedings of the 12th International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Mario Lino, Stathi Fotiadis, Anil A Bharath, and Chris D Cantwell. Multi-scale rotation-equivariant
 graph neural networks for unsteady eulerian fluid dynamics. Physics of Fluids, 34(8), 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mario Lino, Stathi Fotiadis, Anil A Bharath, and Chris D Cantwell. Current and emerging deep-
 learning methods for the simulation of fluid dynamics. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 479
 (2275):20230058, 2023.
Mario Lino, Tobias Pfaff, and Nils Thuerey. SE(3)-Equivariant Diffusion Graph Nets: Synthesizing
 Flow Fields by Denoising Invariant Latents on Graphs. In ICML 2024 AI for Science Workshop,
 2024.
Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow match-
  ing for generative modeling. In In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Phillip Lippe, Bas Veeling, Paris Perdikaris, Richard Turner, and Johannes Brandstetter. Pde-refiner:
  Achieving accurate long rollouts with neural pde solvers. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 36, 2024.
Qiang Liu and Nils Thuerey. Uncertainty-aware surrogate models for airfoil flow simulations with
  denoising diffusion probabilistic models. AIAA Journal, pp. 1–22, 2024.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Nicola Maher, Sebastian Milinski, and Ralf Ludwig. Large ensemble climate model simulations:
  introduction, overview, and future prospects for utilising multiple types of large ensemble. Earth
  System Dynamics, 12(2):401–418, 2021.
Romit Maulik, Kai Fukami, Nesar Ramachandra, Koji Fukagata, and Kunihiko Taira. Probabilistic
  neural networks for fluid flow surrogate modeling and data recovery. Physical Review Fluids, 5
  (10):104401, 2020.
Parviz Moin and John Kim. Numerical investigation of turbulent channel flow. Journal of fluid
  mechanics, 118:341–377, 1982.
Jeremy Morton, Antony Jameson, Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Freddie Witherden. Deep dynamical
   modeling and control of unsteady fluid flows. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 2018.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
OpenFOAM Foundation. OpenFOAM version 10, 2022. URL https://www.openfoam.com.
Jaideep Pathak, Shashank Subramanian, Peter Harrington, Sanjeev Raja, Ashesh Chattopadhyay,
   Morteza Mardani, Thorsten Kurth, David Hall, Zongyi Li, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, et al. Four-
   castnet: A global data-driven high-resolution weather model using adaptive fourier neural opera-
   tors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11214, 2022.
Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter W. Battaglia. Learning mesh-
  based simulation with graph networks. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR 2021), 2021.
S. B. Pope. Ten questions concerning the large-eddy simulation of turbulent flows. New journal of
   Physics, 6(1):35, 2004.
Stephen B Pope. Turbulent flows. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Medical image com-
  puting and computer-assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Salva Rühling Cachay, Bo Zhao, Hailey Joren, and Rose Yu. Dyffusion: A dynamics-informed
  diffusion model for spatiotemporal forecasting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 36, 2024.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Dule Shu, Zijie Li, and Amir Barati Farimani. A physics-informed diffusion model for high-fidelity
  flow field reconstruction. Journal of Computational Physics, 478:111972, 2023.
Chenyang Si, Ziqi Huang, Yuming Jiang, and Ziwei Liu. Freeu: Free lunch in diffusion u-net. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2309.11497, 2023.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Pro-
   ceedings of the 9th International Conference on Learning Representatiovns, 2021.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Improved techniques for training score-based generative models.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:12438–12448, 2020.
Kimberly Stachenfeld, Drummond B Fielding, Dmitrii Kochkov, Miles Cranmer, Tobias Pfaff,
  Jonathan Godwin, Can Cui, Shirley Ho, Peter Battaglia, and Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez. Learned
  coarse models for efficient turbulence simulation. arXiv:2112.15275, 2021.
Brian L Trippe, Jason Yim, Doug Tischer, David Baker, Tamara Broderick, Regina Barzilay, and
  Tommi S Jaakkola. Diffusion Probabilistic Modeling of Protein Backbones in 3D for the motif-
  scaffolding problem. In In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Siddhartha Verma, Guido Novati, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Efficient collective swimming by
  harnessing vortices through deep reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 115(23):5849–5854, 2018. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1800923115.
Clément Vignac, Igor Krawczuk, Antoine Siraudin, Bohan Wang, Volkan Cevher, and Pascal
  Frossard. Digress: Discrete denoising diffusion for graph generation. In Proceedings of the
  11th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Haomin Wen, Youfang Lin, Yutong Xia, Huaiyu Wan, Qingsong Wen, Roger Zimmermann, and
  Yuxuan Liang. DiffSTG: Probabilistic spatio-temporal graph forecasting with denoising diffusion
  models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Advances in Geographic
  Information Systems, pp. 1–12, 2023.
DC Wilcox. Turbulence Modeling for CFD. DCW industries, La Canada, 1998.
Kevin E Wu, Kevin K Yang, Rianne van den Berg, Sarah Alamdari, James Y Zou, Alex X Lu, and
  Ava P Amini. Protein structure generation via folding diffusion. Nature communications, 15(1):
  1059, 2024.
Minkai Xu, Lantao Yu, Yang Song, Chence Shi, Stefano Ermon, and Jian Tang. GeoDiff: A Geo-
 metric Diffusion Model for Molecular Conformation Generation. In In Proceedings of the 10th
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Kai Yi, Bingxin Zhou, Yiqing Shen, Pietro Liò, and Yuguang Wang. Graph denoising diffusion for
  inverse protein folding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     D ENOISING D IFFUSION P ROBABILISTIC M ODELS (DDPM S )
DDPMs can learn to synthesise a sample z 0 from a data distribution q(z 0 ) by progressively denois-
ing a sample z R drawn from an isotropic Gaussian distribution (Song & Ermon, 2020; Ho et al.,
2020). This denoising process mirrors the inverse of a fixed Markov chain of length R, known as the
forward process, and it consists of R denoising steps. The forward (or diffusion) process produces
variables z 1 through z R by sequentially injecting them with Gaussian noise:
                                                       p
                             q(z r |z r−1 ) := N (z r ; 1 − βt z r−1 , βr I),                    (8)
where βr ∈ (0, 1). Thanks to the reparametrization trick (Kingma et al., 2015), it is possible to
shortcut in the forward process and directly sample z r , at any diffusion step r, according to
                                                     √
                              q(z r |z 0 ) = N (z r ; ᾱr z 0 , (1 − ᾱr )I),                   (9)
this is,                                   √        √
                                    z r = ᾱr z 0 + 1 − ᾱr ϵ.                                 (10)
                                Qr
Here, αr := 1 − βr , ᾱr := s=1 αs and ϵ ∼ N (0, I) (Ho et al., 2020). If R is large enough and
the β-schedule is selected properly, the forward process leads to z R (nearly) following a Gaussian
distribution. Typical values for R are around thousands, and linear and cosine β-schedules are the
most common (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021).
Given the data distribution q(z 0 ), the transitions of the reverse (or denoising) process q(z r−1 |z r )
can be approximated using a neural network parametrised by θ,
                           pθ (z r−1 |z r ) := N (z r ; µθ (z r , r), Σθ (z r , r)) .                  (11)
                          r
Although the mean µθ (z , r) could be parametrised in several ways, Ho et al. (2020) found best to
first predict the noise ϵ with the neural network and then compute µθ (z r , r) according to

                                           1             βr
                           µθ (z r , r) = √      zr − √         ϵθ (z r , r) .               (12)
                                            αr          1 − ᾱr
To simplify training, Ho et al. (2020) avoided learning the variance and fixed it to Σθ (z r , r) = σr2 I,
with either
                          σr2 = β or σr2 = β̃r = (1 − ᾱr−1 )/(1 − ᾱr )βr ,
which correspond to the upper and lower bounds on the reverse process entropy, respectively. Fol-
lowing Nichol & Dhariwal (2021), we opt to parameterise Σθ (z r , r) as an interpolation between the
lower, β̃r , and upper, βr , bounds on the reverse process entropy in the log domain:
                                                      r                   r
                              Σθ (z r , r) = evθ (z ,r) log βr +(1−vθ (z ,r)) log β̃r ,                (13)

where vθ (z r , r) is predicted by the neural network. Nichol & Dhariwal (2021) demonstrated that
learning Σθ (z r , r) improved the likelihood of DDPMs and reduced the number of diffusion steps re-
quired for sampling from the learned q(z 0 ) distribution at inference, which we considered especially
relevant for flow field synthesis due to the time constraints in design optimisation tasks.
To train a network to approximate ϵθ (z r , r) and vθ (z r , r), we minimise the loss function L, defined
as the sum of two terms:
                                       L = Lsimple + λvlb Lvlb ,                                     (14)
where Lsimple and Lvlb are defined as
                               Lsimple = Er,z0 ,ϵ ||ϵ − ϵθ (z r , r)||2 ,

                                                                                                     (15)
                                                T
                                                X
               Lvlb = − log pθ (z 0 |z 1 ) +          DKL q(z t−1 |z t , z 0 ) || pθ (z t−1 |z t ) .

                                                  2
The term Lvlb represents the variational lower bound. Its first term is the negative log-likelihood of a
Gaussian distribution, while the remaining terms are the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between
two Gaussians. The gradients of ϵθ (z r , r) are only backpropagated through Lsimple , whereas the
Lvlb term is used to optimise vθ (z r , r). This training strategy was proposed by Nichol & Dhariwal
(2021) and has also been proven successful in subsequent work Dhariwal & Nichol (2021).
To reduce gradient noise, we employ importance sampling and dynamically weight each loss term
based on the loss history (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021).


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     A DDITIONAL M ODEL D ETAILS
The implementation of our models and baselines, including their weights, and demonstration scripts
are available at https://github.com/tum-pbs/dgn4cfd.

B.1   (L)DGN A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING

The message-passing layers in the (L)DGN’s processor follow the general framework described
in Battaglia et al. (2016) and Battaglia et al. (2018). The edge- and node-update functions are
modeled by MLPs with one hidden layer, containing Fh neurons, and with Fh output features. Their
activation functions are SELU functions with their standard parameters (Klambauer et al., 2017) –
as are all the activations in the model. These MLPs are preceded by layer normalization (Ba et al.,
2016). Specifically, the edge-update, edge-aggregation, and node-update steps are as follows:
                       eij ← We eij + MLPe (LN ([eij |vi |vj ])) , ∀(i, j) ∈ E,               (16)
                               X
                        ēj ←      eij ,                           ∀j ∈ V,                    (17)
                           i∈Nj−

                     vj ← Wv vj + MLPv (LN ([ēj |vj ])) ,           ∀j ∈ V,                    (18)
The (L)DGN processes information at L length scales by creating lower-resolution graphs and prop-
agating the node and edge features across them. These low-resolution graphs have fewer nodes and
edges than the original mesh graph, allowing a single message-passing layer to propagate attributes
over longer distances more efficiently. In the (L)DGN’s processor, information is first distributed
and processed in the high-resolution graph through two sequential message-passing layers. It is then
passed to the immediately lower-resolution graph via graph pooling (equations (21) and (20)), and,
here, the features are again processed through two message-passing layers. This process is repeated
L − 1 times in total. Once the lowest-resolution features are processed at G L , they are passed back
to the scale immediately above through a graph-unpooling layer (equation (22)), which also takes
as input the node-feature values at this scale. The features are successively passed through pairs of
message-passing layers and unpooling layers until the information is processed again at the original
mesh graph.
For a fair comparison all DGN, LDGN and baselines models in Appendices B.5, D.2 and D.3,
trained for the same task, follow a similar architecture, with the same number of message-passing
layers and a comparable number of weights. In the E LLIPSE task, all models operate across 4 levels
of resolution (14 message-passing layer in total) and have approximately 3.5M parameters. In the
E LLIPSE F LOW task, they span 5 levels of resolution (18 message-passing layer in total) and have
4.5M parameters, while in the W ING task, they cover 6 levels of resolution (22 message-passing
layer in total) with 5.5M parameters. In the LDGN models, the VGAE applies two graph-pooling
layers before denoising (Figure 8), and the denoising model applies the remaining graph-pooling
layers until the target resolution is achieved. In the E LLIPSE task (1D meshes), this VGAE provides
approximately 4-fold compression, whereas in the E LLIPSE F LOW and W ING tasks (2D meshes), it
roughly offers a 16-fold compression.

                                      2x graph pooling in VGAE


                       physical-space mesh                   latent-space mesh

Figure 8: In our experiments, the LDGN models are applied to the latent space of two-scale VGAEs.

The DGN and LDGN models were trained using the node-wise mean of the loss function described
in equation (14). To reduce gradient noise and improve training stability, we employed the impor-


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tance sampling technique from Nichol & Dhariwal (2021). During each training epoch, a single
state was sampled from each training trajectory.
The initial learning rate was set to 10−4 and was reduced by a factor of 10 when the training loss
plateaued for n consecutive epochs. In the E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW tasks, we used n = 50,
while in the W ING task, n was set to 250 due to the shorter length of the training dataset. Training
continued until the learning rate reached 10−8 . This training strategy was consistently applied to
both the DGN, LDGN, and baseline models.

B.2   VGAE A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING

The LDGN’s VGAE consists of a condition encoder, a node encoder, and a node decoder, as illus-
trated in Figure 9 and outlined in Section 3.2. It was trained to reconstruct the input node features
with a low-weighted KL term between the latent distribution of each node, ζi , and a standard normal
distribution:
                                                                                           !
                  1 X            ′ 2      −6          1 X                 2
                                                                                 2     2

       LVGAE =          ||zi − zi || + 10 × −                  1 + log σi − µi − σi              (19)
                 |V|                                2|V|
                     i∈V                                   i∈V


Figure 9: Diagram of the VGAE architecture. It consist of (a) a condition encoder, (b) a node
encoder, and (c) a node decoder.

B.3   G RAPH P OOLING AND U NPOOLING

Our DGN, LDGN, and baseline models (except for the VGAE, since there are no skip connections
between the encoder and decoder branches) follow a U-Net-like architecture (Ronneberger et al.,
2015), where message passing is applied across L levels of resolution (Gao & Ji, 2019; Lino et al.,
2022; Fortunato et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2023). Thus, in addition to the primal graph, G := (V, E),
L − 1 lower-resolution graphs are employed. Here, for each resolution level ℓ from 2 to L, we
denote their graphs as G ℓ := (V ℓ , E ℓ ), while the primal graph is denoted as G ≡ G 1 := (V 1 , E 1 ).
To generate each lower-resolution graph Gℓ , we apply Guillard’s coarsening algorithm (Guillard,
1993), originally developed for multi-grid methods in CFD. This algorithm removes a subset of
nodes from the input mesh (or bi-directional graph) as outlined in Algorithm 1. For 1D meshes, the
compression ratio is approximately two, and for 2D meshes, around four.
Unlike the methods in Gao & Ji (2019) and Lino et al. (2022), our coarsening approach preserves
the original relative distribution of nodes in the coarser graphs. Furthermore, for the W ING task,
the voxel-grid coarsening used in Lino et al. (2022) introduces new nodes and edges that do not lie
on the W ING surface. In contrast, Guillard’s coarsening ensures that the coarser nodes and edges
remain strictly on the Wing surface, thereby avoiding undesired connections between nodes that
may be spatially close in the world-space but distant in the mesh-space (e.g., a pair of nodes located
on the upper and lower surfaces of the Wing). Additionally, unlike the method in Fortunato et al.
(2022), our approach operates automatically without relying on an external mesh generator. Another
valid and similar alternative could have been bi-stride pooling (Cao et al., 2023).
In our implementation, once V ℓ+1 ⊂ V ℓ is obtained from G ℓ , each node i ∈ V ℓ is assigned a
parent node j ∈ V ℓ+1 , denoted as Pi . Each node i is assigned to the parent node that is the fewest


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Guillard’s coarsening algorithm (Guillard, 1993)
 1: mask ← ones(|V ℓ |)                                                     ▷ Vector of size |V ℓ | filled with ones
 2: for node i ∈ V ℓ do                                                                   ▷ Iterate node-by-node
 3:     if mask[i] = 1 then                              ▷ If first visit to node i then this node is not dropped
 4:         for node j ∈ Ni− do
 5:             mask[j] ← 0                                           ▷ The incoming neighbours are dropped
 6:         end for
 7:     end if
 8: end for
 9: V ℓ+1 ← V ℓ [mask]



hops away. If multiple candidates are equidistant, the parent node is chosen based on the smallest
Euclidean distance. Nodes that share the same parent node j ∈ V ℓ+1 are referred to as its child
nodes, denoted by Chj ⊂ V ℓ . The set of edges E ℓ+1 is constructed to preserve the connectivity of
the child nodes in V ℓ . Specifically, there is an edge from i ∈ V ℓ+1 to j ∈ V ℓ+1 if at least one edge
exists between their child nodes in V ℓ . All these operations are performed as pre-processing steps
and do not occur during model evaluation.
To implement a U-Net-like architecture, we use graph pooling and unpooling to transition between
higher and lower-resolution graphs. Following Lino et al. (2022) and Fortunato et al. (2022), both
pooling and unpooling operations are based on message passing.

Graph pooling Graph pooling from V ℓ to V ℓ+1 is performed by message passing from each node
i ∈ Chj to its parent node j ∈ V ℓ+1 , following equation (20). Edge features E ℓ+1 are assigned via
linear projection of the relative positions between parent nodes, as shown in equation (21).

                         X
                 vj ←           MLP (LN ([Linear(xj − xi )|vi ])) ,         ∀j ∈ V ℓ+1 ,                      (20)
                        i∈Chj

                ejk ← Linear(xj − xk ),                                     ∀(j, k) ∈ E ℓ+1 .                 (21)


Graph unpooling Similarly, graph unpooling from V ℓ to V ℓ−1 is performed by message passing
to each node i ∈ V ℓ−1 from its parent node Pi ⊂ V ℓ , as defined in equation (22):

            vi ← MLP (LN ([Linear(xi − xj )|vj |vi ])) ,           ∀i ∈ V ℓ−1      and     j = Pi .           (22)

The features of E ℓ−1 come via a skip connection from the encoder branch, just before the graph-
pooling layer from V ℓ−1 to V ℓ is applied.

B.4   T REATMENT OF D IRICHLET B OUNDARY C ONDITIONS

In the E LLIPSE F LOW task, the velocity values at the inlet and on the ellipse wall are known a
priori, defining Dirichlet boundary conditions. To ensure that these boundary conditions are ex-
actly satisfied in the DGN’s samples, we apply deterministic diffusion transitions to the nodes on
these boundaries.
        √            Specifically, for boundary nodes, we propagate the values deterministically as
vir := αr vir−1 , and instead of learning their denoising transitions, we directly reverse the diffu-
                                   √
sion process, using vir−1 := vir / αr .
During training, the loss function is not evaluated at these boundary nodes, and during inference,
their noisy node features are sampled
                               √       not from a Gaussian distribution but are instead assigned their
”diffused” values, i.e., viR := ᾱR vi0 . While more sophisticated methods exist for handling bound-
ary conditions, such as those proposed by Lugmayr et al. (2022), our approach remains efficient and
straightforward.
In the LDGN and baseline models, we directly replace the output at these boundary nodes with their
right values.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 1: Model size and hyper-parameters

             Task             Model         # Parameters   Fh     Femb   Fae    FL    # Scales
                              DGN             3.51 M       128    512     –      –       4
                              LDGN            3.52 M       128    512    126     1      2+2
                           Vanilla GNN        3.53 M       154     –      –      –       4
           E LLIPSE       Bayesian GNN        3.56 M       138     –      –      –       4
                            GR-GNN            3.52 M       154     –      –      –       4
                            GM-GNN            3.53 M       154     –      –      –       4
                              VGAE            3.48 M       124     –      –      4       4
                              DGN             4.50 M       128    512     –      –       5
                              LDGN            4.51 M       128    512    126     1      2+3
        E LLIPSE F LOW     Vanilla GNN        4.50 M       153     –      –      –       5
                            GM-GNN            4.50 M       153     –      –      –       5
                              VGAE            4.51 M       126     –      –     32       5
                              DGN             5.48 M       128    512     –      –       6
            W ING             LDGN            5.49 M       128    512    126     1      2+4
                            GM-GNN            5.45 M       152     –      –      –       6



B.5   BASELINE D ETAILS

We compared the DGN and LDGN models with several GNN-based probabilistic baseline models:
a Vanilla GNN, a Bayesian GNN, a Gaussian Regression GNN, a Gaussian Mixture GNN, and a
VGAE. Details on these baselines are provided below.

Vanilla GNN The so-called Vanilla GNN is a deterministic GNN that mirrors the architecture of
the DGN, except for the absence of the diffusion-step encoder and the remb conditioning layers. It
takes the conditioning features Vc and Ec as input and returns constant (for the given conditions)
node features, zi′ , which represent the mean learned from the training data. It was trained to maxi-
mize the expected data, this is
                                                1 X
                                    Lvanilla =        ||zi − zi′ ||2 ,                           (23)
                                               |V|
                                                  i∈V
where zi are the states sampled from the training trajectories. Vanilla GNNs were trained for the
E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW tasks. Since it was trained on short trajectories (10 snapshots per trajec-
tory), its predictions resembles a single state rather than the mean of the complete distribution. This
explains the relatively high sample accuracy of these models, while their distributional accuracy is,
of course, low (Tables 5 to 8).

Bayesian GNN In Bayesian neural networks, prediction variability arises from modeling the pa-
rameters as random variables with associated probability distributions. We compared our DGN and
LDGN models to a Bayesian GNN on the E LLIPSE task. To train the Bayesian GNN efficiently,
we used variational inference and approximated the posterior distribution of the parameters with a
Gaussian. The architecture of the Bayesian GNN mirrors that of the DGN, except for the absence
of the diffusion-step encoder and the remb conditioning layers. During training, we maximized the
Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), assuming a Gaussian prior distribution over the parameters. We
performed a grid search to find the optimal weight for the KL-divergence term in the ELBO loss
(Liu & Thuerey, 2024), which was determined to be 0.1 for maximizing distributional accuracy on
the E LLIPSE -I N D IST dataset.
Gaussian Mixture GNN (GM-GNN) A Gaussian mixture model (GMM) represents a learned
distribution as a combination of multiple Gaussian distributions (Maulik et al., 2020). Its architec-
ture mirrors that of the DGN. Through grid search, we selected three Gaussian components for the


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW tasks, and five components for the W ING task. Once the GNN is evalu-
ated for a given conditional input, sampling is efficient: a Gaussian distribution is selected based on
the returned weights, followed by sampling from that distribution.
Gaussian Regression GNN (GR-GNN) We also considered a Gaussian Regression model, re-
ferred to as GR-GNN, which is a special case of the GM-GNN that represents the learned distribu-
tion as a single Gaussian.
VGAE As a VGAE baseline, we considered a model mirroring the architecture of the VGAE
proposed for the LDGN, but with the number of message-passing and graph-pooling layers matching
the total used in the DGN models. For the E LLIPSE task, we set the size of the latent features
to FL = 1 and performed a grid search to find the optimal weight for the KL term (Kingma et al.,
2015), which was determined to be 0.001 to maximize distributional accuracy on the E LLIPSE -I N D IST
dataset. For the E LLIPSE F LOW task, we found the best KL weight to be 10−8 , and the optimal size
of the latent features is FL = 32 to maximize distributional accuracy on the E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST
dataset.
The number of hidden features per node and edge after encoding is denoted as Fh , and the size
of the diffusion-step embedding is represented by Femb . In the LDGNs’ VGAE, the intermediate
hidden features are denoted by Fae , and the number of latent features by FL . The values of these
hyperparameters for each model, as well as the total model size, are summarized in Table 1.

C    E XPERIMENTAL AND DATASET D ETAILS
The datasets used in our E LLIPSE F LOW and E LLIPSE experiments are available at https://huggingface.
co/datasets/mariolinov/Ellipse, and the datasets used in our W ING experiments are available at https:
//huggingface.co/datasets/mariolinov/Wing. To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have
tackled large-scale, unsteady, and turbulent dynamics on detailed unstructured meshes, as featured
in our W ING datasets. This motivated the creation of these new datasets to provide a realistic and
challenging application context.
All the simulations in our experiments are governed by the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations,
which describe the motion of fluids and capture the balance of mass and momentum in incompress-
ible flows. In their non-dimensional form, these equations are expressed as follows:

       • Continuity equation (mass conservation):
                                             ∂u ∂v   ∂w
                                               +   +    =0
                                             ∂x ∂y   ∂z
       • Momentum conservation equations along the x, y, and z directions, respectively:
                                                              2
                                                               ∂ u ∂2u ∂2u

                 ∂u      ∂u     ∂u      ∂u       ∂p       1
                    +u      +v      +w      =−       +              +        +        ,
                 ∂t      ∂x     ∂y       ∂z      ∂x Re ∂x2             ∂y 2    ∂z 2
                                                              2
                                                                       ∂2v     ∂2v

                 ∂v      ∂v      ∂v      ∂v      ∂p       1    ∂ v
                    +u       +v     +w      =−       +              + 2+ 2 ,
                 ∂t      ∂x      ∂y      ∂z      ∂y Re ∂x2             ∂y      ∂z
                                                              2
                                                               ∂ w ∂2w ∂2w

                ∂w     ∂w       ∂w      ∂w        ∂p      1
                    +u      +v      +w       =−       +             +         +         .
                ∂t      ∂x      ∂y       ∂z       ∂z     Re ∂x2         ∂y 2    ∂z 2

Here, u(t, x, y, z), v(t, x, y, z), and w(t, x, y, z) represent the velocity components along the x, y,
and z directions, respectively; p(t, x, y, z) denotes the pressure, and Re is the Reynolds number, a
dimensionless quantity measuring the ratio of inertial to viscous forces, which characterizes the flow
regime (Pope, 2000).
Since these equations lack an analytical solution, our understanding of fluid behavior under differ-
ent conditions relies heavily on experiments and numerical simulations. The flow regime can be
classified based on the Reynolds number. For low Reynolds numbers, the flow is laminar, exhibit-
ing smooth and predictable layers with minimal disruption. For high Reynolds numbers, the flow
becomes turbulent, characterized by chaotic, irregular fluctuations. Although the Navier-Stokes


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


equations are deterministic, turbulent flows are chaotic due to the high nonlinearity of these equa-
tions, which renders the system sensitive to even minor perturbations. Despite this chaos, in fully
developed turbulence, the energy introduced (e.g., from shear or pressure gradients) is balanced by
energy dissipation through viscous forces, allowing the turbulence statistics to reach a steady state
over time (Wilcox, 1998).

E LLIPSE F LOW task This task involves a canonical fluid dynamics problem, inferring the velocity
u and pressure p fields in simulations of flow around an elliptical cylinder where the free-stream ve-
locity is parallel to the ellipse’s major axis (Figure 3b). The flow is laminar and unsteady, exhibiting
periodic vortex shedding due to the formation of an unstable low-pressure wake behind the elliptical
cylinder (Figure 3b). We compute probability density functions (PDFs) and statistical measures by
sampling states within a periodic cycle.
In the training dataset (E LLIPSE F LOW-T RAIN), the Reynolds number (Re) ranges from 500 to 1000,
and the ellipse’s relative thickness ranges from 0.5 to 0.8. Test datasets evaluate model perfor-
mance for in-distribution Re and thickness (E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST), as well as for lower and higher
Re (E LLIPSE F LOW-L OW R E and E LLIPSE F LOW-H IGH R E, respectively) and lower and higher thickness
(E LLIPSE F LOW-T HIN and E LLIPSE F LOW-T HICK, respectively). These datasets are low-resolution ver-
sions of the datasets from Lino et al. (2022). Here, each simulation consists of 101 consecutive
time-steps of fully developed 2D flow around an ellipse. The original simulations were generated
using Nektar++ (Cantwell et al., 2015). We reduced the resolution by approximately a factor of two.
The ellipse’s major axis length is one (non-dimensional unit), and the domain height ranges from
five to six. The training dataset contains 5000 simulations, while each test dataset comprises 50
simulations sampled from the original datasets in Lino et al. (2022). Additionally, the test dataset
E LLIPSE F LOW-AOA contains 24 simulations for ellipses with an angle-of-attack (the angle between
the ellipse’s major axis and the free-stream velocity) of 10 degrees. Parameter values for each dataset
are detailed in Table 2.
To condition probabilistic models, each node i encodes the Reynolds number and a one-hot vector
ωi indicating its type (inlet, wall, or inner node), while each edge (i, j) encodes the relative position
between nodes, eij := xj − xi . The output is the velocity ui (t∗ ) and pressure pi (t∗ ) at each node
i and at an arbitrary time t∗ .

Table 2: Values of the parameters for the E LLIPSE andE LLIPSE F LOW systems in the training and test
datasets

                                 Reynolds       Minor            Angle of     Average          Average
  Dataset                        number          axis             attack      # nodes          # nodes        Purpose
                                   Re             b                (deg)    in E LLIPSE   in E LLIPSE F LOW
  E LLIPSE (F LOW )-T RAIN      [500, 1000]    [0.5 0.8]            0           71              2340          Training
  E LLIPSE (F LOW )-I N D IST   [500, 1000]    [0.5 0.8]            0           70              2328            Test
  E LLIPSE (F LOW )-L OW R E     [400, 500]    [0.5 0.8]            0           72              2376            Test
  E LLIPSE (F LOW )-H IGH R E   [1000, 1100]   [0.5 0.8]            0           71              2312            Test
  E LLIPSE (F LOW )-T HIN       [500, 1000]    [0.45 0.5]           0           64              2286            Test
  E LLIPSE (F LOW )-T HICK      [500, 1000]    [0.8 0.9]            0           76              2282            Test
  E LLIPSE (F LOW )-AOA         [500, 1000]    [0.5 0.8]           10           74              2514            Test



E LLIPSE task It involves inferring pressure p on the wall of the ellipse from the previous task
(Figure 3a). The pressure distribution on the ellipses in each E LLIPSE F LOW dataset was extracted to
create these datasets. The Reynolds number is provided as an input condition for the probabilistic
models at each node, and the relative position between adjacent nodes, along with the projection of
the free-stream velocity along the edges are provided as input conditions for each edge. The models
output the pressure pi (t∗ ) at each node i. The distribution of simulation parameters (Re and relative
thickness) in the E LLIPSE datasets mirrors that in the E LLIPSE F LOW datasets (Table 2).
In both E LLIPSE and E LLIPSE F LOW simulations, the temporal variance of the system’s state increases
primarily with the relative thickness of the ellipses due to the formation of larger vortices and, to a
lesser extent, with Re. The effect of these parameters on temporal variance is shown in Figure 12a.

                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W ING task These experiments involve a wing in turbulent flow (Re ∼ 2 × 106 ), characterized
by 3D vortices that spontaneously form and dissipate at various locations on the wing surface
(Figure 3c). Each node i encodes a unit outer normal vector n̂i and each edge (i, j) encodes
eij := [xj − xi , u∞ · t̂ij , u∞ · n̂i , u∞ · b̂ij ], where tij is a unit vector parallel to the edge and
b̂ij := t̂ij × n̂i . The output is pi (t∗ ). Unlike the previous systems, this flow is chaotic, and its time
statistics converge over long time spans.
We generated the training and test datasets for the
W ING systems using the PISO solver of OpenFOAM              0.032
with the Spalart-Allmaras Delayed Detached Eddy
Simulation turbulence model (OpenFOAM Founda-                0.030
tion, 2022). The simulation and dataset meshes were


                                                            Cummulative Std.
                                                             0.028
generated with snappyHexMesh. The free-stream
velocity is 100 km/h, and the kinematic viscosity is         0.026
1.5 ×10−5 m2 /s. A symmetry boundary condition
                                                             0.024
was used on the vertical plane intersecting the wing
root. The wing sections are 24XX NACA airfoils               0.022
with constant relative thickness (indicated by XX),
and the quarter-chord is horizontal (i.e., zero dihe-        0.020           Ground-truth states
dral angle). The wing has a length of 1 m and a
                                                                             Predicted states
                                                             0.018
root chord length of 1 m, with a root-section angle-               0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
of-attack of 20 degrees. The chord length decreases                          # states
linearly toward the tip, and the angle of attack also
varies linearly toward the tip. The geometric param- Figure 10:         Node-wise mean of the
eters of the wing that vary across the training and test time/sample-wise     standard      deviation
datasets include the relative thickness, the taper ratio computed over an increasing number of
(ratio between the tip and root chords), the sweep an- states. In the training trajectories, only the
gle (angle between the quarter-chord line and a line first 250 time-steps after the transient stage
perpendicular to the wing root), and the twist angle are used, and their standard deviation is
(angle of attack at the tip minus the angle of attack not close to its ground-truth value, which is
at the root). The values of these parameters for each computed over 2,500 time-steps.
dataset are listed in Table 3. Time-wise variance pri-
marily depends on the wing’s relative thickness, with lower values resulting in higher variance due
to more detached flow. Variance also increases with larger twist angles and smaller sweep angles.
The training dataset consists of 1,000 simulations, and the test dataset consists of 16 simulations.
We simulated the first 4 seconds (transient regime) starting from a RANS solution, then recorded the
pressure on the wing every 0.002 seconds for 0.5 seconds (250 time-steps) in the training dataset,
and for 5 seconds (2,500 time-steps) in the test dataset. The first 250 time-steps are not sufficient
to represent the variability of the states, as illustrated in Figure 10, but we aim to reduce the high
cost of running these simulations by relying on the probabilistic models’ ability to learn common
patterns from an ensemble of simulations.

       Table 3: Values of the parameters for the W ING systems in the training and test datasets

                                     Taper       Sweep          Twist          # time   Average
    Dataset          Thickness                                                                    Purpose
                                     ratio      (degrees)     (degrees)         steps   # nodes

    W ING -T RAIN      [10, 14]    [0.3, 0.7]   [20, 40]           [-5, 5]      250      6852     Training
    W ING -T EST        11, 13      0.4, 0.6     25, 35         -2.5, 2.5      2500      6828     Testing


The conditional features provided as input, as well as the predicted output for each system, are listed
in Table 4.

D     S UPPLEMENTARY R ESULTS
Tables 5 and 6 collect our measures of sample accuracy, the coefficient of determination, on the
test datasets; and Tables 7 to 9 collect our measures of distributional accuracy, the graph-level


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Table 4: Conditional inputs and predicted outputs for each system type

                                           Node                   Edge conditions                    Node
                        System           conditions                                                 outputs
                                                                        eij
                                            vi                                                        zi
                        E LLIPSE            Re                    xj − xi , u∞ · t̂ij                    pi
                        E LLIPSE F LOW    Re, ωi                       xj − xi                      ui , v i , p i
                        W ING               n̂i       xj − xi , u∞ · t̂ij , u∞ · n̂ij , u∞ · b̂ij        pi


Figure 11: For a system in dataset E LLIPSE -I N D IST, probability density function from the DGN,
LDGN, and baseline models trained on 100-time-step trajectories (full distribution). Ground truth
in Figure 4b.



Wasserstein-2 distance. The correlation between the variance of the ground-truth trajectories and
the accuracy of the LDGN’s predictions is illustrated in Figure 12. Figures 13 and 14 showcase ad-
ditional examples of results generated by DGN, LDGN, and baseline models for the E LLIPSE F LOW
and W ING tasks.
Pressure distribution
    on an ellipse
around an ellipse
   Flow fields


Figure 12: For each simulation in the E LLIPSE (top row) and E LLIPSE F LOW (bottom row) test datasets
with a 0-degree angle-of-attack: (a) node-wise mean of the time-wise standard deviation of the
ground truth fields, (b) average R2 between the LDGN outputs and their corresponding ground
truth, and (c) graph-wise W2 distance between the learned distribution of the fields and their ground
truth. Higher standard deviation results in more difficulty generating accurate fields and learning
their probability distribution.


                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table 5: Mean coefficient of determination (R2 ) on the E LLIPSE datasets

           E LLIPSE
                            -I N D IST       -L OW R E      -H IGH R E        -T HIN         -T HICK          -AOA
 Model
 Vanilla GNN              0.984 ± 0.017    0.991 ± 0.007   0.974 ± 0.018   0.992 ± 0.003   0.964 ± 0.025   0.948 ± 0.029
 Bayesian GNN             0.962 ± 0.025    0.967 ± 0.026   0.952 ± 0.021   0.952 ± 0.047   0.945 ± 0.020   0.931 ± 0.050
 GR-GNN                   0.944 ± 0.034    0.971 ± 0.018   0.902 ± 0.039   0.966 ± 0.017   0.900 ± 0.033   0.907 ± 0.031
 GM-GNN                   0.951 ± 0.030    0.973 ± 0.019   0.912 ± 0.033   0.970 ± 0.013   0.901 ± 0.032   0.922 ± 0.031
 VGAE                     0.981 ± 0.038    0.989 ± 0.026   0.971 ± 0.047   0.996 ± 0.006   0.947 ± 0.077   0.951 ± 0.049
 DGN                      0.994 ± 0.006    0.997 ± 0.001   0.988 ± 0.015   0.994 ± 0.002   0.992 ± 0.007   0.968 ± 0.026
 LDGN                     0.995 ± 0.007    0.998 ± 0.002   0.986 ± 0.019   0.997 ± 0.001   0.991 ± 0.009   0.966 ± 0.028



           Table 6: Mean coefficient of determination (R2 ) on the E LLIPSE F LOW datasets

           E LLIPSE
                F LOW       -I N D IST       -L OW R E      -H IGH R E        -T HIN         -T HICK          -AOA
 Model
 Vanilla GNN              0.979 ± 0.015    0.983 ± 0.011   0.972 ± 0.016   0.984 ± 0.007   0.962 ± 0.022   0.972 ± 0.019
 GM-GNN                   0.954 ± 0.022    0.964 ± 0.012   0.940 ± 0.021   0.967 ± 0.008   0.923 ± 0.032   0.947 ± 0.024
 VGAE                     0.981 ± 0.014    0.983 ± 0.012   0.974 ± 0.016   0.984 ± 0.008   0.966 ± 0.021   0.976 ± 0.014
 DGN                      0.990 ± 0.010    0.993 ± 0.007   0.982 ± 0.016   0.989 ± 0.009   0.991 ± 0.005   0.987 ± 0.014
 LDGN                     0.987 ± 0.013    0.992 ± 0.009   0.979 ± 0.017   0.986 ± 0.011   0.988 ± 0.007   0.981 ± 0.016


D.1     P ERFORMANCE

Providing a truly hardware-agnostic performance comparison is challenging. Most of the neural
network components in our models are optimized for GPUs, while official OpenFOAM distributions
lack GPU support. Additionally, performance results can vary depending on the target statistic (e.g.,
mean flow requires shorter simulations and less sampling compared to RMS calculations).
In Table 10, we present a breakdown of the runtime for the DGN and LDGN models on our W ING
experimental domain. The runtimes were measured on a CPU, limited to 8 threads, and on a sin-
gle RTX 3080 GPU. The time for estimating the distribution accounts for the generation of 3,000
samples. This number of samples is sufficient for the RMS of the pressure to converge. When
running on the GPU, we maximized concurrency to achieve 100% GPU utilization (50 to 60 concur-
rent samples). The ground-truth simulation was performed using OpenFOAM’s PISO solver on the
same workstation, limited to 8 CPU threads. Excluding pre-processing and post-processing steps, a
nine-second simulation (required for the RMS to become statistically stationary) takes 50 hours.


Table 7: Mean |V|-dimensional (i.e., graph-wise) Wasserstein-2 distance (W2graph ) on the E LLIPSE
datasets

               E LLIPSE
                              -I N D IST      -L OW R E       -H IGH R E       -T HIN         -T HICK         -AOA
  Model
  Vanilla GNN               0.96 ± 0.52      0.70 ± 0.44    1.32 ± 0.49     0.35 ± 0.10     2.15 ± 0.27     1.31 ± 0.35
  Bayesian GNN              0.83 ± 0.35      0.66 ± 0.25    1.05 ± 0.34     0.49 ± 0.04     1.87 ± 0.22     1.28 ± 0.26
  GR-GNN                    1.09 ± 0.55      0.79 ± 0.42    1.49 ± 0.51     0.44 ± 0.12     2.32 ± 0.24     1.51 ± 0.53
  GM-GNN                    1.07 ± 0.52      0.77 ± 0.43    1.44 ± 0.51     0.43 ± 0.11     2.29 ± 0.24     1.38 ± 0.46
  VGAE                      0.44 ± 0.25      0.32 ± 0.21    0.59 ± 0.21     0.13 ± 0.03     1.13 ± 0.20     0.80 ± 0.16
  DGN                       0.29 ± 0.15      0.21 ± 0.09    0.42 ± 0.18     0.16 ± 0.02     0.56 ± 0.14     0.58 ± 0.1
  LDGN                      0.23 ± 0.12      0.17 ± 0.08    0.42 ± 0.18     0.10 ± 0.02     0.57 ± 0.15     0.59 ± 0.11



                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Mean |V|-dimensional (i.e., graph-wise) Wasserstein-2 distance (W2graph ) on the E LLIPSE -
F LOW datasets

              E LLIPSE
                 F LOW    -I N D IST    -L OW R E    -H IGH R E       -T HIN         -T HICK         -AOA
  Model
  Vanilla GNN            6.23 ± 1.93   5.87 ± 1.61   6.88 ± 1.80    4.10 ± 0.68     9.73 ± 1.49   7.302 ± 1.700
  GM-GNN                 7.24 ± 2.12   6.76 ± 1.67   8.29 ± 2.04    5.05 ± 0.83   10.77 ± 1.69    8.393 ± 1.767
  VGAE                   6.10 ± 1.83   5.60 ± 1.54   6.70 ± 1.72    4.00 ± 0.68     9.36 ± 1.51   7.077 ± 1.607
  DGN                    4.72 ± 2.10   4.04 ± 1.74   5.48 ± 2.01    3.20 ± 0.81     7.76 ± 2.39   5.964 ± 2.125
  LDGN                   3.07 ± 0.93   2.53 ± 0.71   3.84 ± 1.24    2.81 ± 0.59     3.62 ± 0.91   3.709 ± 0.864


Table 9: Mean |V|-dimensional (i.e., graph-wise) Wasserstein-2 distance (W2graph ) on the W ING -T EST
dataset

                             Metric    GM-GNN             DGN            LDGN
                             W2graph   4.32 ± 0.86    2.12 ± 0.90     1.95 ± 0.89



Compared to this baseline, we observe a one to two order-of-magnitude speedup on the CPU and
a two to three order-of-magnitude speedup on the GPU. For single-sample generation, the speedup
is indicated with respect to the time-stepping runtime of the numerical solver. This speedup would
appear even more significant if we also accounted for the simulation of the transition regime.
The LDGN model is 8× more efficient than the DGN due to performing the denoising process in a
compressed latent space. However, this efficiency is only observed when the CPU/GPU cores are
fully utilized.

D.2     I NFLUENCE OF THE N UMBER OF S CALES IN DGN M ODELS

A key distinction of our DGN architecture, compared to previous GNN-based DDPM models, is the
use of a U-Net-like architecture with graph pooling and unpooling layers specifically designed for
mesh graphs (see Appendix B.3). Previous models were limited to small graphs, where applying
message passing directly on the input graph was sufficient (Xu et al., 2022; Hoogeboom et al., 2022;
Trippe et al., 2023; Vignac et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Yi et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2023). However,
DDPMs are known to require hierarchical and global denoising transitions, as these allow the model
to capture and process information across multiple spatial resolutions (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Si et al., 2023). Below, we compare our DGN with a single-scale model. For a fair comparison
to heterogeneous previous work, we have considered a single-scale version of our DGN, with the

            (a) OOD test case with b = 0.9                         (b) OOD test case with Re = 1100

      Ground truth                                           Ground truth


Figure 13: Samples from the DGN, LDGN, baseline models, and ground truth for (a) a simulation
from dataset E LLIPSE F LOW-T HICK, and (b) a simulation from dataset E LLIPSE F LOW-H IGH R E. The
DGN and LDGN achieve the highest sample accuracy, with the DGN showing good accuracy but
retaining some high-frequency noise.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) NACA2411, taper = 0.6, sweep = 35 deg, twist = 2.5 deg        (b) NACA2413, taper = 0.4, sweep = 25 deg, twist = 2.5 deg

         Ground truth                  GM-GNN                                 Ground truth            GM-GNN


            DGN                          LDGN                                     DGN                  LDGN


Figure 14: Samples from the DGN, LDGN, GM-GNN, and ground truth for two simulation from
the W ING -T EST dataset.


Table 10: Performance comparison for sample generation and distribution estimation on the W ING
task, along with the speedup achieved over the numerical solver

                                                          CPU                                            GPU
                                      CPU                                            GPU
     Model                                           min/distribution                               min/distribution
                                    s/sample                                       s/sample
                                                       (speedup)                                      (speedup)
     DGN                              6.81              340 (×8.8)                   0.59              19 (×152)
     LDGN                             0.98               49 (×61)                    0.20            2.43 (×1235)


same denoising parametrization, number and formulation of message-passing layers, diffusion-step
conditioning, and training settings.
In the E LLIPSE task (with approximately 70 nodes per graph), a four-scale DGN significantly outper-
formed its single-scale counterpart (with the same total number of message-passing layers) in both
sample and distributional accuracy, as shown in Table 11. In the E LLIPSE F LOW task (approximately
2.3k nodes per graph) and the W ING task (approximately 6.8k nodes per graph), the single-scale
DGN failed to produce feasible solutions, as illustrated in Figure 15. Instead, the model learned a
transition noise close to zero, resulting in the amplification of the initial Gaussian noise during the
denoising process, as described by equation (2). In the E LLIPSE F LOW task, performance improved as
the number of scales increased (while maintaining the same total number of message-passing lay-
ers), reaching optimal results with the five-scale model, as also shown in Table 11. This five-scale
DGN was also the most computationally efficient: it was 25% faster than the two-scale model, 12%
faster than the three-scale model, and 7% faster than the four-scale model.


Table 11: Sample accuracy (R2 ), distributional accuracy (W2graph ) and inference time for GNN mod-
els with varying numbers of scales

                                          # scales                                               Inference time
                   Dataset                                         R2              W2graph
                                         in model                                                  ms /sample

                                             1           0.964 ± 0.043          0.60 ± 0.28            204
             E LLIPSE -I N D IST
                                             4           0.995 ± 0.006          0.29 ± 0.15            160
                                             2           0.957 ± 0.026          5.37 ± 1.34            436
                                             3           0.966 ± 0.034          5.48 ± 2.04            376
         E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST
                                             4           0.990 ± 0.010          5.01 ± 2.10            353
                                             5           0.990 ± 0.010          4.72 ± 2.11            328


                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     (a) Denoising with a single-scale model


                 R = 1000                          R = 500                        R=0

                           (b) Samples from a single-scale and multi-scael models
        1-scale model        2-scale model          3-scale model       4-scale model        5-scale model


Figure 15: Single-scale models failed to learn in the E LLIPSE F LOW and W ING tasks due to the limited
range of their receptive fields. (a) Instead of removing noise between transitions, a single-scale
model amplified the initial Gaussian noise. (b) Samples from DGN models with one-, two-, three-,
four-, and five-scale architectures for a simulation from the E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST dataset.


D.3     A LTERNATIVE VGAE A RCHITECTURE

Our VGAE incorporates a condition encoder block (Figure 9a) that generates an encoding of Vc
and Ec on the latent graph G L , which is then passed as a conditioning input to the LDGN model.
These encodings cannot be directly generated by the VGAE’s node encoder (Figure 9b), as the node
encoder also requires Z(t) as input, which is unavailable during inference since we directly sample
Gaussian noise in the latent space.
An alternative approach to ours could be to define the LDGN conditions directly within the coarse
representation of the system provided by G L . To test this, we compared our LDGN with another
version that lacks the condition encoder in the VGAE (but has similar number of weights), where
node and edge conditional features are defined directly on G L . We evaluated this in the E LLIPSE task
and found that our proposed LDGN architecture provides better sample and distributional accuracy,
as shown in Tables 12 and 13. This improvement is likely because our conditional encodings,
although compressed, still retain information about relevant high-frequency features.

Table 12: Comparison of the coefficient of determination (R2 ) for an LDGN using our VGAE and
one using the alternative VGAE

                E LLIPSE
                                 -I N D IST         -L OW R E       -H IGH R E          -T HIN           -T HICK
 Model
 Alternative                0.993 ± 0.009         0.996 ± 0.003   0.985 ± 0.017     0.994 ± 0.004     0.990 ± 0.010
 Ours                       0.996 ± 0.007         0.998 ± 0.002   0.988 ± 0.018     0.998 ± 0.001     0.993 ± 0.008



Table 13: Comparison of the graph-wise Wasserstein-2 distance (W2graph ) for an LDGN using our
VGAE and one using the alternative VGAE

                      E LLIPSE
                                     -I N D IST      -L OW R E      -H IGH R E      -T HIN          -T HICK
        Model
        Alternative                 0.22 ± 0.08     0.44 ± 0.17   0.16 ± 0.03     0.60 ± 0.16    0.62 ± 0.09
        Ours                        0.17 ± 0.07     0.41 ± 0.17   0.10 ± 0.02     0.54 ± 0.16    0.57 ± 0.10


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4    R ESULTS FOR H IGH -F REQUENCY E RROR A NALYSIS

To quantify the high-frequency noise present in the DGN and LDGN samples, we computed the
graph Fourier transform of the predicted fields and assessed the energy associated with the 10 highest
graph eigenvalues for all systems in the E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST and W ING -T EST datasets. This serves
as a measure of the high-frequency noise present in the predicted fields. The error of this high-
frequency energy relative to its ground truth, in percent, is collected in Table 14.
We note that the high-frequency noise in the samples generated by DGN models is consistently
higher than in the ground-truth fields. In contrast, the noise in LDGN samples differs only slightly.

Table 14: Relative error (%) between the high-frequency energy in the predicted samples and the
ground truth

                            Dataset & Magnitude                 DGN     LDGN
                                                        u       3.38    1.87
                            E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST    v       8.97    3.49
                                                        p       11.09   3.11
                            W ING -T EST                p       2.84    0.97


D.5    E FFICIENCY IN L EVERAGING T RAINING T RAJECTORIES

While the results in Section 5 demonstrate the efficacy of our approach, there is no theoretical guar-
antee that a model can learn full distributions from a collection of short trajectories. This ability
relies on the model’s capacity to recognize common physical patterns across different trajectories
and leverage this knowledge to enhance its understanding of each individual trajectory. Such inter-
polative capacity depends on two key factors: (i) having a sufficient number of training trajectories
to enable smooth interpolation across the parameter space, and (ii) the model’s ability to effectively
capture and generalize these dependencies.
To disentangle the effects of the number of training tra-
jectories and the model’s design, we conducted additional
experiments on the E LLIPSE task. Specifically, we trained
DGNs, LDGNs, and baseline models on datasets contain-
ing varying numbers of short trajectories, ranging from
500 to 5,000 samples. As shown in Figure 16, the dis-
tributional accuracy of the DGN and LDGN models im-
proves with an increasing number of training trajecto-
ries, demonstrating their ability to interpolate effectively
across trajectories associated with different input condi-
tions and accurately reproduce the underlying distribu-
tion. In contrast, the best-performing baseline model
(VGAE) plateaued in performance beyond 2,000 trajecto-
ries, highlighting its limited interpolation capacity despite
having the same number of learnable parameters.
                                                               Figure 16: The DGN, and especially
This advantage likely stems from the diffusion-based the LDGN, models are more efficient
approach of DGNs and LDGNs, which, unlike models than the VGAE and GM-GNN at learn-
that rely on sampling from a compressed latent space ing common features from a collection
(e.g., VGAE) or impose assumptions about the underly- of short trajectories, resulting in signifi-
ing probability distributions (e.g., GM-GNN), minimizes cantly lower distributional error in large
overfitting by gradually denoising. This approach en- datasets.
ables them to infer missing dynamics by leveraging sim-
ilar states encountered during training. Furthermore, the
LDGN variant outperforms the DGN by learning distributions in a compressed latent space that is
less sensitive to small-scale fluctuations, resulting in superior interpolation performance.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Regarding sampling accuracy, we verified that it remains unaffected by the number of training tra-
jectories. This behavior aligns with our expectations, as accurate samples can still be generated even
without the ability to complete the system’s PDF by feature interpolation.

D.6   F LOW S TATISTICS D ERIVED FROM L EARNED D ISTRIBUTIONS

With our DGN and LDGN models, we aim to learn the probability density function (PDF) of fully-
developed unsteady flows. In certain cases, however, learning the mean flow alone using a deter-
ministic GNN trained directly on mean-flow data might suffice. Nevertheless, such deterministic
models may encounter challenges when the available training trajectories are too short to properly
capture the mean flow. Furthermore, the distributions generated by the DGN and LDGN models can
be used to derive other relevant statistics, such as the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) or the Reynolds
shear stress.
To evaluate the advantage provided by the DGN and LDGN models over deterministic baselines
in the mean-flow prediction task, we trained a deterministic model, referred to as the Mean-Flow
GNN, on 10-time-step-averaged flow fields from the E LLIPSE F LOW-T RAIN dataset. We compared
its performance to that of the models discussed in Section 5: the Vanilla GNN (another determin-
istic model trained to maximize the likelihood; see Section B.5), the DGN, the LDGN, and other
probabilistic baselines. The coefficient of determination for mean-flow predictions, as evaluated on
the E LLIPSE F LOW test datasets, is summarized in Table 15. Notably, the LDGN significantly out-
performs both the deterministic and probabilistic baselines in predicting the mean flow, achieving
coefficient of determination values close to one – despite being trained on only 10 consecutive states
per trajectory.
Figure 17 further illustrates these findings. Predictions from the two deterministic baselines (Mean-
Flow GNN and Vanilla GNN) exhibit diffused vertex distributions corresponding to the 10-time-step
(training simulation length) average fields. This diffusion indicates that during training, these models
are overly biased toward the conditions of individual samples and fail to generalize the true average
flow across training samples. The DGN slightly mitigates this problem through its gradual denoising
approach, which minimizes overfitting to individual training samples. The improvement is more
evident in the LDGN, which, thanks to its more meaningful latent space and latent input conditions,
better leverages the information present across systems that are close in parameter space.
                             (a) Mean u field for an in-distribution test case
          Ground truth


                    (b) Mean u field for a generalisation test case with AoA = 10 deg
          Ground truth


Figure 17: Mean u field predicted by the Mean-Flow GNN and the Vanilla GNN (deterministic
GNNs), as well as obtained from the distributions of the DGN and LDGN, for a test case from (a)
dataset E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST and (b) dataset E LLIPSE F LOW-AOA.

To further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed diffusion models, we computed the turbu-
lent kinetic energy (TKE). This quantity is defined as:
                                            1
                                   TKE = (⟨u′ u′ ⟩ + ⟨v ′ v ′ ⟩)
                                            2
where ⟨·⟩ denotes ensemble averaging, and u′ := u − ⟨u⟩ and v ′ := v − ⟨v⟩ are velocity fluctuations.
The coefficients of determination for the TKE are presented in Table 16. Reflecting the superior
distributional accuracy of the LDGN, this model significantly outperformed the baseline models,
with the DGN emerging as the second-best performer. The LDGN’s advantage in these predictions


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 15: Mean coefficient of determination (R2 ) of the mean-flow on the E LLIPSE F LOW datasets

             E LLIPSE
               F LOW        -I N D IST          -L OW R E       -H IGH R E         -T HIN          -T HICK           -AOA
 Model
 Mean-Flow GNN          0.868 ± 0.014         0.872 ± 0.012   0.865 ± 0.015    0.883 ± 0.002    0.843 ± 0.008    0.863 ± 0.013
 Vanilla GNN            0.869 ± 0.013         0.871 ± 0.012   0.864 ± 0.014    0.883 ± 0.003    0.845 ± 0.009    0.864 ± 0.013
 GM-GNN                 0.867 ± 0.015         0.870 ± 0.012   0.857 ± 0.016    0.883 ± 0.003    0.841 ± 0.009    0.860 ± 0.014
 VGAE                   0.926 ± 0.014         0.931 ± 0.012   0.921 ± 0.015    0.942 ± 0.003    0.902 ± 0.011    0.921 ± 0.015
 DGN                    0.941 ± 0.020         0.946 ± 0.015   0.936 ± 0.021    0.954 ± 0.006    0.912 ± 0.028    0.930 ± 0.025
 LDGN                   0.976 ± 0.004         0.978 ± 0.002   0.975 ± 0.005    0.978 ± 0.001    0.974 ± 0.003    0.975 ± 0.003


is further illustrated in Figure 18. It is important to highlight that all these models were trained on
only 10 consecutive time steps from each training simulation (see Section 5), making the results
even more remarkable.
                                         Ground truth
                (a) TKE
         1/2 (<u'u'> + <v'v'>)


                                         Ground truth
              (b) Reynols
             shear stress
                -<u'v'>



Figure 18: (a) Turbulent kinetic energy and (b) Reynolds shear stress obtained from the distributions
predicted by the GM-GNN, DGN, and LDGN for a test case from the E LLIPSE F LOW-I N D IST dataset.

      Table 16: Mean coefficient of determination (R2 ) of the TKE on the E LLIPSE F LOW datasets

            E LLIPSE
               F LOW        -I N D IST         -L OW R E        -H IGH R E        -T HIN           -T HICK           -AOA
 Model
 GM-GNN                 0.669 ± 0.141        0.675 ± 0.155    0.646 ± 0.120    0.881 ± 0.043    0.393 ± 0.091    0.564 ± 0.132
 VGAE                   -0.201 ± 0.040       -0.182 ± 0.040   -0.218 ± 0.050   -0.145 ± 0.011   -0.253 ± 0.038   -0.197 ± 0.043
 DGN                    0.783 ± 0.215        0.874 ± 0.141    0.755 ± 0.241    0.863 ± 0.150    0.485 ± 0.334    0.654 ± 0.279
 LDGN                   0.911 ± 0.226        0.947 ± 0.064    0.876 ± 0.234    0.895 ± 0.071    0.901 ± 0.046    0.895 ± 0.156


D.7      FAST S AMPLING WITH F LOW M ATCHING

Flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023) has recently emerged as a promising generative model frame-
work, offering significant efficiency gains over diffusion models by defining a direct linear mapping
between samples of a Gaussian distribution (or any other distribution, in theory) and the target dis-
tribution. This enables sampling to be performed with fewer steps.
Our DGN and LDGN architectures can be seamlessly adapted to the flow-matching training frame-
work, benefiting from faster sampling. We observed that flow-matching GNNs (FM-GNNs) and
latent-flow-matching GNNs (LFM-GNNs) outperform their diffusion-based counterparts when the
number of denoising steps is limited to 10 or fewer. However, for ∼20 or more denoising steps,
diffusion models demonstrate superior performance.
This behavior is illustrated in Figure 19a, which compares the standard deviation of the pressure
predicted by the DGN and the FM-GNN with 10 denoising steps for a sample from the W ING -T EST
dataset (ground truth shown in Figure 6). The shift in performance for 20 or more denoising steps is


                                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


shown in Figure 19b, which presents the sample accuracy and distributional error as a function of the
number of denoising steps for the DGN, FM-GNN, and their latent variants on the E LLIPSE -I N D IST
dataset.
From these results, we observe that the LFM-GNN achieves a compelling balance between accuracy
and sampling speed. However, further experimentation is necessary to fully explore its potential,
which we leave for future work.
              (a) 10-step denoising                     (b) Accuracy vs. # denoising steps
           diffusion vs. flow matching                          in EllipseVal dataset


     DGN                   FM-GNN


Figure 19: Flow-matching-based models outperform diffusion-based models when only a small
number of denoising steps are employed for sampling. This was tested on (a) the W ING -T EST dataset
and (b) the E LLIPSE -I N D IST dataset.


                                                 31
