Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C OMBINING I NDUCTION AND T RANSDUCTION FOR
A BSTRACT R EASONING
 Wen-Ding Li*1 Keya Hu*2 Carter Larsen1 Yuqing Wu1 Simon Alford1 Caleb Woo1
 Spencer M. Dunn1 Hao Tang1 Wei-Long Zheng2 Yewen Pu†4 Kevin Ellis†1
 1
   Cornell 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Autodesk * co-leads † co-advising
 correspondence: {wl678,kellis}@cornell.edu, hu_keya@sjtu.edu.cn

 Please refer to the updated arXiv version, which has improved results with more authors.

                                               A BSTRACT

         When learning an input-output mapping from very few examples, is it better to
         first infer a latent function that explains the examples, or is it better to directly
         predict new test outputs, e.g. using a neural network? We study this question
         on ARC by training neural models for induction (inferring latent functions) and
         transduction (directly predicting the test output for a given test input). We train
         on synthetically generated variations of Python programs that solve ARC training
         tasks. We find inductive and transductive models solve different kinds of test
         problems, despite having the same training problems and sharing the same neural
         architecture: Inductive program synthesis excels at precise computations, and at
         composing multiple concepts, while transduction succeeds on fuzzier perceptual
         concepts. Ensembling them approaches human-level performance on ARC.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Robust generalization from few examples remains one of the most important ways in which human
intelligence surpasses AI. Much recent work views this generalization as a form of abstract reason-
ing: Given just a few training input-outputs xtrain , ytrain , together with a test input xtest , the idea is
to predict the corresponding test output ytest using reasoning strategies such as analogical reasoning,
chain-of-thought, inductive program synthesis, or transductive prediction (Thoms et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2024; Witt et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024a; Hocquette & Cropper, 2024; Butt
et al., 2024). The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (Chollet (2019), henceforth ARC) is a few-
shot learning benchmark that tests the ability to rapidly learn a diverse range of new skills, and apply
them to new situations. Each ARC task is presented as input-outputs over colored grids, but can en-
gage concepts such as occlusion, pathfinding, collision, symmetry, gravity, bouncing, counting, etc.,
making ARC essentially a composite of many reasoning datasets, and one of the more interesting
unsolved benchmarks that stresses broad-coverage few-shot learning (Figure 1).

     object contact                  gravity                symmetry, occlusion               jumping


        bouncing                      mazes                     pathfinding                   growth


Figure 1: Few-shot learning tasks from the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC). Each task
typically has 2-5 input-output examples. Here we show just one input-output example per task.


Here we study neural methods for induction and transduction, using few-shot learning problems
from ARC as our testbed. Induction means first finding a function f where f (xtrain ) ≈ ytrain , and


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


then predicting ytest = f (xtest ). Transduction instead outputs ytest without explicit construction of an
intermediate function f . Intuitively, induction captures the notion that a learner should first explain
the training data, then use that explanation to make predictions. Inductive learners can perform better
by spending more time optimizing or searching for better explanations, using the training examples
xtrain , ytrain to score candidate functions. Transduction instead captures the intuition that the training
examples themselves should play a direct role in generating new predictions, and that successful
prediction need not require an explicit explanation. See Figure 2.
                              induction                                                      transduction

                                                                              xx        yy
  x           y                                                                 train
                                                                                 trai    train
                                                                                           trai
      train       train
                                          f(•)                                n          n
                                                                   y
                                                                       test                                 y
                                                  f(x          )                                                test
                                                        test


  x                                                                           xx
      test                                                                      test
                                                                                 test


Figure 2: Induction generates an intermediate function f to explain training input-outputs. Trans-
duction directly predicts the test output, for example using a neural network.

We train neural networks for both induction and transduction by generating a large corpus of syn-
thetic problems. We discover that neural models for induction and transduction are strongly comple-
mentary. We believe this is surprising: Although any pair of models would generally solve somewhat
different problems, usually this can be attributed to different priors, data, or architecture. Instead,
we find that, even controlling for priors, data, and architecture, most problems solved by induc-
tion were not solved by transduction, and vice versa. Moreover, induction and transduction can be
trivially ensembled by using induction to generate candidate functions f until either a satisfactory
function is found (e.g. f (xtrain ) = ytrain ) or until a test-time compute budget is reached, at which
point, transduction kicks in as a fallback: That they are complementary has practical implications.
Our study is tightly linked to program synthesis. We represent functions f as Python code, mean-
ing that induction synthesizes programs. We train transduction models on LLM-produced Python
scripts, meaning that transduction is trained on the input-outputs of symbolic code. Although pro-
gram learning has long been a popular vision of how general AI could work (Solomonoff, 1964;
Schmidhuber, 2004; Hutter, 2004), the dominant theory has always been one of explicit code gen-
eration (induction), rather than implicitly teaching neural networks to imitate code (transduction).
Our work puts this assumption to the test.
Testing these neural methods requires a large dataset of function-learning problems, which is chal-
lenging to generate because not only must we make novel functions, but also good inputs to those
functions. Consider the transformations in Figure 1: What counts as a good input for one function
is unlikely to work for another. To address this challenge, we first generate a deterministic Python
function for f , and then a probabilistic program for sampling inputs to f , finally executing those pro-
grams to produce input-outputs. This helps generate inputs that are appropriate for the underlying
transformation, and forces xtrain , ytrain to be explainable by a deterministic mapping.
We contribute the following:
1. A study finding that neural models for induction and transduction are strongly complementary,
   even when trained on the same problems. This contradicts seminal neural program synthesis
   work (Devlin et al. (2017), which found induction superior), and contradicts the findings of the
   leading ARC team (Cole et al. (2024), which advocates transduction with test-time training).
2. An automated data generation methodology that starts with 100-160 program solutions for ARC
   training tasks, and expands them to make 400k new problems paired with Python solutions.
3. A study of how these methods scale. We find performance saturates quickly when increasing
   manually-labelled data, but scales with compute, both at training and testing time.
4. Analysis of families of problems solved by each approach, and how they compare to humans.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    N EURAL M ODELS FOR I NDUCTION AND T RANSDUCTION
We consider few-shot supervised learning problems where the learner is trained to map members
of an input space X to output space Y. For K-shot learning, we receive K training input-outputs
(xtrain , ytrain ) ∈ X K × Y K , together with a single test input xtest ∈ X , and predict ytest ∈ Y. Our
neural models for K-shot learning are meta-learned (Mishra et al., 2017, inter alia.) using meta-
learning data further annotated with a ground-truth function f : X → Y, which supervises the
induction model. Below we define the training and use of these models.
Definition: Neural networks for induction and transduction. A neural network for transduction
is a function t that maps (xtrain , ytrain , xtest ) to a distribution over ytest , and which has learnable pa-
rameters θ. In other words, tθ : X K × Y K × X → ∆(Y), where the notation ∆(S) means the set of
distributions over S. We can also write this as a conditional distribution, tθ (ytest |xtrain , ytrain , xtest ).
A neural network for induction is a function i that maps (xtrain , ytrain , xtest ) to a distribution over
functions f that map X to Y, with learnable parameters θ. In other words, iθ : X K × Y K × X →
∆(X → Y), which we can write as a conditional distribution iθ (f |xtrain , ytrain , xtest ).
Training induction and transduction. Both types of models are trained via meta-learning. We
assume a meta-learning dataset D of few-shot learning problems, each equipped with a ground-
truth function f such that f (x) = y for every x, y in (xtrain , ytrain ) and (xtest , ytest ). Inductive and
transductive models are meta-trained to minimize the following losses:
         T RANSDUCTION L OSS = E(xtrain ,ytrain ,xtest ,ytest ,f )∼D [− log tθ (ytest |xtrain , ytrain , xtest )]   (1)
               I NDUCTION L OSS = E(xtrain ,ytrain ,xtest ,ytest ,f )∼D [− log iθ (f |xtrain , ytrain , xtest )]    (2)

Testing induction and transduction. After meta-learning the models encounter a test-time few-
shot learning task (xtrain , ytrain , xtest ). Transductive models predict their most likely output for
ytest (approximated via beam search). Inductive models sample a test-time budget of B functions
f1 · · · fB , which are filtered by (xtrain , ytrain ), and finally used to predict ytest = f (xtest ). Writing
ŷtest for the predicted test output:
     T RANSDUCTION : ŷtest = arg max tθ (y|xtrain , ytrain , xtest )                                               (3)
                                        y∈Y

           I NDUCTION : ŷtest ∼ Uniform (F)                                                         (4)
                                   where F = {fb (xtest ) : for 1 ≤ b ≤ B if fb (xtrain ) = ytrain }
                                          fb ∼ iθ (f |xtrain , ytrain , xtest )

Combining induction and transduction. Induction allows checking candidate hypotheses against
the training examples. Therefore, we know when induction has found a plausible solution–but
sometimes it fails to find any solution. Transduction has the opposite property: We can’t check
if its predictions match the training examples, but it always offers a candidate answer. Therefore
we ensemble by attempting induction first, then transduction if none of the candidate hypotheses
explained the examples:
                      E NSEMBLE : ŷtest ∼ Uniform (F) if F ̸= ∅
                                  ŷtest = arg max tθ (y|xtrain , ytrain , xtest ) if F = ∅                         (5)
                                                   y∈Y


Instantiating the framework for ARC. Every input from X and output from Y is a 2D grid
ranging from 1–30 pixels per side, with each pixel containing one of ten colors. Because ARC tasks
are highly diverse yet typically have an abstract program-like structure, we represent the underlying
function f as Python code, which is computationally universal, and so possible in principle of solv-
ing any ARC task. Therefore the induction model must generate Python code, so we initialize our
models with Llama3.1-8B-instruct (Dubey et al., 2024) because it was pretrained on source code.1
We encode 2D colored grids as strings using 1 token per pixel, and use newlines to delimit rows
(Appendix B.1). We then meta-learn by further fine-tuning Llama3.1-8B-instruct for induction or
transduction using a synthetically-generated corpus of problems, described next.
   1
     Our preliminary experiments suggested Llama3.1-8B-instruct was better than Mistral-7B-v0.3, Qwen2-
7B-Instruct, and deepseek-coder-6.7b-instruct


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     G ENERATING DATASETS FOR I NDUCTION AND T RANSDUCTION
Generating ARC-style tasks is challenging because of the diversity of concepts that can occur in
ARC. It is also challenging because we need to generate not just a function, and also inputs that
serve as good examples for that function.
At a high level, our dataset grows out of 100 manually-written Python programs, each of which both
solves a given task (function f ), and also randomly generates new input grids. We call these 100
manually-written programs seeds. Each seed is commented with natural language describing the
core intuitions behind the problem. We then use a large language model to mutate and recombine
the seeds, producing many thousands of programs (Figure 3).

                                           100 seed solutions                                   100k seed problems with solutions

    100 seed problems                            language                                                      language
                                                                                                concepts:
                                 concepts: cropping
       examples                  description:
                                                                                                description:

                                 In the input you will see a single colored                                     code
                                 shape, around 4x6 in size, floating in a
                                 12x12 grid of black.

                        solve    To make the output, crop the background
                                 out of the image - so the output grid has            remix
                                                                                                                          runtime check
                                 the same dimensions as the shape.
                                                                                                               examples
                                                    code


              manual problem solving                                          synthetic augmentation

     Figure 3: Synthetic data generation pipeline, starting with human-written programs (seeds).


The structure of seeds. Each seed consists of three parts:

       1. A natural language description of its specific ARC task—including how to solve that
          task—represented as a Python comment at the top of the seed.
       2. A Python function transform_grid corresponding to the function f in the manuscript,
          which maps each input grid of a specific ARC task to its corresponding output grid.
       3. A Python function generate_input, which takes no arguments, and which randomly
          generates new inputs to f (new inputs to transform_grid).

Prior knowledge. The seeds impart a prior upon the system by demonstrating good programs for
solving training tasks. We further codified much of this prior into a Python library containing code
that we found useful across many seeds, such as subroutines for generating random sprites, detecting
symmetries, or extracting objects (Appendix A.2). Synthetic problems can use that same library.
However, this prior knowledge is different from previous Domain Specific Languages for ARC (Butt
et al., 2024; Wind, 2020; Ainooson et al., 2023). Domain Specific Languages restrict the class of
allowed programs by only allowing stereotyped combinations of domain-specific primitives. We
still allow arbitrary Python code, which helps cover the long tail of diverse tasks.

Remixing the seeds. To generate a larger synthetic dataset we “remix” the seeds using LLMs.
Each new synthetic ARC problem is generated by a three stage pipeline (Figure 11):

       1. A new natural language description is sampled by prompting an LLM with seed natural lan-
          guage descriptions, effectively using in-context learning to recombine and mutate elements
          of different problems, in the spirit of self-instruct (Wang et al., 2023).
       2. Code is generated for that new description via Retrieval Augmented Generation
          (RAG: Lewis et al. (2020)). Our RAG pipeline retrieves seeds with similar descriptions,
          and prompts an LLM to generate code for the new description, given the retrieved seeds.
       3. The newly created generate_input is executed to make inputs, which are passed to
          transform_grid to produce input-output grids.


                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4 illustrates example problems generated by our pipeline.Unless otherwise mentioned, we
create synthetic datasets with GPT4o-mini and ada-002.

 concepts:                     concepts:                                              concepts:
 shape detection, contour      color blending,                                        pattern detection, copying,
 extraction, bounding box      radial expansion                                       positioning


Figure 4: Example synthetic ARC problems generated by our pipeline. Concepts are generated in a
comment near the top of the Python script as part of the natural language description of the seed.


4    E MPIRICAL S TUDY OF I NDUCTION AND T RANSDUCTION
We train inductive and transductive models with the goal of understanding (1) how the methods
compare; (2) how performance scales with train-time effort; and (3) how performance scales with
test-time compute (for induction only, as it allows drawing more samples at test time to improve
performance). We report performance on the 400-problem public validation split of ARC, which is
harder than the training split. The systems described in this section learn from a 100-problem subset
of the training split, specifically problems for which we created seeds.

Induction and Transduction are strongly complementary. Despite training on the exact same
problems, inductive and transductive models solve different tasks, and neither approach is dramat-
ically more effective than the other. And although these methods have a similar overall solve rate,
most problems solved by induction are not solved by transduction, and vice versa (Figure 5A).
An alternative explanation is that induction and transduction are not actually complementary, but
instead that, having trained two neural networks with different random initializations, they simply
solved different problems due to randomness at train or test time. To test this alternative explanation,
we trained many models with different random initializations. We find that the problems solved by
induction/transduction are surprisingly stable across these different runs (Figure 5B). In other words,
some problems are friendlier to induction, and others friendlier to transduction (Figure 6).

(A) complementary methods          (B) finding is stable across random seeds, and (C) statistically significant
                                                             transduction induction

                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                    p<.004
                                    induction transduction


                                                                                      0.0
    = 1 problem solved

Figure 5: (A) Induction and transduction solve different problems, where solve means predicting the
right output given 2 tries. Venn diagram for models trained on 100k synthetic problems generated
using gpt4o-mini. (B) Training many models with different random seeds, and then measuring the
correlation between solved tasks by different models. Solved tasks strongly correlates with other
models of the same class but not the other class. (C) Statistical significance test evaluating the null
hypothesis that correlation is independent of whether a model is inductive/transductive.


                                                                   5
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              solved only by induction


                                                             solved only by transduction


                                                                   solved by both


                              Figure 6: Example tasks solved by induction/transduction/both. See also Appendix C.


       Performance scales with dataset size, but quickly saturates with increasing number of seeds.
       We trained models while systematically varying the number of human-created seeds we use, and
       varying the amount of synthetic data generated from those seeds (Figure 7). Performance improves
       with increasing training data for fine-tuning (increasing synthetic data), but saturates for increas-
       ing quantity of human-created seeds. We conjecture that this saturation occurs because each seed
       serves to introduce a few core concepts, and that after enough seeds, essentially all of the important
       concepts have been demonstrated. This suggests that, beyond a critical threshold number of seeds,
       the method can scale with increasing amounts of compute without demanding further human data
       labeling. Looking beyond ARC, this means that our methodology could probably be applied to other
       few-shot function-learning problems using a modest amount of manual data labeling.

                                     increasing synthetic data, 100 seeds                increasing seeds, 40k synthetic problems
                      0.150         Induction                                                                            Induction
Validation Accuracy


                      0.125         Transduction                                                                         Transduction
                      0.100
                      0.075
                      0.050
                                    20         40       60        80        100     25              50                              100
                                         num synthetic problems (10^3)                                   num seeds
       Figure 7: Increased manual human effort (# seeds) does not significantly increase performance, but
       increasing compute spent generating synthetic data increases performance of the final model.


                                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Induction performance scales with test-time compute. We vary the test-time sampling budget
for induction, finding an almost monotonic increase in solve rate (Figure 8, left). In principle,
drawing additional samples runs the risk of discovering solutions that are “false-positives,” meaning
they fit the training examples without correctly predicting the test output. In practice, about 9% of
samples that fit the training examples are false-positives. Figure 8 (right) shows that about half of
this 9% corresponds to problems where the majority of the probability mass is still placed on the
correct output, meaning that a simple majority vote scheme would squash any false positives (e.g.
clustering in AlphaCode Li et al. (2022)). Appendix D shows example false positives.

                                   ARC Val Accuracy
                   20%

                   15%


                                                                  # validation problems
                                                                                          60
      Solve Rate


                   10%                                                                    40
                   5%                       Sample + Oracle
                                            Sample + Filter                               20
                                            CodeIt
                   0%                                                                      0
                           0      500    1000    1500    2000                                  0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                  number of samples                                                   False Positive Rate

Figure 8: Left: Sample+Oracle assumes an oracle that selects one of the sampled programs. It
upper-bounds the accuracy of randomly selecting one program consistent with the training exam-
ples (Sample+Filter). Induction model trained with 100k gpt4-description-gpt4omini-codegen data.
CodeIt (Butt et al., 2024) is a recent neural program induction model for ARC. Right: Histogram of
false positive rate. Of the problems that have false positives, about half have a false positive rate less
than 0.5, meaning that most (filtered) samples predict the right test output.

Stronger LLMs make better synthetic data, and induction is more sensitive to data quality.
To save costs, the previous results all used GPT4o-mini to generate synthetic data. To understand
the value of stronger models we generated 100k synthetic problems using GPT4 to generate natural
language problem descriptions (but GPT4o-mini still generated the code). The richer and more
diverse synthetic problems elicited from GPT4 significantly improved performance, but primarily
for induction, while transduction was less sensitive to data quality (Table 1).

                         Table 1: Val Acc: % validation tasks that are correctly solved in 2 tries.

                                System     Val Acc.     Finetuning Data
                  Ensemble                 26.50%
    Induction, 2048 samples                18.78%       GPT-4 for generating descriptions, GPT-4o-mini for code
 Transduction, beam size 20                15.25%
                  Ensemble                 19.50%
    Induction, 2048 samples                11.07%       GPT-4o-mini for generating descriptions and code
 Transduction, beam size 20                13.50%


5    S CALING OUR METHOD
Motivated by our findings so far, we scaled up our method by producing two larger datasets:
ARC-Heavy: 200k problems from 160 seeds. The purpose of ARC-Heavy is to scale our method
in an easily reproducible way, while also filling any gaps in its mastery of the training split. We first
ran models from Section 4 on the training split to identify 60 problems that they still struggled with,
for which we produced 60 new seeds, giving 160 seeds in total. From those seeds we produced 200k
synthetic problems, with GPT4 generating natural language descriptions and GPT4o-mini generat-
ing the corresponding Python code.


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ARC-Potpourri: 400k problems from heterogeneous sources. The purpose of ARC-Potpourri is
to assemble the biggest dataset that we could, even if it comes from a messy mixture of sources.
Starting with ARC-Heavy we added all synthetic data from Section 4. We further added 100k
transduction-only training examples from ReARC (Hodel, 2024).
Test-time improvements. We improve transduction with test-time training (Sun et al. (2020), ab-
breviated TTT; Appendix E). We expand our sampling budget to 20k programs.
We call our resulting systems BARC. Table 2 shows the performance of various BARC models. Both
transduction and induction are effective, with induction solving slightly more problems, until adding
test-time training, after which transduction does slightly better. An ensemble scores 54.375%, sur-
passing previously published methods. Our best model performs nearly as well as the average human
(60.2%) but much worse than the best humans (98%).
    Table 2: % validation tasks correctly solved in 2 tries. Human results from LeGris et al. (2024).

                                    System       Val Acc.                       Fair comparison?
     ARC-Heavy: BARC models
     Induction, 10k samples, majority vote       30.50%                         —
                   Transduction (no TTT)         19.25%                         —
                      Ensemble (no TTT)          37.50%                         —
                      Transduction (TTT)         29.75%                         —
                         Ensemble (TTT)          43.25%                         —
     ARC-Potpourri: BARC models
     Induction, 20k samples, majority vote        38.00%                        —
                   Transduction (no TTT)         29.125%                        —
                      Ensemble (no TTT)          47.875%                        —
                      Transduction (TTT)          39.25%                        —
                         Ensemble (TTT)          54.375%                        —
                  CodeIt (Butt et al., 2024)       15%                          Yes, only trains on training set
            Claude-3.5 / Greenblatt (2024)      21% / 42%                       Yes, but closed LLMs at test time
                               Wind (2020)         39%                          No, designed by looking at val set
                          Avg/Best Human 60.2% / 97.8% Yes


6     W HICH PROBLEMS ARE EASIER FOR THE MODELS , AND FOR HUMANS ?
Do problems that challenge humans also
challenge the model, and vice-versa? We                                          transduction+TTT
sort ARC validation problems into 5 equally-                        0.8          induction                    easiest 20%
sized difficulty classes using data from LeGris                                  ensemble
et al. (2024). Figure 9 illustrates a peculiar
                                                   model % solved


relationship between human and model accu-                          0.6         hardest 20%
racy: All models surpass human performance
on the hardest problems, but underperform on
the easiest problems. Because our models train                      0.4
on simple Python programs, this suggests some
problems are simple in code and learnable by
transformers, but very hard for people—and
                                                                    0.2
conversely that people possess priors allowing                            0.2      0.4        0.6    0.8
effortless solution of problems beyond what our                                     human % solved
Python program generator produces. For prob-
lems of typical difficulty, the model roughly           Figure 9: Human vs model performance across 5
tracks human performance, and across all dif-           difficulty levels. The easiest difficulty level con-
ficulty levels, transduction and induction serve        tains problems in the top 20% of human accuracy,
complementary roles, even when augmented                and the hardest difficulty level contains the 20%
with test time training.                                of problems with the lowest human accuracy.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Which concepts are easier for the models? We test on ConceptARC (Moskvichev et al., 2023),
an alternative ARC-style test-set which classifies its tasks into “concept groups” each exemplifying
a single isolated high-level concept such as “sameness” or “above vs below.” We use models trained
on ARC-Potpourri, finding that specific concept categories are easier for induction or transduction
(Figure 10). We find an intuitive division of labor between the two approaches: Concept groups
such as counting are best solved with symbolic code, while transduction better handles perceptual
processes such as judging whether a shape is more horizontal or more vertical, or more top/bottom.
ConceptARC reveals another dimension along which transduction and induction differ: Because
ConceptARC illustrates one concept per problem, there is no need to compose many concepts to-
gether. Therefore the induction model, which is uniquely equipped for symbolic composition, loses
a key advantage. Transduction has more limited composition capabilities but can instantiate indi-
vidual concepts in flexible subsymbolic ways, which could explain why it excels on ConceptARC.


       induction                    pass@1                       transduction

Figure 10: ConceptARC accuracy by concept group. Concept groups sorted left-to-right by ratio of
inductive to transductive performance. IceCube is the original ARC Kaggle winner (Wind, 2020).
We report pass@3 because Moskvichev et al. (2023) report accuracy given 3 attempts.



7   R ELATED W ORK

ARC was originally designed to challenge conventional deep learning and spur progress on alter-
native paradigms (Chollet, 2019). The first wave of successful approaches used discrete program
search over domain-specific programming languages, including the original Kaggle winner (Wind,
2020). These symbolic approaches held their own against GPT-4 (Wang et al., 2024), but have re-
cently been surpassed by transductive architectures using test-time training (Cole et al., 2024), and
by LLM-guided program generation (Greenblatt, 2024). ARC has so far resisted conventional neu-
ral and symbolic approaches, but is solvable for adult humans, and to some extent, children (LeGris
et al., 2024; Opielka et al., 2024).
Code generation via LLMs is done in many recent works (Li et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021). We most directly build on Li & Ellis (2024) and Greenblatt (2024).
The former fine-tunes LLMs for inductive program synthesis using LLM-generated variations of
human-written programs. While there are many technical differences, a key factor is that we gen-
erate function inputs by synthesizing an input_generator function, rather than have an LLM
directly generate possible inputs. This matters because an LLM alone could not generate complex,
precisely-correct inputs such as ARC grids. This potentially makes our work applicable to other
few-shot generalization problems with complex input-spaces such as webpages, robot planning,
etc. Greenblatt (2024) samples many Python programs from GPT4o: Comparable to our induction
model, but instead of fine-tuning, it uses prompting. Fine-tuning forced us to create a dataset of new
problems, which created the opportunity for exploring transductive models.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Classic work in neural program synthesis has previously compared induction and transduction (Ro-
bustFill: Devlin et al. (2017)). We explore here a richer space of functions, reaching a qualitatively
different conclusion than RobustFill: Instead of finding transduction inferior to induction, we find
them complementary. More broadly, the transductive-inductive divide lies near the heart of super-
vised learning. Inductive approaches, such as linear regression, first construct a function f where
f (xtrain ) ≈ ytrain , and then predict ytest = f (xtest ). Transductive approaches, such as Support Vector
Machines and In-Context Learning, instead output their predictions by performing direct compar-
isons with the training data. We use the same neural network architecture and dataset to perform
both tasks, allowing a controlled comparison between these paradigms.


8    D ISCUSSION

What we learn about robust sample-efficient generalization.Neither explicit symbolic hypothe-
ses nor implicit neural representations suffice to solve all problems: each has their own domain of
applicability, and simply ensembling models specialized in each does not cover all cases. Engi-
neering a more clever neural program search, or training transductive predictors on more data, is
unlikely to be fruitful. Instead we need representations irreducible to a purely neural or symbolic
form, which intertwine inductive and transductive reasoning. One way of implementing this idea is
to do program synthesis within a language whose atomic primitives are non-symbolic, and to pre-
train those primitives to encapsulate the basic atoms of core knowledge. While work has taken steps
in related directions (Reed & De Freitas, 2015; Alet et al., 2018; Tang & Ellis, 2023; Li et al., 2024),
how to engineer and scale this idea remains open.
To what extent is this methodology applicable beyond ARC? Few-shot function learning is a very
flexible framework, but our particular method is most applicable when the target generalization can
be described in symbolic code. As an immediately tangible example, web scraping and other forms
of data-munging could fit within our framework. As a more ambitious goal, symbolic code is an
especially good medium for defining precise models of how the world works. This is true both within
the natural sciences (Schmidt & Lipson, 2009) and also within AI, with examples such as robotic
policies (Liang et al., 2023), planners (Wong et al., 2023), and world models more broadly (Das
et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024b; Evans et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2024). These are not the kinds
of programs that occur often in LLM pretraining data—so merely prompting is unlikely to perform
well—but it is nonetheless feasible to curate around 100 seeds demonstrating what the system should
learn.
Theoretically, induction and transduction should not be so complementary. Equivalences be-
tween induction and transduction are well-know, such as the ‘kernel trick’ which allows translating
parametric function fitting into a transductive problem. Our metalearning models, given infinite
metatraining data, should similarly converge because transformers are universal function approxi-
mators. That there remains a difference is interesting precisely because it deviates from what one
would expect theoretically.
Limitations. Our system does not grow more competent at few-shot learning by solving new prob-
lems: Instead, it bootstraps from manually encoded knowledge in the seeds, which is transformed
into a few-shot learner via an LLM training/inference pipeline. A more compelling approach would
be to have the system discover for itself the knowledge that we compiled for it within the seeds, for
instance by practicing on training tasks, without supervising on ground truth solutions.
Our work is only evaluated on ARC. However, ARC is designed to contain many concepts and
problems embedded within it, so can be viewed as an open-ended composite of different learning
problems. Owing to this diversity, it is also notoriously challenging, and has resisted solution de-
spite a series of high-profile competitions. We therefore believe that although evaluating on multiple
benchmarks is desirable, ARC is an appropriate benchmark to use as the centerpiece of an experi-
mental evaluation.
Code & Data Availability. Our code, data, and model weights are freely available at https:
//github.com/xu3kev/BARC.
Acknowledgements. We are grateful for advice from Robert Hawkins regarding the statistical anal-
ysis in Figure 5C and for discussions with Weinan Sun about biological learning. This work was
partly supported by an NSF CAREER award to K.E.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
James Ainooson, Deepayan Sanyal, Joel P. Michelson, Yuan Yang, and Maithilee Kunda. A
  neurodiversity-inspired solver for the abstraction & reasoning corpus (arc) using visual imagery
  and program synthesis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.09425.

Ferran Alet, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie P Kaelbling. Modular meta-learning. In Conference
  on robot learning, pp. 856–868. PMLR, 2018.

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.

Natasha Butt, Blazej Manczak, Auke Wiggers, Corrado Rainone, David W Zhang, Michaël Deffer-
  rard, and Taco Cohen. Codeit: Self-improving language models with prioritized hindsight replay.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence, 2019.

Jack Cole, Mohamed Osman, Michael Hodel, Keith Duggar, and Tim Scarfe. Machine learning
  street talk, June 2024.

Ria Das, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Zenna Tavares. Combining functional
  and automata synthesis to discover causal reactive programs. Proceedings of the ACM on Pro-
  gramming Languages, 7(POPL):1628–1658, 2023.

Jacob Devlin, Jonathan Uesato, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Singh, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and
  Pushmeet Kohli. Robustfill: Neural program learning under noisy i/o. ICML, 2017.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Ko-
  revaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra,
  Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar,
  Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng
  Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park,
  Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya
  Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer,
  Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten,
  Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas
  Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh,


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kam-
  badur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi,
  Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur ÃĞelebi,
  Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava,
  Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Raga-
  van Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta
  Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross
  Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh,
  Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Ra-
  parthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya
  Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodin-
  sky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias
  Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vig-
  nesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petrovic,
  Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xi-
  aoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco GuzmÃan,  ˛ Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, VÃ tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

Richard Evans, Matko BoÅanjak,
                         ˛       Lars Buesing, Kevin Ellis, David Pfau, Pushmeet Kohli,
  and Marek Sergot. Making sense of raw input. Artificial Intelligence, 299:103521, 2021.
  ISSN 0004-3702. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2021.103521. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370221000722.

Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023.

Ryan Greenblatt. Draw more samples. "https://redwoodresearch.substack.com/p/
  getting-50-sota-on-arc-agi-with-gpt", 2024. Accuracy from ARCPrize Leader-
  board.

Céline Hocquette and Andrew Cropper. Relational decomposition for program synthesis. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2408.12212, 2024.

Michael Hodel. Rearc. https://github.com/michaelhodel/re-arc, 2024. [Online
 GitHub repository].

Marcus Hutter. Universal artificial intelligence: Sequential decisions based on algorithmic proba-
 bility. Springer Science & Business Media, 2004.

Seungpil Lee, Woochang Sim, Donghyeon Shin, Wongyu Seo, Jiwon Park, Seokki Lee, Sanha
  Hwang, Sejin Kim, and Sundong Kim. Reasoning abilities of large language models: In-depth
  analysis on the abstraction and reasoning corpus, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2403.11793.

Solim LeGris, Wai Keen Vong, Brenden M. Lake, and Todd M. Gureckis. H-arc: A robust estimate
  of human performance on the abstraction and reasoning corpus benchmark, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2409.01374.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020.

Chengshu Li, Jacky Liang, Andy Zeng, Xinyun Chen, Karol Hausman, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey
  Levine, Li Fei-Fei, Fei Xia, and Brian Ichter. Chain of code: Reasoning with a language model-
  augmented code emulator. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller,
  Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 28259–28277. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v235/li24ar.html.

Wen-Ding Li and Kevin Ellis. Is programming by example solved by llms?, 2024.

Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023.

Yichao Liang, Nishanth Kumar, Hao Tang, Adrian Weller, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tom Silver,
  JoÃčo F. Henriques, and Kevin Ellis. Visualpredicator: Learning abstract world models with
  neuro-symbolic predicates for robot planning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2410.23156.

Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-
  learner. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.03141, 2017.

Arsenii Kirillovich Moskvichev, Victor Vikram Odouard, and Melanie Mitchell. The conceptARC
  benchmark: Evaluating understanding and generalization in the ARC domain. Transactions on
  Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=8ykyGbtt2q.

Gustaw Opielka, Hannes Rosenbusch, Veerle Vijverberg, and Claire E. Stevenson. Do large lan-
  guage models solve arc visual analogies like people do?, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2403.09734.

Scott Reed and Nando De Freitas.             Neural programmer-interpreters.         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1511.06279, 2015.

Jürgen Schmidhuber. Optimal ordered problem solver. Machine Learning, 54(3):211–254, 2004.

Michael Schmidt and Hod Lipson. Distilling free-form natural laws from experimental data. science,
 324(5923):81–85, 2009.

Ray J Solomonoff. A formal theory of inductive inference. Information and control, 7(1):1–22,
  1964.

Yu Sun, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, John Miller, Alexei Efros, and Moritz Hardt. Test-time train-
  ing with self-supervision for generalization under distribution shifts. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 9229–9248. PMLR, 2020.

Hao Tang and Kevin Ellis. From perception to programs: Regularize, overparameterize, and amor-
  tize. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato,
  and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 33616–33631. PMLR, 23–29
  Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/tang23c.html.

Hao Tang, Keya Hu, Jin Peng Zhou, Sicheng Zhong, Wei-Long Zheng, Xujie Si, and Kevin Ellis.
  Code repair with llms gives an exploration-exploitation tradeoff. NeurIPS, 2024a.

Hao Tang, Darren Key, and Kevin Ellis. Worldcoder, a model-based llm agent: Building world
  models by writing code and interacting with the environment. NeurIPS, 2024b.

Luca H. Thoms, Karel A. Veldkamp, Hannes Rosenbusch, and Claire E. Stevenson. Solv-
  ing arc visual analogies with neural embeddings and vector arithmetic: A generalized
  method. ArXiv, abs/2311.08083, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:265158110.

Ruocheng Wang, Eric Zelikman, Gabriel Poesia, Yewen Pu, Nick Haber, and Noah D Goodman.
  Hypothesis search: Inductive reasoning with language models. ICLR, 2024.

Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions.
  In The 61st Annual Meeting Of The Association For Computational Linguistics, 2023.

Johan Sokrates Wind. 1st place 2020 arc kaggle. https://github.com/top-quarks/
  ARC-solution, 2020. [Online GitHub repository].


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonas Witt, Stef Rasing, Sebastijan DumanÄ iÄĞ, Tias Guns, and Claus-Christian Carbon. A
  divide-align-conquer strategy for program synthesis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2301.03094.

Lionel Wong, Jiayuan Mao, Pratyusha Sharma, Zachary S Siegel, Jiahai Feng, Noa Korneev,
  Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jacob Andreas. Learning adaptive planning representations with natu-
  ral language guidance. ICLR, 2023.


A      DATA GENERATION TECHNICAL DETAILS


    Step1: Random remix to generate new language descriptions


                                            Prompt example
                         randomly sample                                         LLM                new language
      100 seed                                      language                                     new concepts:
      problems                               concepts:
                                                                                                 new description:
                                             description:


    Step2: RAG to generate new codes                                             Prompt example

                    calculate cosine                      get four codes
                     similarity with                      with the most                   language
                                                                                  concepts:
                       the seeds                         similar language
                                                                                  description:
                     language part                         part with the
       new                                                                                                              LLM   new code
    language                                             new description                      code
 new concepts:                         100 seed
 new description:                      problems
                                                                                         new language
                                                                                 new concepts:... new description:...


Figure 11: A new natural language description is sampled by prompting an LLM with seed natural
language descriptions, effectively using in-context learning to recombine and mutate elements of
different problems. Code is generated for that new description via Retrieval Augmented Generation
(RAG). Our RAG pipeline retrieves seeds with similar descriptions, and prompts an LLM to generate
code for the new description, given the retrieved seeds.


The prompt template for generating natural language descriptions by randomly sampling language
descriptions from seed problems is as follows:


     You’ve generated these on previous requests:

     {examples}

     Brainstorm {num_generations} more, using similar thinking:

     ‘‘‘python
     # concepts:
     # <concepts in your new generation>

     # description:
     # <description of your new generation>
     ‘‘‘



The prompt template for generating Python code from the natural-language descriptions (and similar
example code retrieved from the seeds, via RAG) is as follows:


                                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   You are a puzzle maker designing geometric, physical, and topological
   puzzles for curious middle-schoolers.

   Each puzzle consists of uncovering a deterministic rule, pattern, procedure,
    algorithm, or transformation law that maps inputs to outputs.
   Both the inputs and outputs are 2D grids of colored pixels. There are 10
   colors, but the order of the colors is never relevant to the puzzle.

   The middle schoolers are trying to discover this deterministic
   transformation, which can be implemented as a Python function called ‘main‘.
   Designing a puzzle involves also creating example inputs, which can be
   implemented as a Python function called ‘generate_input‘. Unlike ‘main‘, the
    ‘generate_input‘ function should be stochastic, so that every time you run
   it, you get another good example of what the transformation can be applied
   to.

   Here is a overview of the puzzle you are designing:

   {description}

   Please implement the puzzle by writing code containing the ‘generate_input‘
   and ‘main‘ functions. Use the following standard library (‘common.py‘):

   ‘‘‘python
   {common_lib}
   ‘‘‘

   Here are some examples from puzzles with similar descriptions to show you
   how to use functions in ‘common.py‘:

   {examples}

   Your task is to implement the puzzle, following these steps:

   1. Inspect the example puzzle implementations, making note of the functions
   used and the physical/geometric/topological/logical details
   2. Inspect the new puzzle’s description
   3. Brainstorm a possible implementation for the new puzzle
   4. Generate a code block formatted like the earlier examples with a comment
   starting ‘# concepts:‘ listing the concepts and ‘# description:‘ describing
   the inputs and transformation from the given description.

   Be sure to make the transformation ‘main‘ deterministic. Follow the
   description closely.



Execution and Filtering of Generated Problems We heuristically filter problems to improve the
quality of data based on the following criteria:

      • The generator and transformation functions can be executed, producing at least 4 input-
        output grids examples.
      • Transformation being deterministic: We check for consistency by running the functions
        with different random seeds and filter out those with non-deterministic outputs.
      • Appropriate grid sizes: We remove input-output grids with height or width larger than 30,
        aligning with grid sizes in ARC
      • Color permutation check: Since we use numpy arrays with integers 0-9 to represent colors,
        we want to ensure transformations don’t rely on arithmetic operations of these integers. We
        filter this by checking if input-output remains consistent when permuting the underlying
        color-number mapping.
      • Removal of problems with all trivial identity input-output examples.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.1   S EED EXAMPLES

 Example seed 0d3d703e          Example seed 1b2d62fb           Example seed 0dfd9992


                               Figure 12: Three seed examples


"""============ problem id: 0d3d703e ============"""
from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# color mapping

# description:
# The input is a grid where each column is of the same color.
# To make the output, change each color according to the following
                                     mapping:
# green -> yellow, blue -> gray, red -> pink, teal -> maroon, yellow ->
                                     green, gray -> blue, pink -> red,
                                     maroon -> teal

def transform_grid(input_grid):
    # Initialize output grid
    output_grid = input_grid.copy()

      # Performs color mapping
      output_grid = np.vectorize(lambda color: color_map.get(color, color))
                                           (output_grid)

      return output_grid

# Constructing the color map
color_map = {Color.GREEN : Color.YELLOW,
             Color.BLUE : Color.GRAY,
             Color.RED : Color.PINK,
             Color.TEAL : Color.MAROON,
             Color.YELLOW : Color.GREEN,
             Color.GRAY : Color.BLUE,
             Color.PINK : Color.RED,
             Color.MAROON : Color.TEAL
            }


def generate_input():
    grid = np.full((3, 3), Color.BLACK)
    for x in range(grid.shape[0]):
        grid[x, :] = random.choice(list(color_map.keys()))
    return grid

"""============ problem id: 1b2d62fb ============"""

import numpy as np
from typing import *
from common import *


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


# concepts:
# boolean logical operations, bitmasks with separator

# description:
# In the input you will see two maroon bitmasks separated by a blue
                                     vertical bar
# To make the output, color teal the pixels that are not set in either
                                     bitmasks (logical NOR)

def transform_grid(input_grid: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    # Find the blue vertical bar. Vertical means constant X
    for x_bar in range(input_grid.shape[0]):
        if np.all(input_grid[x_bar, :] == Color.BLUE):
            break

     left_mask = input_grid[:x_bar, :]
     right_mask = input_grid[x_bar+1:, :]

     output_grid = np.zeros_like(left_mask)
     output_grid[(left_mask != Color.MAROON) & (right_mask != Color.MAROON
                                          )] = Color.TEAL

     return output_grid


def generate_input() -> np.ndarray:
    # create a pair of equally sized maroon bitmasks
    width, height = np.random.randint(2, 10), np.random.randint(2, 10)

     grid1 = np.zeros((width, height), dtype=int)
     grid2 = np.zeros((width, height), dtype=int)

     for x in range(width):
         for y in range(height):
             grid1[x, y] = np.random.choice([Color.MAROON, Color.BLACK])
             grid2[x, y] = np.random.choice([Color.MAROON, Color.BLACK])

     # create a blue vertical bar
     bar = np.zeros((1, height), dtype=int)
     bar[0, :] = Color.BLUE

     grid = np.concatenate((grid1, bar, grid2), axis=0)

     return grid

"""============ problem id: 0dfd9992 ============"""

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# occlusion, translational symmetry

# description:
# In the input you will see a translationally symmetric pattern randomly
                                     occluded by black pixels.
# To make the output, remove the occluding black pixels to reveal the
                                     translationally symmetric pattern.

def transform_grid(input_grid):
    # Plan:
    # 1. Find the translational symmetries


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     # 2. Reconstruct the sprite by ignoring the black pixels and
                                          exploiting the symmetry

     w, h = input_grid.shape

     # Identify the translational symmetries
     translations = detect_translational_symmetry(input_grid,
                                          ignore_colors=[Color.BLACK])
     assert len(translations) > 0, "No translational symmetry found"

     # Reconstruct the occluded black pixels by replacing them with colors
                                           found in the orbit of the
                                          symmetries
     output_grid = np.copy(input_grid)
     for x in range(w):
         for y in range(h):
             if output_grid[x, y] == Color.BLACK:
                 # Use the translational symmetry to fill in the occluded
                                                      pixels
                 # to do this we compute the ORBIT of the current pixel
                                                      under the
                                                      translations
                 # and take the most common non-black color in the orbit

                    # Compute the orbit into the output
                    orbit_pixels = orbit(output_grid, x, y, translations)
                    orbit_colors = {input_grid[transformed_x, transformed_y]
                                    for transformed_x, transformed_y in
                                    orbit_pixels}

                    # occluded by black, so whatever color it is, black doesn
                                                         ’t count
                    orbit_colors = orbit_colors - {Color.BLACK}

                    # Copy the color
                    assert len(orbit_colors) == 1, "Ambiguity: multiple
                                                         colors in the orbit"
                    output_grid[x, y] = orbit_colors.pop()

     return output_grid

def generate_input():
    # Make a random large canvas
    grid = np.full((np.random.randint(15, 30), np.random.randint(15, 30))
                                         , Color.BLACK)

     # Make the basic sprite
     w, h = random.randint(3, 8), random.randint(3, 8)
     sprite = random_sprite(w, h, density=1, color_palette=Color.NOT_BLACK
                                          )

     # Place the sprite in the canvas
     for x in range(0, grid.shape[0], w):
         for y in range(0, grid.shape[1], h):
             blit_sprite(grid, sprite, x, y)

     # Create random occluders
     n_occluders = random.randint(1, 5)
     for _ in range(n_occluders):
         x, y = random.randint(0, grid.shape[0]), random.randint(0, grid.
                                              shape[1])
         w, h = random.randint(3, 7), random.randint(3, 7)
         occluder_sprite = np.full((w, h), Color.BLACK)
         blit_sprite(grid, occluder_sprite, x, y)



                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      return grid


A.2   C OMMON LIBRARY


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


"""Common library for ARC"""

import numpy as np
import random


class Color:
    """
    Enum for colors

     Color.BLACK, Color.BLUE, Color.RED, Color.GREEN, Color.YELLOW,
     Color.GREY, Color.PINK, Color.ORANGE, Color.TEAL, Color.MAROON

     Use Color.ALL_COLORS for ‘set‘ of all possible colors
     Use Color.NOT_BLACK for ‘set‘ of all colors except black

     Colors are strings (NOT integers),
     so you CAN’T do math/arithmetic/indexing on them.
     (The exception is Color.BLACK, which is 0)
     """

def flood_fill(grid, x, y, color, connectivity=4):
    """
    Fill the connected region that contains the point (x, y) with
    the specified color.

     connectivity: 4 or 8, for 4-way or 8-way connectivity.
     8-way counts diagonals as connected,
     4-way only counts cardinal directions as connected.
     """


def draw_line(grid, x, y, end_x=None, end_y=None, length=None, direction=
                                     None,
              color=None, stop_at_color=[]):
    """
    Draws a line starting at (x, y) extending to (end_x, end_y) or
    of the specified length in the specified direction
    Direction should be a vector with elements -1, 0, or 1.
    If length is None, then the line will continue until it hits
    the edge of the grid.

     stop_at_color: optional list of colors that the line should stop at.
     If the line hits a pixel of one of these colors, it will stop.

     Example:
     # blue diagonal line from (0, 0) to (2, 2)
     draw_line(grid, 0, 0, length=3, color=blue, direction=(1, 1))
     draw_line(grid, 0, 0, end_x=2, end_y=2, color=blue)
     """

def find_connected_components(grid, background=Color.BLACK, connectivity=
                                     4,
                              monochromatic=True):
    """
    Find the connected components in the grid.
    Returns a list of connected
    components, where each connected component is a numpy array.

     connectivity: 4 or 8, for 4-way or 8-way connectivity.
     monochromatic: if True, each connected component is assumed to have
     only one color.
     If False, each connected component can include multiple colors.
     """


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


def random_scatter_points(grid, color, density=0.5,
                            background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Randomly scatter points of the specified color in the grid with
    specified density.
    """

def scale_pattern(pattern, scale_factor):
    """
    Scales the pattern by the specified factor.
    """

def blit_object(grid, obj, background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Draws an object onto the grid using its current location.

     Example usage:
     blit_object(output_grid, an_object, background=background_color)
     """

def blit_sprite(grid, sprite, x, y, background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Draws a sprite onto the grid at the specified location.

     Example usage:
     blit_sprite(output_grid, the_sprite, x=x, y=y,
                 background=background_color)
     """

def bounding_box(grid, background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Find the bounding box of the non-background pixels in the grid.
    Returns a tuple (x, y, width, height) of the bounding box.

     Example usage:
     objects = find_connected_components(input_grid, monochromatic=True,
                                 background=Color.BLACK, connectivity=8)
     teal_object=[obj for obj in objects if np.any(obj == Color.TEAL)][0]
     teal_x, teal_y, teal_w, teal_h = bounding_box(teal_object)
     """

def object_position(obj, background=Color.BLACK, anchor="upper left"):
    """
    (x,y) position of the provided object.
    By default, the upper left corner.

     anchor: "upper left", "upper right", "lower left", "lower right",
     "center", "upper center", "lower center", "left center", "right
                                          center"

     Example usage:
     x, y = object_position(obj, background=background_color,
                             anchor="upper left")
     middle_x, middle_y = object_position(obj, background=background_color
                                          ,
                                         anchor="center")
     """

def crop(grid, background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Crop the grid to the smallest bounding box that contains all
    non-background pixels.

     Example usage:


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     # Extract a sprite from an object
     sprite = crop(an_object, background=background_color)
     """

def translate(obj, x, y, background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Translate by the vector (x, y). Fills in the new pixels with the
    background color.

     Example usage:
     red_object = ... # extract some object
     shifted_red_object = translate(red_object, x=1, y=1)
     blit_object(output_grid, shifted_red_object,
                 background=background_color)
     """

def collision(_=None, object1=None, object2=None, x1=0, y1=0, x2=0, y2=0,
    background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Check if object1 and object2 collide when object1 is at (x1, y1) and
    object2 is at (x2, y2).

     Example usage:

     # Check if a sprite can be placed onto a grid at (X,Y)
     collision(object1=output_grid, object2=a_sprite, x2=X, y2=Y)

     # Check if two objects collide
     collision(object1=object1, object2=object2,
                 x1=X1, y1=Y1, x2=X2, y2=Y2)
     """

def contact(_=None, object1=None, object2=None, x1=0, y1=0, x2=0, y2=0,
             background=Color.BLACK, connectivity=4,):
    """
    Check if object1 and object2 touch each other (have contact)
    when object1 is at (x1, y1) and object2 is at (x2, y2).
    They are touching each other if they share a border, or if they
    overlap.
    Collision implies contact, but contact does not imply collision.

     connectivity: 4 or 8, for 4-way or 8-way connectivity.
         (8-way counts diagonals as touching,
         4-way only counts cardinal directions as touching)

     Example usage:

     # Check if a sprite touches anything if it were to be placed at (X,Y)
     contact(object1=output_grid, object2=a_sprite, x2=X, y2=Y)

     # Check if two objects touch each other
     contact(object1=object1, object2=object2)
     """

def generate_position_has_interval(max_len, position_num, if_padding=
                                     False):
    """
    Generate the position of the lines with random interval.
    """

def random_free_location_for_sprite(grid, sprite, background=Color.BLACK,
                                    border_size=0, padding=0,
                                    padding_connectivity=8):
    """
    Find a random free location for the sprite in the grid


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Returns a tuple (x, y) of the top-left corner of the sprite in the
     grid, which can be passed to ‘blit_sprite‘

     border_size: minimum distance from the edge of the grid
     background: color treated as transparent
     padding: if non-zero, the sprite will be padded with a non-background
     color before checking for collision
     padding_connectivity: 4 or 8, for 4-way or 8-way connectivity when
     padding the sprite

     Example usage:
     x, y = random_free_location_for_sprite(grid, sprite, padding=1,
         padding_connectivity=8, border_size=1, background=Color.BLACK)
     # find the location, using generous padding
     assert not collision(object1=grid, object2=sprite, x2=x, y2=y)
     blit_sprite(grid, sprite, x, y)
     """

def object_interior(grid, background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Computes the interior of the object (including edges)

     returns a new grid of ‘bool‘ where True indicates that the pixel is
     part of the object’s interior.

     Example usage:
     interior = object_interior(obj, background=Color.BLACK)
     for x, y in np.argwhere(interior):
         # x,y is either inside the object or at least on its edge
     """

def object_boundary(grid, background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Computes the boundary of the object (excluding interior)

     returns a new grid of ‘bool‘ where True indicates that the pixel is
     part of the object’s boundary.

     Example usage:
     boundary = object_boundary(obj, background=Color.BLACK)
     assert np.all(obj[boundary] != Color.BLACK)
     """

def object_neighbors(grid, background=Color.BLACK, connectivity=4):
    """
    Computes a mask of the points that neighbor or border the object, but
    are not part of the object.

     returns a new grid of ‘bool‘ where True indicates that the pixel is
     part of the object’s border neighbors5.

     Example usage:
     neighbors = object_neighbors(obj, background=Color.BLACK)
     assert np.all(obj[neighbors] == Color.BLACK)
     """

class Symmetry:
    """
    Symmetry transformations, which transformed the 2D grid in ways that
    preserve visual structure.
    Returned by ‘detect_rotational_symmetry‘,
    ‘detect_translational_symmetry‘, ‘detect_mirror_symmetry‘.
    """

     def apply(self, x, y, iters=1):


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          """
          Apply the symmetry transformation to the point (x, y) ‘iters‘
          times.
          Returns the transformed point (x’,y’)
          """

def orbit(grid, x, y, symmetries):
    """
    Compute the orbit of the point (x, y) under the symmetry
    transformations ‘symmetries‘.
    The orbit is the set of points that the point (x, y) maps to after
    applying the symmetry transformations different numbers of times.
    Returns a list of points in the orbit.

     Example:
     symmetries = detect_rotational_symmetry(input_grid)
     for x, y in np.argwhere(input_grid != Color.BLACK):
         # Compute orbit on to the target grid, which is typically the
         output
         symmetric_points = orbit(output_grid, x, y, symmetries)
         # ... now we do something with them like copy colors or infer
         missing colors
     """

def detect_translational_symmetry(grid, ignore_colors=[Color.BLACK]):
    """
    Finds translational symmetries in a grid.
    Satisfies: grid[x, y] == grid[x + translate_x, y + translate_y] for
    all x, y, as long as neither pixel is in ‘ignore_colors‘.

     Returns a list of Symmetry objects, each representing a different
     translational symmetry.

     Example:
     symmetries = detect_translational_symmetry(grid, ignore_colors=[
                                           occluder_color])
     for x, y in np.argwhere(grid != occluder_color):
         # Compute orbit on to the target grid
         # When copying to an output, this is usually the output grid
         symmetric_points = orbit(grid, x, y, symmetries)
         for x, y in symmetric_points:
              assert grid[x, y] == grid[x, y] or grid[x, y] ==
                                                   occluder_color
     """

def detect_mirror_symmetry(grid, ignore_colors=[Color.BLACK]):
    """
    Returns list of mirror symmetries.
    Satisfies: grid[x, y] == grid[2*mirror_x - x, 2*mirror_y - y]
        for all x, y, as long as neither pixel is in ‘ignore_colors‘

     Example:
     symmetries = detect_mirror_symmetry(grid,ignore_colors=[Color.BLACK])
         # ignore_color: In case parts of the object have been removed and
         # occluded by black
     for x, y in np.argwhere(grid != Color.BLACK):
         for sym in symmetries:
              symmetric_x, symmetric_y = sym.apply(x, y)
              assert grid[symmetric_x, symmetric_y] == grid[x, y]
                  or grid[symmetric_x, symmetric_y] == Color.BLACK

     If the grid has both horizontal and vertical mirror symmetries,
         the returned list will contain two elements.
     """



                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


def detect_rotational_symmetry(grid, ignore_colors=[Color.BLACK]):
    """
    Finds rotational symmetry in a grid, or returns None if no symmetry
                                         is possible.
    Satisfies: grid[x, y] == grid[y - rotate_center_y + rotate_center_x,
                            -x + rotate_center_y + rotate_center_x]
                            # clockwise
               grid[x, y] == grid[-y + rotate_center_y + rotate_center_x,
                            x - rotate_center_y + rotate_center_x]
                            # counterclockwise
               for all x,y, as long as neither pixel is in ignore_colors

     Example:
     sym = detect_rotational_symmetry(grid, ignore_colors=[Color.BLACK])
         # ignore_color: In case parts of the object have been removed and
         # occluded by black
     for x, y in np.argwhere(grid != Color.BLACK):
         rotated_x, rotated_y = sym.apply(x, y, iters=1) # +1 clockwise,
         -1 counterclockwise
         assert grid[rotated_x, rotated_y] == grid[x, y] or
                grid[rotated_x, rotated_y] == Color.BLACK
     print(sym.center_x, sym.center_y) # In case these are needed, they
                                          are floats
     """

def is_contiguous(bitmask, background=Color.BLACK, connectivity=4):
    """
    Check if an array is contiguous.

     background: Color that counts as transparent (default: Color.BLACK)
     connectivity: 4 or 8, for 4-way (only cardinal directions) or
     8-way connectivity (also diagonals) (default: 4)

     Returns True/False
     """

def random_sprite(n, m, density=0.5, symmetry=None, color_palette=None,
                connectivity=4, background=Color.BLACK):
    """
    Generate a sprite (an object), represented as a numpy array.

     n, m: dimensions of the sprite. If these are lists, then a random
     value will be chosen from the list.
     symmetry: optional type of symmetry to apply to the sprite. Can be
     ’horizontal’, ’vertical’, ’diagonal’, ’radial’, ’not_symmetric’. If
     None, a random symmetry type will be chosen.
     color_palette: optional list of colors to use in the sprite. If None,
     a random color palette will be chosen.

     Returns an (n,m) NumPy array representing the sprite.
     """

def detect_objects(grid, _=None, predicate=None, background=Color.BLACK,
                   monochromatic=False, connectivity=None,
                   allowed_dimensions=None,
                   colors=None, can_overlap=False):
    """
    Detects and extracts objects from the grid that satisfy custom
    specification.

     predicate:
         a function that takes a candidate object as input and
         returns True if it counts as an object
     background:


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         color treated as transparent
     monochromatic:
         if True, each object is assumed to have only one color
         If False, each object can include multiple colors.
     connectivity:
         4 or 8, for 4-way or 8-way connectivity.
         If None, the connectivity is determined automatically.
     allowed_dimensions:
         a list of tuples (n, m) specifying the allowed dimensions of the
         objects.
         If None, objects of any size are allowed.
     colors:
         a list of colors that the objects are allowed to have.
         If None, objects of any color are allowed.
     can_overlap: if True, objects can overlap.
         If False, objects cannot overlap.

     Returns a list of objects, where each object is a numpy array.
     """


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    concepts:                     concepts:                            concepts:
    color inversion,              pixel sorting, frequency counting,   shape completion, color filling
    objecxt transformation        color arrangement


    concepts:                     concepts:                            concepts:
    symmetry detection,           color blending,                      object detection, shape expansion,
    reflection                    radial expansion                     color filling


    concepts:                     concepts:                            concepts:
    pattern detection, copying,   inverse patterns, scaling            color blending,
    positioning                                                        shape merging


             Figure 13: Nine example problems generated automatically by our pipeline.


                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3      G ENERATED ARC EXAMPLES

B      F INE TUNING TRAINING DETAILS
B.1      P ROMPTING THE MODELS

We must include in our prompts for our fine-tuned models the input/output 2D colored grids of
each problem. To do this we represent the problem textually by naming the colors one-by-one. We
renamed certain colors which were more than one token (e.g., maroon→brown saves 1 token/pixel),
and presented the grid as a whitespace-delimited 2D array with newlines delimiting rows. Please
see below.

 Train examples                                                           Test example
 Example 1               Example 2                 Example 3


                                 Figure 14: Prompt example illustration


Transduction example:


      ----- Role: system --------------------
      You are a world-class puzzle solver with exceptional pattern recognition
      skills. Your task is to analyze puzzles, spot patterns, and provide direct
      solutions.
      ----- Role: user --------------------
      Given input-output grid pairs as reference examples, carefully observe the
      patterns to predict the output grid for new test input. Each pair follows
      the same transformation rule. Grids are 2D arrays represented as strings,
      with cells (colors) separated by spaces and rows by newlines.
      Here are the input and output grids for the reference examples:
      Example 1
      Input:
      Black Gray Black
      Gray Gray Gray
      Black Gray Black

      Output:
      Black Black Blue Red Black Black
      Black Black Red Blue Black Black
      Blue Red Blue Red Blue Red
      Red Blue Red Blue Red Blue
      Black Black Blue Red Black Black
      Black Black Red Blue Black Black


      Example 2
      Input:
      Gray Black Black
      Black Gray Black
      Black Black Gray

      Output:
      Blue Red Black Black Black Black
      Red Blue Black Black Black Black
      Black Black Blue Red Black Black
      Black Black Red Blue Black Black


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Black Black Black Black Blue Red
   Black Black Black Black Red Blue


   Example 3
   Input:
   Black Gray Black
   Black Gray Gray
   Gray Gray Black

   Output:
   Black Black Blue Red Black Black
   Black Black Red Blue Black Black
   Black Black Blue Red Blue Red
   Black Black Red Blue Red Blue
   Blue Red Blue Red Black Black
   Red Blue Red Blue Black Black


   Here is the input grid for the test example:
   Input:
   Black Black Black
   Black Gray Black
   Gray Gray Gray

   Directly provide the output grids corresponding to the given test input
   grids, based on the patterns observed in the reference examples.
   ----- Role: assistant --------------------
   The output grid for the test input grid is:
   ‘‘‘
   Black Black Black Black Black Black
   Black Black Black Black Black Black
   Black Black Blue Red Black Black
   Black Black Red Blue Black Black
   Blue Red Blue Red Blue Red
   Red Blue Red Blue Red Blue
   ‘‘‘



Induction example:


   ----- Role: system --------------------
   You are a world-class puzzle solver with exceptional pattern recognition
   skills and expertise in Python programming. Your task is to analyze puzzles
   and provide Python solutions.
   ----- Role: user --------------------
   Given input-output grid pairs as reference examples, carefully observe the
   patterns to predict the output grid for new test input. Each pair follows
   the same transformation rule. Grids are 2D arrays represented as strings,
   with cells (colors) separated by spaces and rows by newlines.
   Here are the input and output grids for the reference examples:
   Example 1
   Input:
   Black Gray Black
   Gray Gray Gray
   Black Gray Black

   Output:
   Black Black Blue Red Black Black
   Black Black Red Blue Black Black
   Blue Red Blue Red Blue Red
   Red Blue Red Blue Red Blue


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Black Black Blue Red Black Black
   Black Black Red Blue Black Black


   Example 2
   Input:
   Gray Black Black
   Black Gray Black
   Black Black Gray

   Output:
   Blue Red Black Black Black Black
   Red Blue Black Black Black Black
   Black Black Blue Red Black Black
   Black Black Red Blue Black Black
   Black Black Black Black Blue Red
   Black Black Black Black Red Blue


   Example 3
   Input:
   Black Gray Black
   Black Gray Gray
   Gray Gray Black

   Output:
   Black Black Blue Red Black Black
   Black Black Red Blue Black Black
   Black Black Blue Red Blue Red
   Black Black Red Blue Red Blue
   Blue Red Blue Red Black Black
   Red Blue Red Blue Black Black


   Here is the input grid for the test example:
   Input:
   Black Black Black
   Black Gray Black
   Gray Gray Gray

   Write a Python function ‘transform‘ that can convert any given input grid to
    its corresponding output grid based on the pattern observed in the
   reference examples.
   ----- Role: assistant --------------------
   Let’s solve this puzzle using Python code with the common library functions.
    We’ll first reason about the problem and then write the code to solve it.
   The ‘transform‘ function will take the input grid and return the output grid
   . Here is the Python code with the comments describing how to solve the
   problem:
   ‘‘‘python
   from common import *

   import numpy as np
   from typing import *

   # concepts:
   # repetition, diagonal lines, color change

   # description:
   # In the input you will see a 3x3 grid with a specific diagonal pattern of
   gray pixels.
   # The output should be the result of repeating this diagonal pattern
   horizontally and vertically


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      # to fill a 6x6 grid, changing the color from gray to blue and red in an
      alternating manner.

      def transform(input_grid: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
          # Create a new 6x6 output grid filled with the background color (black)
          output_grid = np.full((6, 6), Color.BLACK)

         # Check for the diagonal pattern in the input grid
         for i in range(3):
             for j in range(3):
                 if input_grid[i, j] == Color.GRAY:
                     # Fill the same position in the output grid with alternating
      colors
                     output_grid[i * 2, j * 2] = Color.BLUE
                     output_grid[i * 2, j * 2 + 1] = Color.RED
                     output_grid[i * 2 + 1, j * 2] = Color.RED
                     output_grid[i * 2 + 1, j * 2 + 1] = Color.BLUE

            return output_grid
      ‘‘‘


C      E XAMPLES OF I NDUCTION S OLUTIONS

C.1     ARC P ROBLEM F 3 CDC 58 F

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# color counting, grid transformation

# description:
# In the input, you will see a grid with several colored squares.
# To make the output, count the number of squares of each color.
# Fill the output grid with bars of corresponding colors.
# The height of each bar corresponds to the number of squares of that
                                     color.

def transform(input_grid: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    # Create a blank output grid
    output_grid = np.zeros_like(input_grid)

       # Count the number of squares of each color
       color_counts = {color: 0 for color in Color.NOT_BLACK}

       for row in input_grid:
           for cell in row:
               if cell in color_counts:
                   color_counts[cell] += 1

       # Define the height of the bars based on the counts
       max_height = 10 # Maximum height of the bars
       for color, count in color_counts.items():
           if count > 0:
               for h in range(min(count, max_height)):
                   output_grid[-(h + 1), (color - 1) % len(Color.NOT_BLACK)]
                                                         = color # Fill the
                                                         output grid with


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      colors in a bar
                                                      representation

      return output_grid


C.2   ARC P ROBLEM BE 03 B 35 F

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# color detection, pattern extraction, rotation transformation

# description:
# In the input, you will see a 5x5 grid consisting of a colored pattern
                                     in the top left corner and a 2x2
                                     square of red pixels in the bottom
                                     right corner.
# Depending on the color of the top left corner (blue or green), rotate
                                     the pattern by 90 degrees clockwise
                                     or counterclockwise.
# The output grid should be the transformed pattern placed in the same
                                     position as the original top left
                                     pattern.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Extract the top left 5x5 pattern
    pattern = input_grid[0:5, 0:5]

      # Identify the color in the top left corner
      corner_color = pattern[0, 0]

      # Define rotation based on the corner color
      if corner_color == Color.BLUE:
          transformed_pattern = np.rot90(pattern, k=-1) # Rotate 90
                                               degrees counterclockwise
      elif corner_color == Color.GREEN:
          transformed_pattern = np.rot90(pattern, k=1)   # Rotate 90
                                               degrees clockwise
      else:
          raise ValueError("The corner color must be either BLUE or GREEN."
                                               )

      # Create the output grid
      output_grid = np.full((2, 2), Color.BLACK) # Initialize a small grid
      output_grid = blit_sprite(output_grid, transformed_pattern, x=0, y=0,
                                            background=Color.BLACK)

      return output_grid


C.3   ARC P ROBLEM 2072 ABA 6

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# color mapping, pattern replication



                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


# description:
# In the input you will see a 3x3 grid of colored pixels.
# The colors are either black or gray. The output should be a grid where:
# 1. If the pixel is black, it remains black in the output.
# 2. If the pixel is gray, it should be replaced with a 2x2 block of blue
                                      and red pixels in a checkerboard
                                     pattern.
# The blue pixel should occupy the top-left and bottom-right of the 2x2
                                     block, while the red pixel occupies
                                     the top-right and bottom-left.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Create an output grid that is larger than the input grid
    output_grid = np.zeros((input_grid.shape[0] * 2, input_grid.shape[1]
                                         * 2), dtype=int)

      # Fill the output grid based on the input grid
      for x in range(input_grid.shape[0]):
          for y in range(input_grid.shape[1]):
              if input_grid[x, y] == Color.BLACK:
                  # Black stays black in the output
                  continue
              else:
                  # Replace gray with a checkerboard pattern of blue and
                                                       red
                  output_grid[2 * x:2 * x + 2, 2 * y:2 * y + 2] = [
                      [Color.BLUE, Color.RED],
                      [Color.RED, Color.BLUE]
                  ]

      return output_grid



C.4   ARC P ROBLEM EF 26 CBF 6

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# color transformation, grid sections, boundary detection

# description:
# In the input, you will see a grid with a pattern of yellow and blue
                                     pixels with a black background,
# and multiple colored circles (not yellow or blue) placed randomly
                                     within the grid.
# The goal is to transform the output grid by replacing all the blue
                                     pixels with the color of the closest
                                      circle
# and keeping the yellow pixels unchanged.

def transform(input_grid: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    # Create a copy of the input grid to modify
    output_grid = np.copy(input_grid)

      # Find the coordinates of the colored circles
      circle_coordinates = np.argwhere((input_grid != Color.BLACK) & (
                                           input_grid != Color.YELLOW) & (
                                           input_grid != Color.BLUE))

      # Iterate over the grid and replace blue pixels with the nearest
                                           circle color


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      for x in range(input_grid.shape[0]):
          for y in range(input_grid.shape[1]):
              if input_grid[x, y] == Color.BLUE:
                  # Find the closest circle
                  closest_color = None
                  closest_distance = float(’inf’)
                  for circle_x, circle_y in circle_coordinates:
                      distance = abs(circle_x - x) + abs(circle_y - y) #
                                                           Manhattan
                                                           distance
                      if distance < closest_distance:
                          closest_distance = distance
                          closest_color = input_grid[circle_x, circle_y]
                  # Replace the blue pixel with the closest circle color
                  output_grid[x, y] = closest_color

      return output_grid


C.5   ARC P ROBLEM E 7639916

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# boundary detection, color filling

# description:
# In the input grid, you will see a black background with several purple
                                     pixels forming a boundary.
# The task is to fill the area enclosed by the purple boundary with blue
                                     pixels.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Create an output grid that starts as a copy of the input grid
    output_grid = np.copy(input_grid)

      # Find the coordinates of the purple pixels
      purple_coords = np.argwhere(input_grid == Color.PURPLE)

      # If no purple pixels are found, return the original grid
      if len(purple_coords) == 0:
          return output_grid

      # Get the boundaries of the purple pixels
      min_x, min_y = np.min(purple_coords, axis=0)
      max_x, max_y = np.max(purple_coords, axis=0)

      # Fill the area enclosed by the purple boundary
      for x in range(min_x, max_x + 1):
          for y in range(min_y, max_y + 1):
              # Check if the current position is outside the purple
                                                   boundary
              if (x == min_x or x == max_x or y == min_y or y == max_y) and
                                                    output_grid[x, y] ==
                                                   Color.BLACK:
                  output_grid[x, y] = Color.BLUE

      return output_grid


C.6   ARC P ROBLEM C 074846 D


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# rotation, color change, symmetry

# description:
# In the input, you will see a colored object with a single gray pixel.
# To make the output, rotate the object 90 degrees clockwise around the
                                     gray pixel,
# and color the newly exposed pixels green.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Find the gray pixel location
    gray_pixel_locations = np.argwhere(input_grid == Color.GRAY)
    assert len(gray_pixel_locations) == 1
    gray_x, gray_y = gray_pixel_locations[0]

      # Create an output grid
      output_grid = np.full(input_grid.shape, Color.BLACK)

      # Rotate the object around the gray pixel
      for x in range(input_grid.shape[0]):
          for y in range(input_grid.shape[1]):
              if input_grid[x, y] != Color.BLACK and input_grid[x, y] !=
                                                   Color.GRAY:
                  # Calculate new position after 90 degrees clockwise
                                                       rotation
                  new_x = gray_x + (y - gray_y)
                  new_y = gray_y - (x - gray_x)

                    # Check if the new position is within bounds
                    if 0 <= new_x < output_grid.shape[0] and 0 <= new_y <
                                                         output_grid.shape[1]
                                                         :
                        # Place the rotated pixel in the output grid
                        output_grid[new_x, new_y] = input_grid[x, y]

                    # Color newly exposed pixels green
                    if output_grid[x, y] == Color.BLACK:
                        output_grid[x, y] = Color.GREEN

      # Place the gray pixel back in the center
      output_grid[gray_x, gray_y] = Color.GRAY

      return output_grid


C.7   ARC P ROBLEM AE 58858 E

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# object detection, color change, size comparison

# description:
# In the input, you will see a grid with red objects of various sizes.
# To make the output, change all objects larger than a certain size (3
                                     pixels) to pink.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


def transform(input_grid):
    # Create a copy of the input grid to produce the output
    output_grid = np.copy(input_grid)

      # Find all connected components (red objects) in the input grid
      red_objects = find_connected_components(input_grid, background=Color.
                                           BLACK, monochromatic=True)

      # Iterate through the red objects and change their color if they are
                                           larger than 3 pixels
      for obj in red_objects:
          size = np.sum(obj == Color.RED)
          if size > 3:
              output_grid[obj == Color.RED] = Color.PINK

      return output_grid



C.8   ARC P ROBLEM 21 F 83797

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# vertical and horizontal lines, intersection

# description:
# In the input, you will see two red pixels.
# To make the output, draw a blue square with the red pixels as corners.
# Additionally, draw a vertical and horizontal line that intersect at
                                     each red pixel.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Copy the input grid to the output grid
    output_grid = np.copy(input_grid)

      # Find the positions of the red pixels
      red_pixels = np.argwhere(input_grid == Color.RED)

      # Ensure there are exactly two red pixels
      assert len(red_pixels) == 2
      (x1, y1), (x2, y2) = red_pixels

      # Sort the red pixels’ positions to determine which is top-left and
                                           bottom-right
      top_left = (min(x1, x2), min(y1, y2))
      bottom_right = (max(x1, x2), max(y1, y2))

      # Draw a blue square from the top-left to the bottom-right corner
      output_grid[top_left[0]:bottom_right[0]+1, top_left[1]:bottom_right[1
                                           ]+1] = Color.BLUE

      # Draw horizontal and vertical lines through the red pixels
      for x, y in [(x1, y1), (x2, y2)]:
          output_grid[x, :] = Color.RED # Horizontal line through red
                                               pixels
          output_grid[:, y] = Color.RED # Vertical line through red pixels

      return output_grid


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.9    ARC P ROBLEM 33 B 52 DE 3

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# object detection, color mapping, grid transformation

# description:
# In the input, you will see a 20x20 grid containing a 4x4 pattern made
                                     of colored pixels (not necessarily
                                     contiguous) and a series of 3x3 gray
                                      squares.
# The task is to extract the colors from the 4x4 pattern and color the
                                     corresponding 3x3 gray squares with
                                     those colors in a specific order.
# The first gray square should be colored with the first color from the
                                     pattern, the second gray square with
                                      the second color, and so on.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Step 1: Detect the 4x4 color pattern in the input grid.
    color_pattern = detect_objects(input_grid, monochromatic=False,
                                         connectivity=8)

       # Step 2: Extract the colors from the detected pattern.
       colors = []
       for obj in color_pattern:
           cropped_obj = crop(grid=obj, background=Color.BLACK)
           colors.extend(cropped_obj.flatten())

       # Step 3: Identify the locations of the gray squares.
       gray_squares = detect_objects(input_grid, colors=[Color.GRAY],
                                            monochromatic=True, connectivity
                                            =8)

       # Step 4: Color the gray squares with the corresponding colors from
                                            the pattern.
       output_grid = np.copy(input_grid)
       for i, gray_square in enumerate(gray_squares):
           if i < len(colors):
               # Color the gray square with the corresponding color
               x, y = np.where(gray_square == Color.GRAY)
               flood_fill(output_grid, x[0], y[0], colors[i])

       return output_grid


C.10    ARC P ROBLEM 332 EFDB 3

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# borders, alternating patterns

# description:
# In the input, you will see an empty black grid. To make the output,
                                     draw a blue border around the grid,
                                     but only on the edges that are


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               multiples of 2 (i.e., the top and
                                               bottom edges, and the left and right
                                                edges at every even column/index).

def transform(input_grid):
    # Get the dimensions of the input grid
    height, width = input_grid.shape

      # Create the output grid, initially a copy of the input grid
      output_grid = input_grid.copy()

      # Draw the blue border on edges that are multiples of 2
      for x in range(0, height, 2): # Vertical edges: multiples of 2
          draw_line(output_grid, x, 0, direction=(0, 1), color=Color.BLUE)
                                                # Top edge
          draw_line(output_grid, x, width - 1, direction=(0, 1), color=
                                               Color.BLUE) # Bottom edge

      for y in range(0, width, 2): # Horizontal edges: multiples of 2
          draw_line(output_grid, 0, y, direction=(1, 0), color=Color.BLUE)
                                                # Left edge
          draw_line(output_grid, height - 1, y, direction=(1, 0), color=
                                               Color.BLUE) # Right edge

      return output_grid



D     I NDUCTION FALSE P OSITIVE S OLUTIONS
D.1   ARC P ROBLEM 25094 A 63

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# grid transformation, color replacement, pattern detection

# description:
# In the input, you will see a grid with colored regions. If a 5x5 square
                                      in the grid consists entirely of a
                                     single color,
# replace that square with a 5x5 yellow square in the output grid. If the
                                      square is not fully filled with a
                                     single color, leave it as is.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Plan:
    # 1. Iterate over the grid to find 5x5 squares.
    # 2. For each 5x5 square, check if it is monochromatic (all pixels
                                         are the same color).
    # 3. If it is, replace it with a 5x5 yellow square in the output grid
                                         .

      output_grid = np.copy(input_grid)

      # Dimensions
      square_size = 5
      for x in range(len(input_grid) - square_size + 1):
          for y in range(len(input_grid[0]) - square_size + 1):
              # Extract the 5x5 region
              region = input_grid[x:x + square_size, y:y + square_size]
              # Check if the region is monochromatic


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               if np.all(region == region[0, 0]):   # All pixels should be
                                                     the same color
                    # Replace the region with a yellow square
                    output_grid[x:x + square_size, y:y + square_size] = Color
                                                         .YELLOW

      return output_grid


D.2   ARC P ROBLEM 009 D 5 C 81

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# pattern recognition, color transformation, grid manipulation

# description:
# In the input, you will see a 15x15 grid with a pattern of purple pixels
                                      that forms a shape and a blue
                                     circle in the center of the grid.
# To create the output, you should color the shape formed by the purple
                                     pixels with a specific color based
                                     on the number of purple pixels:
# - If there are 1-10 purple pixels, color the shape yellow.
# - If there are 11-20 purple pixels, color the shape green.
# - If there are 21-30 purple pixels, color the shape red.
# - If there are more than 30 purple pixels, color the shape orange.
# The blue circle should be replaced by black.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Create an output grid initialized to black
    output_grid = np.zeros_like(input_grid)

      # Count the number of purple pixels
      purple_count = np.count_nonzero(input_grid == Color.PURPLE)

      # Determine the color based on the number of purple pixels
      if 1 <= purple_count <= 10:
          shape_color = Color.YELLOW
      elif 11 <= purple_count <= 20:
          shape_color = Color.GREEN
      elif 21 <= purple_count <= 30:
          shape_color = Color.RED
      else:
          shape_color = Color.ORANGE

      # Find the purple shape and color it accordingly
      output_grid[input_grid == Color.PURPLE] = shape_color

      # Replace the blue circle with black
      output_grid[input_grid == Color.BLUE] = Color.BLACK

      return output_grid


D.3   ARC P ROBLEM E 95 E 3 D 8 E

from common import *

import numpy as np
from typing import *


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


# concepts:
# occlusion, symmetry detection, reconstruction

# description:
# In the input you will see a grid containing a repeated pattern that has
                                      been partially occluded by black
                                     squares.
# To make the output, remove the occluding black squares and restore the
                                     pattern based on the detected
                                     symmetry.

def transform(input_grid):
    # Plan:
    # 1. Extract the occluded pattern from the input grid.
    # 2. Detect the symmetries in the pattern.
    # 3. Fill in the missing parts of the pattern using the detected
                                         symmetries.

      # Step 1: Identify non-black pixels to find the pattern
      occlusion_color = Color.BLACK
      non_black_mask = input_grid != occlusion_color
      objects = detect_objects(input_grid, background=occlusion_color,
                                           monochromatic=False,
                                           connectivity=8)

      # Step 2: Find the symmetries in the detected objects
      symmetries = detect_translational_symmetry(input_grid, ignore_colors=
                                           [occlusion_color])

      # Step 3: Fill in the missing parts using the symmetries
      output_grid = input_grid.copy()
      for x, y in np.argwhere(non_black_mask):
          for symmetric_x, symmetric_y in orbit(input_grid, x, y,
                                               symmetries):
              if output_grid[symmetric_x, symmetric_y] == occlusion_color:
                  output_grid[symmetric_x, symmetric_y] = input_grid[x, y]

      return output_grid



D.4   ARC P ROBLEM 73 CCF 9 C 2

from common import *
import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# pattern extraction, rotation, centering

# description:
# In the input, you will see a grid with a pattern repeated several times
                                     , but with random rotations.
# To make the output, extract one instance of the pattern and rotate it
                                     back to its original orientation.

def transform(input_grid: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    # Create a copy of the input grid for the output
    output_grid = np.copy(input_grid)

      # Find connected components to extract patterns
      components = find_connected_components(output_grid, background=Color.
                                           BLACK, connectivity=8)



                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      # For each component, check if it’s a valid pattern
      for component in components:
          # Crop the component to get the pattern
          pattern = crop(component, background=Color.BLACK)

          # Check if the pattern can be rotated back to its original
                                               orientation
          # We can rotate the pattern and compare with the original
          original_pattern = pattern.copy()

          # Rotate the pattern in 90-degree increments and check if the
                                               original pattern matches
          rotated_patterns = [np.rot90(original_pattern, k) for k in range(
                                               4)]

          # We assume the first valid pattern is the original orientation
          for rotated in rotated_patterns:
              if np.array_equal(rotated, original_pattern):
                  # If it matches, we’ve found the original orientation
                  output_grid = pattern
                  break

      return output_grid



D.5   ARC P ROBLEM D 56 F 2372

from common import *
import numpy as np
from typing import *

# concepts:
# object detection, symmetry detection, cropping

# description:
# In the input you will see a grid filled with different colored shapes.
# The output should be the smallest symmetric shape (with respect to the
                                     center) that can fit all the others
                                     inside it.
# If there are no symmetric shapes, the output should be a grid of the
                                     same size filled with the background
                                      color.

def transform(input_grid: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    # Find all connected components (shapes) in the grid
    components = find_connected_components(input_grid, background=Color.
                                         BLACK, connectivity=8,
                                         monochromatic=False)

      # Initialize a variable to track the largest symmetric shape found
      largest_symmetric_shape = None
      max_area = 0

      # Check each component for symmetry and area
      for component in components:
          # Crop the component to get its shape
          cropped_shape = crop(component, background=Color.BLACK)

          # Check for horizontal and vertical mirror symmetry
          is_symmetric = np.array_equal(cropped_shape, np.flip(
                                               cropped_shape, axis=0)) or \
                         np.array_equal(cropped_shape, np.flip(
                                                              cropped_shape
                                                              , axis=1))


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                if is_symmetric:
                    area = np.count_nonzero(cropped_shape != Color.BLACK)
                    if area > max_area:
                        max_area = area
                        largest_symmetric_shape = cropped_shape

        # If we found a symmetric shape, return it; otherwise return a grid
                                             of the same size filled with the
                                              background color
        if largest_symmetric_shape is not None:
            return largest_symmetric_shape
        else:
            return np.full(input_grid.shape, Color.BLACK)



E      T EST-T IME T RAINING

Test time training is an approach for updating model parameters at test time, which we apply
to our transduction model. We assume that we are given test problems D comprising triples
(xtrain , ytrain , xtest ) and a data augmentation procedure AUG(x, y) which constructs variations of
an ARC problem, for example by permuting colors and rotating grids. Then model parameters are
optimized to maximize the likelihood of augmented test tasks where a random training input-output
is selected to serve as a fake test example:
                       E                       [tθ (ytrain [k] | xtrain [: k], xtrain [k + 1 :], ytrain [: k], ytrain [k + 1 :])]   (6)
            (xtrain ,ytrain ,xtest )∼D
                k∼1..len(xtrain )
        ′       ′
      (xtrain ,ytrain )∼AUG(xtrain ,ytrain )

where len(xtrain ) is the number of example training inputs, and k is the index of the training input-
output which is randomly selected to serve as a fake testcase. Note that this procedure does not rely
on access to ground truth test predictions.
We choose each training example as a fake test example and do 10 times different randomly com-
bined data augmentation for each fake task, which gives us 12k pseudo training dataset from the
evaluation dataset. We also randomly include 5k RE-ARC examples and 5k ARC-Heavy examples,
which we speculated would have a regularizing effect. The dataset size for test time training is 22k
total problems.

F      E XPERIMENT PARAMETERS

F.1      I NDUCTION

Fine-tuning Hyperparameters:

        training type                     lora rank         lora alpha       learning rate         gradient accumulate steps
        lora finetune                         64                64               2e-4                           2
    per device batch size                   device            epcoh          weight decay         learning rate scheduler type
               8                           8xA100                3                 0                         cosine


For the last 230k data finetune we used full finetuning instead of LoRA:

 training type                  learning rate                          weight decay                    gradient accumulate steps
 full finetune                      1e-5                                    0.05                                   1
     epoch                 per device train batch               learning rate scheduler type                    devices
        2                            16                                    cosine                               8xA100


                                                                        43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Inference Hyperparameters:

       • temperature: 0.8 (1.0 for the full-data fine-tuned model)
       • top-p: 1.0

Output selection: For experiments in section 4, when allowing one or two attempts, we filter the
sample programs using train input-output examples and then randomly select one or two distinct
programs uniformly. We report the expected value in our results. For experiments in section 5, we
take the execution results of test output from the programs that can pass all the train examples and
use majority vote to select the top 2, and in the case of concept arc, the top 3 test outputs.

F.2   T RANSDUCTION

Fine-tune Hyperparameters:

  training type       learning rate       weight decay          gradient accumulate steps      device
  full finetune           1e-5                1e-2                           2                8xA100
 engineer epoch        other epoch    per device train batch   learning rate scheduler type
         3                  2                   8                         cosine


For the final engineering results, we train for 3 epochs. For all other experiment results, we train for
2 epochs.
Inference Hyperparameters:

       • temperature: 0
       • use beam search: True
       • beam width:
           1. engineer results: 40
           2. 100k data scale: 20
           3. all other experiment results: 3
       • top-p: 1.0

Test-time Fine-tuning Hyperparameters

       training type         lora rank    lora alpha    learning rate    gradient accumulate steps
       lora finetune            64            64            2e-4                      2
   per device batch size      device        epcoh       weight decay    learning rate scheduler type
              2              4xA6000           3              0                    cosine


                                                   44
