Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



C RYO GEN: G ENERATIVE E NERGY- BASED M ODELS
FOR C RYOGENIC E LECTRON T OMOGRAPHY R ECON -
STRUCTION
 Yunfei Teng† Yuxuan Ren‡ Kai Chen Xi Chen Zhaoming Chen Qiwei Ye
 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)
 {yfteng, yxren, kchen, xchen, zmchen, qwye}@baai.ac.cn


                                                          A BSTRACT
           Cryogenic electron tomography (Cryo-ET) is a powerful technique for visualiz-
           ing subcellular structures in their native states. Nonetheless, its effectiveness is
           compromised by anisotropic resolution artifacts caused by the missing-wedge ef-
           fect. To address this, IsoNet, a deep learning-based method, proposes iteratively
           reconstructing the missing-wedge information. While successful, IsoNet’s depen-
           dence on recursive prediction updates often leads to training instability and model
           divergence. In this study, we introduce CryoGEN—an energy-based probabilis-
           tic model that not only mitigates resolution anisotropy but also removes the need
           for recursive subtomogram averaging, delivering an approximate 10× speedup
           for training. Evaluations across various biological datasets, including immature
           HIV-1 virions and ribosomes, demonstrate that CryoGEN significantly enhances
           structural completeness and interpretability of the reconstructed samples.


1    I NTRODUCTION
                                  Electron Beam                         Cryo-ET is a cutting-edge imaging technique
                                                                        that allows the detailed examination of three-
                                              TEM Stage                 dimensional (3D) structures of biomolecules,
                                                                        cellular components, and whole organisms at
 Frozen Specimen
                                                                        near-atomic resolution, preserving them in a
                                                                        near-native and hydrated environment. Pioneer-
                                                                        ing work by (Lucic et al., 2005) offers a com-
                      Transmission Imaging
                                                                        prehensive overview of using Cryo-ET to visu-
                                                                        alize cellular structures within their native envi-
                                                                        ronments. Subsequent advancements by (Beck
                                                                        & Baumeister, 2016) and (Schur et al., 2015)
                                                                        further demonstrate its capacity to resolve in-
                                                                        dividual proteins and their interactions at sub-
                                                                        nanometer resolution. These capabilities posi-
                                                                        tion Cryo-ET as an indispensable tool for de-
                           Tilt Series
                                                                        ciphering the intricate organization and regula-
                     Fourier         WBP                                tion of molecular machinery in living systems.
                    Transform     Reconstruct
                                                      The workflow of Cryo-ET proceeds as follows
    Missing Wedge                            Reconstructed Result
                                                      : a hydrated biological sample, intended for ob-
  Figure 1: Cryo-ET imaging and reconstruction. servation, is vitrified through rapid freezing to
                                                      preserve its native state, and then continuously
imaged by a transmission electron microscope (TEM) as the slide is incrementally tilted through a
series of angles. This process will generate a series of two-dimensional projections, and the collec-
tion of these projections are commonly referred to as a tilt series. The tilt series are then aligned
and reconstructed into a 3D structure, which is known as a tomogram in Cryo-ET. Among the vari-
ous available tomographic reconstruction methods, weighted back-projection (WBP) (Radermacher,
2006) is the most widely used one. This entire procedure is depicted in Figure 1.
However, the optical constraints in the TEM stage typically limit the tilt range to approximately
±60◦ , resulting in a missing wedge of data in Fourier space. Consequently, tomograms reconstructed
    †: Methodology development and algorithm implementation.
    ‡: Algorithm improvement and experimental validation.


                                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


via WBP exhibit anisotropic resolution (see Figure 2 (a)), with the lowest resolution observed along
the Z-axis (parallel to the direction of electron beam). This anisotropy leads to distorted or elongated
structural features in the 3D reconstruction, hindering the structural interpretation and underscoring
a persistent challenge in Cryo-ET data analysis.
Traditional methods to mitigate the missing
wedge problem include dual-axis tomography
(Mastronarde, 1997), which acquires two per-
pendicular tilt series to reduce the missing
wedge to a smaller “missing pyramid”. Com-
putational approaches such as model-based it-
erative reconstruction (Yan et al., 2019) and
iterative compressed-sensing optimized non-
uniform fast Fourier transform reconstruction          (a) WBP-reconstructed    (b) IsoNet-corrected (baseline)
(Deng et al., 2016) employ statistical tools
and optimization techniques to compensate for
missing data. However, these methods intro-
duce additional complexity to either data ac-
quisition or processing, yet they remain insuf-
ficient for fully restoring the missing informa-
tion. Meanwhile, Cryo-ET contends with the
inherent challenge of low signal-to-noise ratios
                                                   (c) CryoGEN-corrected (ours)        (d) Real structure
(SNR) caused by the need to use low electron
doses to prevent radiation damage. Traditional Figure 2: Reconstructed 3D structure comparison
approaches, such as tailored filtering (Tegunov among (a) WBP (b) IsoNet and (c) our method
& Cramer, 2019) or contrast transfer function using simulated Cryo-ET data of (d) C13 Vipp1
deconvolution (Cohen et al., 2024), can only stacked rings (EMDB:18424).
partially mitigate noise, leaving necessary SNR enhancement as an unresolved challenge.
In the past few years, deep learning-based approaches have demonstrated promising avenues for
restoring missing wedge data and improving SNR. IsoNet (Liu et al., 2022), for instance, has
achieved notable success in restoring missing wedge information, inspiring subsequent methods
(e.g., (Wiedemann & Heckel, 2024)). Concurrently, Noise2Noise-based denoising tools like Cry-
oCARE (Buchholz et al., 2019), Topaz (Bepler et al., 2020), and Warp (Tegunov & Cramer, 2019),
have significantly enhanced tomogram quality. Recent efforts (Wiedemann & Heckel, 2024; Zeng
et al., 2024) aim to unify missing wedge correction and denoising into integrated pipelines. Despite
these advances, current methods still produce artifacts and distortions, underscoring the need for
more robust and refined solutions.
In this work, we advance Cryo-ET data reconstruction by introducing CryoGEN, a generative deep
learning framework grounded in energy-based modeling. Different from IsoNet (Liu et al., 2022),
which relies on recursive training susceptible to error accumulation and requiring iterative fine-
tuning of predictions, CryoGEN eliminates these limitations through a direct modeling of data dis-
tributions from a Bayesian perspective. This approach leads to enhanced training stability, acceler-
ated convergence, and immunity to pitfalls observed in IsoNet. Comparative results in Figure 2 (b)
and (c) illustrate CryoGEN’s superior reconstruction fidelity.
Our contributions are: (1) Bayesian Formulation: We frame Cryo-ET reconstruction within a
Bayesian framework, addressing theoretical challenges and practical constraints; (2) Objective Anal-
ysis: We identify a potential failure mode in IsoNet’s algorithm, analyze its underlying cause, and
propose corrective strategies; (3) Energy-Based Modeling: We derive a novel objective function
based on energy-based modeling and provide detailed end-to-end training and inference protocols
for CryoGEN; (4) Empirical Validation: Across multiple datasets, we show that CryoGEN achieves
significantly improved accuracy and faster training compared to existing methods.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

In Cryo-ET reconstruction, let x ∈ X represent the original data (complete tomograms with missing
wedge restored), characterized by the distribution px . The observed data y ∈ Y corresponds to
WBP-reconstructed tomograms affected by the missing wedge, following distribution py .
We also define a missing wedge operator TM : X → Y, where Y = {TM (x) | x ∈ X }. This opera-
tor TM acts as a many-to-one linear transformation, which can be conceptualized as first converting
the image into the Fourier domain, masking to simulate tilt limitations, and transforming it back.
The imaging process for Cryo-ET is modeled as:
                                 y = TM (x) + ϵn ,          ϵn ∼ N (0, σn2 I),                       (1)
where ϵn denotes additive Gaussian noise, with σn2 determined experimentally. Consequently, Re-
covering x from y constitutes an ill-posed inverse problem.

2.2   BAYESIAN RULE

We observe that y follows a Gaussian distribution y ∼ N (TM (x), σn2 I). Applying Bayes’ theorem,
we obtain p(x|y) ∝ p(y|x) · p(x), which leads to:
                       log p(x | y) = log p(y | x) + log p(x) + constant
                                                                | {z } .                             (2)
                       | {z }         | {z }         | {z }
                          Posterior        Likelihood             Prior      Evidence

Thus, maximizing log p(x|y) is equivalent to maximizing the sum of log p(y|x) and log p(x). While
the maximization of log p(y|x) is straightforward, the prior distribution p(x) for complete tomo-
grams is typically unknown. This gap not only presents a challenge but also necessitates the devel-
opment of an effective method for properly defining this prior.

2.3   E NERGY- BASED M ODELS

To model an arbitrary distribution, we employ Energy-based models (EBMs) (Lecun et al., 2006),
which provide a probabilistic framework by defining distributions in terms of an energy function.
We introduce a non-negative energy function Ex , allowing the distribution to be expressed as:
                                              1
                                      p(x) = exp(−Ex (x)),                                     (3)
                                              Z
where Z is the partition function (Boltzmann, 1974). The energy function Ex assigns lower en-
ergies to high-probability states (e.g., properly reconstructed tomograms) and higher energies to
implausible states, thereby sculpting the energy landscape to match the data manifold.

3     M OTIVATION
For each observation y ∈ Y, substituting log p(y|x) = − 2σ12 ∥TM (x) − y∥22 into Equation (2) leads
                                                           n
to the optimal reconstruction x∗ is obtained via maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation as the
following:

            ∗                                          1                2
           x (y) = arg max log p(x|y) = arg max − 2 ∥TM (x) − y∥2 + log p(x) .                  (4)
                      x∈X                    x∈X      2σn
To circumvent the computational expense of iterative sampling or optimization, a natural strategy is
to learn a parameterized mapping gθ : y 7→ x∗ (y). This approach, which focuses on learning the
mapping directly, is not immediately obvious but is fundamentally similar to the method (Johnson
et al., 2016) (i.e., training neural networks to predict the targets directly rather than generating them
iteratively during runtime). This concept also forms the foundation of IsoNet (Liu et al., 2022) and
its variants (Buchholz et al., 2019), whose limitations we will discuss shortly, alongside the rationale
for incorporating a generative model to address these challenges.
Consider a simplified scenario with a single observation Y = {y0 }, where two distinct x1 and x2
map exactly to y0 under the operation TM , so obviously:
                           ∥TM (x1 ) − y0 ∥22 = 0,          ∥TM (x2 ) − y0 ∥22 = 0.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Under the linearity of TM , the likelihood is maximized along the line segment connecting x1 and
x2 . Assuming a prior p(x) modeled as a Gaussian mixture:
                                    1
                                       N (x | x1 , σ 2 I) + N (x | x2 , σ 2 I) ,

                           p(x) =
                                    2
where N (x|xi , σ 2 I) denotes a single Gaussian distribution centered at xi with covariance matrix
σ 2 I. Alternatively, this can be expressed as:
                                              ∥x − x1 ∥2             ∥x − x2 ∥2

                               1
                  p(x) = √            exp −                + exp   −               .
                            2 2πσ 2              2σ 2                   2σ 2
We assume σ 2 < 15 ∥x1 −x2 ∥22 , ensuring sufficient separation between modes in X , and seek to max-
imize the posterior p(gθ (y0 )|y0 ). Following IsoNet’s methodology (as detailed in Appendix A.1),
the objective simplifies to solving:
                                        1
                       θ′ = arg min       ∥gθ (y0 ) − x1 ∥22 + ∥gθ (y0 ) − x2 ∥22 .

                                    θ   2
This formulation seeks the parameter θ′ that minimizes the mean squared error between the func-
tion’s output gθ (y0 ) between both x1 and x2 . Apparently, this leads to gθ′ (y0 ) = 21 (x1 + x2 ), and
thus
                                                             ∥x1 − x2 ∥2

                                                 1
                          p (x = gθ′ (y0 )) = √       exp −                  .                        (5)
                                                2πσ 2             8σ 2

This result may be unfavorable because
                                                          ∥x1 − x2 ∥2

                                         1
                  p x = x1 or x = x2 = √        1 + exp −                .                              (6)
                                      2 2πσ 2                2σ 2
It can be shown that Equation (5) yields a lower probability compared to Equation (6) under our
assumptions, indicating that the result learned by gθ′ (y0 ) is suboptimal compared to directly se-
lecting either x1 or x2 . This typically happens when the probability density function of the prior
distribution is non-convex, and thus simply averaging the minima lacks meaningful interpretation,
highlighting a key limitation we have observed with IsoNet. By introducing an energy function as
Ex (x) = − log p(x), the situation is depicted in Figure 3(a), where it is demonstrated that Ex (x̄)
does not correspond to a low-energy state, where x̄ denotes the average of x1 and x2 .
                                                         The fundamental issue arises from the inherent
                                                         one-to-many mapping, which precludes the ex-
                                                         istence of a deterministic function capable of
                                                         associating a single observation with all poten-
                                                         tial minima. Mathematically, this reflects the
                                                         constraint that the cardinality of gθ (Y) cannot
                                                         surpass that of Y, inevitably causing undesir-
               (a) Energy landscape                      able results. A simple yet effective solution is to
                                                         incorporate Gaussian noise through input aug-
  Domain
                                                         mentation by perturbing the input as y + ϵg ,
                                                         where ϵg ∼ N (0, σg2 I). Since the support of
                                                         ϵg spans the entire real space (an uncountably
                                                         infinite set), the ambiguity in the mapping is ef-
  Domain                                                 fectively resolved.
                                                      Integrating the energy model Ex with gθ (y +
                (b) Find a minimum                    ϵg ) enables the generation of distributions
                                                      aligned with the target, facilitating the identi-
   Figure 3: Limitations of IsoNet formulation.       fication of a suitable minimum rather than aver-
aging over multiple minima. This method also circumvents the computational burden of one-the-fly
sampling, inheriting the advantages of IsoNet while resolving the earlier limitation. As illustrated in
Figure 3(b), the noise ϵg steers the model toward distinct low-energy states during the minimization
of Ex , favoring convergence to a specific local minimum over an averaged solution. Notably, we
later establish in Equation (9) that this framework can be reinterpreted as a generative task.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     M ETHODOLOGY
Our objective is to determine a suitable energy model Ex , but training the energy model directly
on the space X is not feasible due to the lack of labeled data, restricting training to the observation
space Y. However, we can assume that if a sample x belongs to X , its corresponding energy should
be low. Moreover, we assume that if x ∈ X , then R(x) ∈ X as well, where R denotes a rotation
operation selected from a predefined set of rotations R detailed in Appendix A.2. This rotation
operation assumes that, aside from the missing wedge angles, the distributions are uniform in all
directions, which is a fundamental premise in Cryo-ET reconstruction.
                                                                  1
                                                                     P
Thus we may train an energy model E on Y , with Ex (x) = |R|           R∈R Ey (TM (R ◦ x)). Inspired
by (Lecun et al., 2006), we do not explicitly define the energy function. Instead, we could define it in
a manner akin to contrastive learning, where low energy is assigned to samples while higher energy
is attributed to other undesired regions in the energy space. This approach falls under the category of
implicit probabilistic models (Diggle & Gratton, 1984). Using the trained energy model, we define
the distribution px based on the Boltzmann distribution, as previously described in Equation (3).

4.1     O BJECTIVE

We train the model with two objectives: consistency loss and posterior maximization. The consis-
tency loss follows the IsoNet formulation; although it ultimately stabilizes, its inherent drawbacks
can impede early progress and even cause divergence (see Section 3). The energy-based penalty,
by contrast, supplies a sharper optimization signal but is well-known for instability at the end of
training. To balance these trade-offs, we combine both terms.

4.1.1    C ONSISTENCY L OSS
In general, we can assume that gθ′ serves as an approximate inverse of TM . To enforce this inverse
condition, we first introduce a consistency loss:
                                         "                                                       #
                                            1 X      −1                                        2
 Consistency Loss = Ey∼py ,ϵ∼N (0,σh2 I)           ∥R ◦ gθ′ ◦ TM ◦ R (gθ (y) + ϵh ) − gθ (y)∥2 ,
                                           |R|
                                               R∈R
                                                                                                 (7)
where “◦” denotes function composition. While Equation (7) largely mirrors IsoNet’s objective
function (Liu et al., 2022), it omits the epoch-wise recursive refinement step. If TM is not one-
to-one—as is often the case—the problem highlighted in Section 3 can arise, so injecting noise ϵh
becomes essential.

4.1.2    M AXIMUM A P OSTERIOR
Next, our goal is to generate results that maximize the log posterior log p(x|y) by incorporating
the previously discussed energy penalty term. The objective is to minimize the error on X using a
model trained on the Y. Therefore, we must ensure that E(TM (x)) is low when TM (x) ∈ Y and
high otherwise. Therefore, we can define the posterior as:
                                "                                                                   #
                                    1 X                                 1                         2
Posterior = Ey∼py ,ϵ∼N (0,σg2 I) −          E (TM ◦ R ◦ gθ (y + ϵg )) + 2 ∥TM ◦ gθ (y + ϵg ) − y∥2 ,
                                   |R|                                 2σn
                                        R∈R
                                                                                                    (8)
where σn2 denotes the hyperparameter introduced in Equation (1). By overcoming the limitations of
relying solely on the consistency loss, our approach obtains a notable performance gain in the early
stage of training.

4.2     E NERGY M ODEL

The energy model E can be constructed using various methods, such as (Chen et al., 2020; Du
et al., 2023). In this work, we directly employ generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). Specifically, we define our energy model as a parameterized neural network Eϕ with
parameters ϕ. This configuration allows for the simultaneous training of both the energy model


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eϕ and gθ . Consequently, the energy model is learned through adversarial training, as outlined in
Equation (9):
                   "                                                                           #
                                               1 X
Energy = max min Ey∼py ,ϵ∼pϵ ,ϵg ∼N (0,σg2 I)         Eϕ (TM ◦ R ◦ gθ (y + ϵg )) − Eϕ (y + ϵ) .
            ϕ   θ                             |R|
                                                  R∈R
                                                                                               (9)
Furthermore, we consider a similar formulation as (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017). Let y follow the
distribution py with support on Y, and let ϵ be an absolutely continuous distribution with density pϵ .
Then, the distribution py+ϵ is also absolutely continuous with density:
                                                           Z
                         py+ϵ (z) = Ey∼py [pϵ (z − y)] =      pϵ (z − y) dpy .                   (10)
                                                              Y
                                                           ∥z−y∥2
                                                       −
Especially, If ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 I), then py+ϵ (z) ∝ Y e
                                                   R
                                                              dpy , and Equation (9) reaches Nash
                                                             2σ 2

equilibrium when pgθ (z) = py+ϵ (z), as follows:
                          Z       Z
                        1
                                              1z=TM ◦R◦gθ (y+ϵg ) · pϵg (ϵg ) py (y) dϵg dy.
                                         X
             pgθ (z) =                                                                        (11)
                       |R| y∈Y ϵg ∈Rd
                                         R∈R
This result is analogous to the conclusion presented in (Goodfellow et al., 2014), except that here,
the data distribution is obtained by convolving the original data distribution with a Gaussian.
4.3   A LGORITHM
The CryoGEN algorithm consists of two stages: training and inference. (1) During the training
stage, a prediction model gθ is trained by a combination of consistency loss and posterior maxi-
mization along with an energy model Eϕ , using Equations (7) to (9). The full training procedure
is detailed in algorithm 1; (2) In the inference stage, the complete tomogram is first divided into
multiple overlapping subtomograms. These subtomograms are then processed through the predic-
tion model gθ to generate refined versions, which are later reassembled into a complete tomogram.
Finally, to minimize edge effects, overlapping regions are averaged using a weighted approach.
Algorithm 1 Training prediction model.
Require: Tomogram dataset Y, noise levels σ 2 , σg2 , σh2 > 0, estimated noise variance σn2 , energy
  model Eϕ : Rd → R+ , prediction model gθ : Rd → Rd , learning rate η, energy penalty term
  λ ≥ 0.
  repeat
      Randomly generate noise ϵ, ϵg , ϵh ∼ N (0, σ 2 I), N (0, σg2 I), N (0, σh2 I).
      Set f (ϕ, θ) = − Eϕ (TM ◦ R ◦ gθ (y + ϵg )) + 1/2σn2 · ∥TM ◦ gθ (y + ϵg ) − y∥22
      Update θ′ ← θ′ − η · ∂θ
                            ∂
                              ′ ∥R
                                   −1
                                      ◦ gθ′ ◦ TM ◦ R (gθ (y) + ϵh ) − [gθ (y)] ∥22
                            ∂
      Update ϕ ← ϕ − ηλ · ∂ϕ [Eϕ (y + ϵ) − f (ϕ, θ)]
      Update θ ← ηλ · θ + (1 − ηλ) · θ′ − ηλ · ∂θ∂
                                                     f (ϕ, θ)
      Reduce the energy penalty term λ
  until convergence
  return gθ

5     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we compare our method with IsoNet, the state-of-the-art missing wedge correction
technique, across various experiments. First, we validate our hypothesis using simple geometric
shapes, as described in Section 5.1. Next, we assess our algorithm on a simulated dataset and
benchmark it against other approaches in Section 5.2. Finally, we evaluate our method on real-
world examples to test its robustness, as discussed in Section 5.3. Additional implementation and
data processing details are provided in the Appendix, where we also present results from the lat-
est simultaneous missing wedge correction and denoising method, DeepDeWedge (Wiedemann &
Heckel, 2024).
Remark. CryoGEN achieves a significant speedup, completing the training process approximately
10× faster than IsoNet. For instance, with an NVIDIA V100, CryoGEN requires only two hours,
whereas IsoNet takes around 20 hours on Section 5.3 experiment.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (a) IsoNet-corrected sphere.                          (b) IsoNet-corrected prism.


         (c) CryoGEN-corrected sphere.                         (d) CryoGEN-corrected prism.
                          Figure 6: CryoGEN and IsoNet corrected shapes.

5.1   S IMPLE S HAPES
First, we validate the algorithm’s effectiveness using sim-
ple synthetic shapes with known ground truth. We gener-
ate a 3D sphere and a triangular prism, artificially intro-
ducing a missing wedge. To illustrate this, we transform
the X-Z slice into the Fourier domain, clearly revealing
the missing wedge, as shown in Figure 4.
Our objective is to reconstruct the missing wedge regions,       (a) Sphere.         (b) Prism.
and we demonstrate that our algorithm significantly out-
                                                            Figure 4: Central Fourier slice of the
performs the baseline in this task. As illustrated in Fig-
                                                            original missing-wedged shapes.
ure 5, the synthetic images exhibit reduced resolution in
the directions affected by the missing wedge, while the X-Y slice closely matches the ground truth
as designed) closely matches the ground truth by design, as illustrated in Figure 5.
                                                We first apply both IsoNet and CryoGEN to the two
                                                shapes, with the results shown in Figure 6. Both
                                                methods aim to restore the corrupted regions. While
                                                IsoNet successfully reconstructs the sphere, some
                                                artefacts remain, and it fails to restore the prism, pro-
                                                ducing a distorted oval in the X-Z and Y -Z slices.
      (a) Original missing-wedged sphere.       In contrast, CryoGEN achieves an almost perfect
                                                restoration of both shapes, with the slices closely
                                                resembling the original clean images. Our experi-
                                                ments reveal that CryoGEN can effectively recover
                                                more of the missing wedge regions and capture high-
                                                frequency signals.
                                               Next, we quantitatively evaluate performance using
      (b) Original missing-wedged prism.
                                               the Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Struc-
 Figure 5: Original missing-wedged shapes. tural Similarity Index (SSIM) between the ground
truth and the generated results. Definitions of PSNR and SSIM are provided in Appendix A.3.1.
We compare the corrupted datasets, the results corrected by IsoNet and DeepDeWedge, and those
corrected by CryoGEN. As shown in Table 1, our method consistently outperforms the baselines.

5.2   S IMULATED DATA
In this section, we applied our algorithm to more complex protein assemblies. Following the ap-
proach of IsoNet, we first evaluated our performance on the publicly available atomic model apo-
ferritin (PDB:6Z6U) (Yip et al., 2020). Additionally, we selected the recently published electron
microscopy dataset of C13 Vipp1 stacked rings (EMDB:18424) (Junglas et al., 2024). The results
show that CryoGEN delivers more consistent outcomes in both the spatial and Fourier domains.
Additionally, CryoGEN demands significantly less training time compared to IsoNet.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Quantitative evaluation of image quality for tomography reconstructions using different
methods, comparing PSNR and SSIM metrics (higher values indicating better performance for both
metrics) on sphere, prism and Vipp1 assembly datasets.
                                          Sphere                Prism          Vipp1 assembly
                     Data State
                                     PSNR      SSIM       PSNR       SSIM      PSNR      SSIM
                  Corrupted          21.12     0.8113     14.82      0.6931    26.68    0.8000
               Iso-corrected         22.98     0.8770     19.11      0.8857    27.12    0.8191
          Dewedge-corrected          23.17     0.8824     21.10      0.9278    28.75    0.8758
          CryoGEN-corrected          29.19     0.9706     32.69      0.9949    30.65    0.9199

Apoferritin. We made reconstructions using the atomic model of apoferritin (# PDB: 6Z6U), a
widely-used benchmark in high-resolution CryoGEN. The simulated maps were then randomly ro-
tated in ten different orientations, and a missing wedge was imposed in Fourier space, producing
subtomograms with missing wedge artifacts. In this setup, CryoGEN achieved noticeably superior
performance compared to IsoNet and also substantially reduced the training time. These improve-
ments are particularly evident when inspecting the low-density volume in ChimeraX (Goddard et al.,
2018), as illustrated in Figure 7.


(a) WBP reconstructed missing-       (b) Structure generated by IsoNet,    (c) Structure generated by Cryo-
wedged apoferritin, displaying       displaying a corrupted region with    GEN, showing a much smoother
both corrupted and missing re-       visible inconsistencies in the low-   and coherent low-density volume
gions in the low-density volume.     density volume.                       representation.
Figure 7: Comparison of low-density volumes generated by WBP (a), IsoNet (b) and CryoGEN (c).
The results indicate that IsoNet produces synthetic artifacts stemming from the reconstruction of the
missing wedge, which CryoGEN effectively resolves.

C13 Vipp1 Stacked Rings. We assessed our method using the recently published C13 Vipp1
stacked rings dataset (# EMDB:18424), which features complex molecular assemblies. This dataset
was obtained from the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (wwPDB Consortium, 2023).


                                    (a) IsoNet-corrected Vipp1 assembly.


                                   (b) CryoGEN-corrected Vipp1 assembly.
Figure 8: CryoGEN and IsoNet corrected Vipp1 assembly. The results shown in IsoNet exhibit strong
streaking artifacts. In contrast, our method does not exhibit these streaking artifacts.
                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Following the approach of IsoNet, we randomly rotated the tomograms to generate ten distinct sam-
ples before applying missing wedge corruption. As shown in Table 1, CryoGEN outperforms IsoNet,
achieving higher PSNR and SSIM values. We present the original results in Figure 2, alongside
spatial and Fourier domain comparisons in Figure 8. In the Fourier domain, CryoGEN accurately
captures essential details and produces more consistent and symmetrical results. Furthermore, while
IsoNet’s reconstruction still exhibits artifacts, CryoGEN produces significantly smoother and more
accurate results with higher contrast in spatial domain.

5.3    R EAL -W ORLD E XAMPLES
In this section, we evaluate the method’s effectiveness using real-world examples. We employ a
well-known Cryo-ET particle selection benchmark, specifically the dataset of purified ribosomes
(Zhang et al., 2016), as well as the virus-like particle dataset of immature HIV-1 for both single-
particle and tomographic reconstruction (Schur et al., 2016). CryoGEN significantly reduces the
ringing effect and achieves higher contrast, while providing better compensation for the missing
wedge compared to IsoNet’s irregular distribution.


      (a) IsoNet-corrected purified ribosomes.             (c) CryoGEN-corrected purified ribosomes.


(b) Central Fourier slice of the IsoNet-corrected       (d) Central Fourier slice of the CryoGEN-
purified ribosomes.                                     corrected purified ribosomes.

Figure 9: Comparison of IsoNet-corrected and CryoGEN-corrected purified ribosomes, including
their corresponding central fourier slices. The CryoGEN-corrected images exhibit higher contrast
and reduced high-frequency features. While both methods effectively fill in the missing wedge, the
IsoNet correction shows an irregular distribution of high-frequency components in the central re-
gion, whereas CryoGEN achieves a more consistent distribution.

Purified Ribosomes. The ribosomes dataset is commonly used as a Cryo-ET benchmark. We col-
lected all seven tilt series from the EMPIAR-10045 dataset and applied the same preprocessing
steps as IsoNet, detailed in Appendix A.8.5. Figure 9 shows the correction results for both IsoNet
and CryoGEN. Ribosomes in the CryoGEN-corrected volume appear clearer and exhibit higher con-
trast, which significantly aids in particle selection. Additionally, there is less noise and fewer sharp
artifacts in the background. Notably, the IsoNet-corrected volume displays a frequency spectrum
with an irregular concentration of high-frequency components in the central region, introducing no-
ticeable noise and artifacts. In contrast, the CryoGEN-corrected volume shows a much smoother
and more consistent frequency distribution, with better control over central frequencies. The more
symmetrical pattern suggests reduced distortion and better alignment with the expected smooth be-
havior, indicating improved data integrity.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   (a) IsoNet-corrected immature HIV capsid.              (c) CryoGEN-corrected immature HIV capsid.


(b) Central Fourier slice of the IsoNet-corrected        (d) Central Fourier slice of the CryoGEN-
immature HIV capsid.                                     corrected immature HIV capsid.
Figure 10: A comparison of IsoNet-corrected and CryoGEN-corrected immature HIV capsids, along
with their corresponding central Fourier slices, reveals distinct differences. The IsoNet-corrected
images exhibit noticeable ringing effects, whereas the CryoGEN-corrected images feature minimal
noise and a smoother background. Additionally, while both methods address the missing wedge
region, IsoNet correction introduces more prominent streak artifacts.
HIV Capsid. The results of HIV capsid dataset are presented in Figure 10. Following IsoNet’s pre-
processing procedure, we collected three tilt series from the EMPIAR-10164 dataset and processed
the volume as detailed in Appendix A.8.6. The CryoGEN-corrected HIV capsid is noticeably clearer
than the IsoNet-corrected version, with minimal noise and a much smoother background. In con-
trast, the IsoNet-corrected volume exhibits a pronounced ringing effect around the gold beads, with
bright rings surrounding them and unwanted white dust scattered throughout the image. Our algo-
rithm effectively eliminates all these artefacts. Additionally, CryoGEN compensates for the missing
wedge region more effectively than IsoNet. As shown in the top windows of Figure 10 (a) and Fig-
ure 10 (c), the virus particle in the CryoGEN-corrected volume is more intact, with fewer defects
compared to the IsoNet-corrected version. In the Fourier domain, while both methods attempt to fill
the missing wedge region, IsoNet’s correction introduces more noticeable line artefacts.

6 C ONCLUSION
Cryo-ET serves as an indispensable tool for visualizing subcellular architectures in their native envi-
ronments, yet its potential is constrained by anisotropic resolution artifacts arising from the missing-
wedge effect. In this study, we present CryoGEN, an innovative energy-based framework engineered
to resolve the missing-wedge challenge in Cryo-ET. Our method achieves faster, more stable training
convergence than existing approaches while significantly enhancing reconstruction fidelity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project was led by Dr. Teng, who oversaw its progression, designed the methodology, and
implemented the algorithms. Guided by Dr. Teng during the internship, Yuxuan Ren refined the
algorithms and performed the experimental validation. The authors would also like to extend their
sincere gratitude to Prof. Zhouchen Lin and Dr. He Zhang for their exceptional feedback on this
research, as well as Dr. Sha Hu for her assistance in refining the biological terms during the paper
writing process. The authors also express the appreciation to Dr. Hui Wang and Dr. Jiayan Zhang
for their motivational discussion and biological expertise.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky and Leon Bottou. Towards principled methods for training generative adversarial
 networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://
 openreview.net/forum?id=Hk4_qw5xe.
M Beck and W Baumeister. Visualizing the molecular sociology at the hela cell nuclear periphery
 by cryo-electron tomography. Annual Review of Biochemistry, 85:1–18, 2016.
Tristan Bepler, Kotaro Kelley, Alex J Noble, and Bonnie Berger. Topaz-denoise: general deep
  denoising models for cryoem and cryoet. Nature communications, 11(1):5208, 2020.
Ludwig Boltzmann. Theoretical Physics and Philosophical Problems: Selected Writings, volume 5
  of Vienna Circle Collection. Springer, 1974. ISBN 978-90-277-0287-8.
Tim-Oliver Buchholz, Mareike Jordan, Gaia Pigino, and Florian Jug. Cryo-care: Content-aware im-
  age restoration for cryo-transmission electron microscopy data. In 2019 IEEE 16th International
  Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2019), pp. 502–506. IEEE, 2019.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Eli J. Cohen, Tina Drobnič, Deborah A. Ribardo, Aoba Yoshioka, Trishant Umrekar, Xuefei Guo,
  Jose-Jesus Fernandez, Emma E. Brock, Laurence Wilson, Daisuke Nakane, David R. Hendrixson,
  and Morgan Beeby. Evolution of a large periplasmic disk in campylobacterota flagella enables
  both efficient motility and autoagglutination. Developmental Cell, 59(24):3306–3321.e5, 2024.
  ISSN 1534-5807. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2024.09.008.
Yuchen Deng, Yu Chen, Yan Zhang, Shengliu Wang, Fa Zhang, and Fei Sun. Icon: 3d reconstruction
  with ‘missing-information’ restoration in biological electron tomography. Journal of Structural
  Biology, 2016. ISSN 1047-8477. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2016.04.004.
P. J. Diggle and R. J. Gratton. Monte carlo methods of inference for implicit statistical models.
   Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 46(2):193–227, 1984.
Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus,
  Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Sussman Grathwohl. Reduce, reuse, recycle:
  Compositional generation with energy-based diffusion models and MCMC. In Proceedings of
  the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 8489–8510. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023.
Thomas D Goddard, Conrad C Huang, Elaine C Meng, Eric F Pettersen, Gregory S Couch, John H
  Morris, and Thomas E Ferrin. Ucsf chimerax: Meeting modern challenges in visualization and
  analysis. Protein science, 27(1):14–25, 2018.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural infor-
  mation processing systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.
Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and
  super-resolution. volume 9906, pp. 694–711, 10 2016. ISBN 978-3-319-46474-9. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-319-46475-6 43.
Benedikt Junglas, David Kartte, Mirka Kutzner, Nadja Hellmann, Ilona Ritter, Dirk Schneider, and
  Carsten Sachse. Structural basis for vipp1 membrane binding: From loose coats and carpets to
  ring and rod assemblies. bioRxiv, 2024. doi: 10.1101/2024.07.08.602470.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.
Yann Lecun, Sumit Chopra, and Raia Hadsell. A Tutorial on Energy-Based Learning. MIT Press,
  01 2006. URL https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/7443.003.0013.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yun-Tao Liu, Heng Zhang, Hui Wang, Chang-Lu Tao, Guoqiang Bi, and Hong Zhou. Isotropic
  reconstruction for electron tomography with deep learning. Nature Communications, 13, 10 2022.
  doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-33957-8.
Vladan Lucic, Friedrich Förster, and Wolfgang Baumeister. Cryo-electron tomography of cells:
  connecting structure and function. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 6(6):432–439, 2005.
  doi: 10.1038/nrm1613.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van
  Gool. Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2201.09865.
David N. Mastronarde. Dual-axis tomography: An approach with alignment methods that preserve
  resolution. Journal of Structural Biology, 120(3):343–352, 1997. doi: 10.1006/jsbi.1997.3919.
Michael Radermacher. Weighted back-projection methods. Electron tomography: methods for
 three-dimensional visualization of structures in the cell, pp. 245–273, 2006.
F.K. Schur, M. Obr, W.J.H. Hagen, W. Wan, and J.A.G. Briggs. Structure of the immature hiv-1
  capsid in situ by cryo-electron tomography and sub-tomogram averaging. Nature, 517(7535):
  505–508, 2015.
Florian KM Schur, Martin Obr, Wim JH Hagen, William Wan, Arjen J Jakobi, Joanna M Kirkpatrick,
  Carsten Sachse, Hans-Georg Kräusslich, and John AG Briggs. An atomic model of hiv-1 capsid-
  sp1 reveals structures regulating assembly and maturation. Science, 353(6298):506–508, 2016.
Dimitry Tegunov and Patrick Cramer. Real-time cryo-electron microscopy data preprocessing with
  warp. Nature methods, 16(11):1146–1152, 2019.
Simon Wiedemann and Reinhard Heckel. A deep learning method for simultaneous denoising and
  missing wedge reconstruction in cryogenic electron tomography. Nature Communications, 15(1):
  8255, 2024.
The wwPDB Consortium. Emdb—the electron microscopy data bank. Nucleic Acids Research, 52
  (D1):D456–D465, 11 2023. ISSN 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad1019.
Rui Yan, Singanallur V. Venkatakrishnan, Jun Liu, Charles A. Bouman, and Wen Jiang. Mbir: A
  cryo-et 3d reconstruction method that effectively minimizes missing wedge artifacts and restores
  missing information. Journal of Structural Biology, 2019. ISSN 1047-8477. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.1016/j.jsb.2019.03.002.
Ka Man Yip, Niels Fischer, Elham Paknia, Ashwin Chari, and Holger Stark. Atomic-resolution
  protein structure determination by cryo-em. Nature, 587(7832):157–161, 2020.
Xiangrui Zeng, Yizhe Ding, Yueqian Zhang, Mostofa Rafid Uddin, Ali Dabouei, and Min Xu. Dual:
  deep unsupervised simultaneous simulation and denoising for cryo-electron tomography. bioRxiv,
  2024.
Chenwei Zhang, Anne Condon, and Khanh Dao Duc. Synthetic high-resolution cryo-em density
  maps with generative adversarial networks, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
  17674.
Xing Zhang, Mason Lai, Winston Chang, Iris Yu, Ke Ding, Jan Mrazek, Hwee L Ng, Otto O Yang,
  Dmitri A Maslov, and Z Hong Zhou. Structures and stabilization of kinetoplastid-specific split
  rrnas revealed by comparing leishmanial and human ribosomes. Nature communications, 7(1):
  13223, 2016.
Zongwei Zhou, Md Mahfuzur Rahman Siddiquee, Nima Tajbakhsh, and Jianming Liang. Unet++:
  A nested u-net architecture for medical image segmentation. In Deep Learning in Medical Image
  Analysis and Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support, pp. 3–11. Springer, 2018.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   A LGORITHM FLOWCHART


              Consistency Loss


                                               (a) IsoNet

           CryoET Imaging

           Complementary
           CryoET Imaging


           Rotation

           Inverse Rotation


           Gaussian Noise

        Add      Stop Gradient


                                             (b) CryoGEN
                 Figure 11: Algorithm flowcharts of (a) IsoNet and (b) CryoGEN.
IsoNet formulates the task of restoring y’s missing wedge information to reconstruct x as an inpaint-
ing problem Lugmayr et al. (2022), solving it in a self-supervised manner as illustrated in Figure 11
(a). It trains a neural network, denoted as gθ , following these steps:
      1. A sample y is processed by gθ to obtain a missing-wedge-restored x̃ = gθ (y).
      2. The signal x̃ is rotated by a rotation operator R (randomly chosen from a predefined set
         R). Then, a simulated missing wedge operation TM is applied, yielding ỹ = TM ◦ R(x̃).
      3. The simulated sample ỹ is fed to gθ , yielding a reconstructed sample x̂ = gθ (ỹ).
      4. The inpainted part is first extracted as x̂ − TM (x̂), then combined with the rotated y with
         missing-wedge operation to obtain TM ◦ R(y), and finally the inverse rotation is applied to
         yield ŷ = R−1 [(x̂ − TM (x̂)) + TM ◦ R(y)].
      5. ŷ and y form a data pair (ŷ, y) to train gθ , where y serves as the label.
      6. These steps are repeated until convergence.
Similarly, details of CroGEN are provided in Figure Figure 11 (b), with the complete algorithm
presented in Section 4.3.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2     ROTATION LIST DEFINED IN THE I SO N ET

The cropped subtomograms are cube-shaped with six faces, resulting in 24 possible rotations for
reorientation. However, we exclude the four rotations that maintain the same missing wedge in the
X-Z direction as the original, unrotated subtomogram. Further details and a schematic diagram are
provided in the supplementary materials of IsoNet (Liu et al., 2022).

A.3     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

A.3.1    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR S ECTION 5.1
Formally, v̂ represents the predicted volume, and v ∗ denotes the ground truth. PSNR and SSIM are
defined as follows:
                                Im                                (2µv̂ µv∗ + C1 )(2σv̂v∗ + C2 )
        PSNR = 10 log10                  ,   SSIM(v̂, v ∗ ) =                                         .
                            ∥v̂ − v ∗ ∥2                        (µv̂ + µ2v∗ + C1 )(σv̂2 + σv2∗ + C2 )
                                                                  2



In the PSNR formula, Im represents the maximum possible pixel value, which we define as the
maximum value of the ground truth image.
In the SSIM formula:

• µv̂ and µv∗ are the mean intensities of images v̂ and v ∗
• σv̂2 and σv2∗ are the variances of images v̂ and v ∗
• σv̂v∗ is the covariance between images v̂ and v ∗
• C1 and C2 are small constants used to stabilize the division when the denominator is close to zero

The central Fourier slices of the corrected sphere and prism are displayed in Figure 12, while the
original clean sphere and prism are shown in Figure 13.


          (a) Central fourier slice of the                           (b) Central fourier slice of the
          IsoNet-corrected sphere.                                   IsoNet-corrected prism.


          (c) Central fourier slice of the                           (d) Central fourier slice of the
          CryoGEN-corrected sphere.                                  CryoGEN-corrected prism.

Figure 12: Central fourier slices of sphere and prism. The IsoNet’s corrected has less information
both at low and high-frequency signals with missing regions, while CryoGEN fills in most of the
missing wedge. It is consistent with the spatial domain results.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     (a) Orignal clean prism.


                                    (b) Original clean prism.

                               Figure 13: Original clean shapes.


Compared to the corrected tomograms, the CryoGEN-corrected versions more closely resemble the
original clean shapes.

A.3.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR S ECTION 5.2


                             (a) Original missing wedged apoferritin.


                                 (b) IsoNet-corrected apoferritin.


                               (c) CryoGEN-corrected apoferritin.

            Figure 14: Missing wedged, CryoGEN and Iso-Net corrected apoferritin.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We present the central X-Y , X-Z, Y -Z slices, as well as the central Fourier slices for the corrupted,
IsoNet-corrected, and CryoGEN-corrected volumes in Figure 14. In the IsoNet-corrected X-Y slice,
there are faint white artifacts in the background, consistent with Figure 7, and line artifacts in the X-
Z slice, which are absent in the CryoGEN-corrected results. Additionally, the central Fourier slice
of the IsoNet-corrected volume displays a distinct borderline, which is not present in the CryoGEN-
corrected slice.


                              Figure 15: Original clean Vipp1 assembly.



The original clean Vipp1 assembly are shown in Figure 15.


A.3.3    R ECONSTRUCTION FROM N OISY S AMPLES

We also demonstrated the robustness of our algorithm under higher noise levels, such as SNR=0.2.
The results are presented in Figure 16. Even in this challenging scenario, CryoGEN outperforms
IsoNet, demonstrating its strong denoising capabilities.


                                    (a) Original noisy Vipp1 assembly.


                                  (b) IsoNet-corrected Vipp1 assembly.


                                 (c) CryoGEN-corrected Vipp1 assembly.
            Figure 16: CryoGEN and IsoNet corrected noisy Vipp1 assembly SNR=0.2.
                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4    A RTIFACTS

In this section, we summarize the artifacts observed during our experiments, including streak arti-
facts, synthetic artifacts, and ringing artifacts. Throughout all experiments, CryoGEN consistently
outperforms the baseline methods.

A.4.1 S TREAK A RTIFACTS
Streak artifacts commonly appear around dense materials, such as gold particles, in Cryo-ET recon-
structions, primarily due to two factors: (1) the restricted tilt angle range during data acquisition, and
(2) the sensitivity of reconstruction algorithms, such as WBP (Radermacher, 2006), to high-intensity
variations (see Figure 1). These bright spots generate ripples or streaks during the back-projection
process, resulting in visual distortions that degrade the overall image quality.


                                   (a) IsoNet-corrected Vipp1 assembly.


                                 (b) CryoGEN-corrected Vipp1 assembly.
                     Figure 17: CryoGEN and IsoNet corrected Vipp1 assembly.

Although these artifacts are clearly depicted in Figure 17, their visibility may be constrained by the
size of the gold nanoparticles and ribosomes in Figure 9. To address this, we provide an additional
view in Figure 18, where the artifacts are more noticeable.


                                 (a) IsoNet-corrected purified ribosomes.


                             (b) DeepDeWedge-corrected purified ribosomes.


                               (c) CryoGEN-corrected purified ribosomes.
      Figure 18: Comparison of IsoNet-corrected and CryoGEN-corrected purified ribosomes.

                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4.2   S YNTHETIC ARTIFACTS
Synthetic artifacts refer to unintended distortions or features that emerge in generated images or
data, often resulting from generative models trained on datasets with incomplete distributions. As
shown in Figure 19, the IsoNet method introduces synthetic artifacts caused by the reconstruction
of the missing wedge, whereas the CryoGEN approach effectively resolves these issues.


           (a) WBP.                         (b) IsoNet.                      (c) CryoGEN.
Figure 19: Comparison of low-density volumes generated by WBP (a), IsoNet (b) and CryoGEN (c).

A.4.3   R INGING A RTIFACTS
Ringing artifacts are undesirable distortions that appear as bands, typicallynear sharp edges in to-
mographic imaging. These artifacts often arise from reconstruction using band-limited signals that
lack the high-frequency components required to accurately capture sharp transitions. In experiments
with both purified ribosomes and immature HIV capsids, CryoGEN outperforms baseline methods,
displaying minimal ringing artifacts.


(a) IsoNet-corrected purified ribo- (b) DeepDeWedge-corrected puri- (c) CryoGEN-corrected purified
somes.                              fied ribosomes.                 ribosomes.

  Figure 20: A comparison of purified ribosomes corrected by IsoNet, DeWedge, and CryoGEN.


(a) IsoNet-corrected immature HIV (b) DeepDeWedge-corrected imma- (c) CryoGEN-corrected immature
capsid.                           ture HIV capsid.                HIV capsid.

Figure 21: A comparison of immature HIV capsids corrected by IsoNet, DeWedge, and CryoGEN.



                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5   A DDTIONAL R ESULTS BY D EEP D E W EDGE

First, we present the DeepDeWedge-corrected simple shapes in Figure 22, where defects similar to
those in the IsoNet-corrected versions are apparent. Both methods exhibit spatial domain artifacts,
resulting in distorted volumes, and neither DeepDeWedge nor IsoNet effectively fills in the missing
information in Fourier space.


                                 (a) DeepDeWedge-corrected sphere.


                                 (b) DeepDeWedge-corrected prism.

                           Figure 22: DeepDeWedge-corrected shapes.

Next, the DeepDeWedge-corrected simulated data is displayed in Figure 23. Similar to IsoNet,
DeepDeWedge encounters the same issues, generating faint shadows and distinct line artifacts in the
background, as well as a noticeable borderline in the central Fourier slice.
Finally, we test the DeepDeWedge on the real-world examples as shown in Figure 24. The
DeepDeWedge-corrected ribosomes exhibit the same irregular distribution of high-frequency com-
ponents in the central region and yield unsatisfactory results for the HIV capsid, with noticeable
artifacts. A potential reason for the poor performance on the HIV capsid may be the loss of infor-
mation caused by even-odd splits.


                               (a) DeepDeWedge-corrected apoferritin.


                            (b) DeepDeWedge-corrected Vipp1 assembly.

                       Figure 23: DeepDeWedge-corrected simulated data.

                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) DeepDeWedge-corrected purified ribosomes.                   (c) DeepDeWedge-corrected HIV capsid.


(b) Central fourier slice of the DeepDeWedge-               (d) Central fourier slice of the DeepDeWedge-
corrected purified ribosomes.                               corrected HIV capsid.

Figure 24: DeepDeWedge-corrected ribosomes and HIV capsid, along with their corresponding
central Fourier slices.
A.6 V ISUALIZATION OF A SINGLE RIBOSOME
In Figure 25, we present a visualization of an individual ribosome. The average of all ribosomes is
compared to those reconstructed by IsoNet and CryoGEN, using the fitmap command in ChimeraX1
for rigid-body optimization to align the maps. While the IsoNet reconstructions may appear to ex-
hibit more details in 2D grayscale images, as shown in Figure 9, this effect is likely due to undesired
noise or synthetic artifacts, highlighting the superior denoising capabilities of CryoGEN.
                                                                      Furthermore, we compute the corre-
                                                                      lation between the ribosome recon-
                                                                      structions generated by IsoNet and
                                                                      CryoGEN with the average, obtain-
                                                                      ing correlation coefficients of ρIsoNet
                                                                      = 0.1792 and ρCryoGEN = 0.5134, re-
                                                                      spectively (ρCryoGEN > ρIsoNet ). Both
                                                                      qualitative and quantitative results
                                                                      demonstrate that CryoGEN outper-
                                                                      forms IsoNet, providing smoother re-
                                                                      constructions.
                                                                A.7 I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
                                                                Following struct2map GAN (Zhang
                                                                et al., 2024), the architecture consists
                                                                of a generator and discriminator with
                                                                specific design choices. The gen-
                                                                erator is a modified U-Net architec-
Figure 25: Single Ribosome Visualization: We compared ture, known as U-Net++ (Zhou et al.,
CryoGEN with IsoNet and the averaged results of all ribo- 2018), which enhances the standard
somes across two examples at different rotation angles.         U-Net with dense skip connections
for improved performance. The discriminator is composed of four 3D convolutional layers, each
using a 3×3×3 kernel. Following the final convolutional layer, an adaptive average pooling layer
reduces the dimensions of the feature map to 1×1×1. This output is then flattened and fed into a
series of three fully connected layers, with ReLU activations between each layer. The final layer
produces a single output, which serves as the result of binary classification.
   1
       https://cgl.ucsf.edu/chimerax/docs/user/commands/fitmap.html


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The CryoGEN are trained with the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with batch size one for
simulated shapes and protein subtomograms and with batch size 4 for real-world examples. The
learning rate is set to 0.0004 with a linear warm-up phase in the initial one-tenth steps, which is
followed by a linear decay schedule thereafter. Different from IsoNet, which progressively increases
the noise scale, we apply random noise levels across all training steps. Specifically, a random number
is sampled from a uniform distribution within the range (0, 1] and multiplied by the set noise scale
for each step. Additionally, the penalty term λ is kept constant during the first epoch and then decays
linearly throughout the subsequent epochs.

A.8     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

A.8.1    S PHERE
A hollow sphere with an outer diameter of 70 pixels and a thickness of 4 pixels is positioned at
the center of a 140×140×140 volume. Corruption is applied by setting values to zero within the
missing wedge angles in Fourier space. For training, the volume is split into ten 96×96×96 pixel
subtomograms with randomly chosen origins. These subtomograms are then randomly cropped to
64×64×64 pixels before being input into the models.

A.8.2    P RISM
A prism with a thickness of 20 pixels is placed inside a 96×96×96 volume. It is randomly rotated
in ten directions. Corrupted prisms are generated by setting zero values within the missing wedge
angles in Fourier space. The entire volume is directly fed into the model during training.

A.8.3    S IMULATED A POFERRITIN
Ten randomly rotated apoferritin datasets are downloaded from a link provided by IsoNet and gen-
erated using ChimeraX’s molmap function. During training, the datasets are directly fed into the
model without further modifications.

A.8.4    S IMULATED S TACKED R INGS
C13 Vipp1 stacked ring data are downloaded from the EMDB database and binned twice, resulting
in 200×200×200 pixels. The data is randomly rotated in ten different directions. Corrupted stacked
rings are generated by setting zero values within the missing wedge angles in Fourier space. For
training, the data is split into ten 96×96×96 pixel subtomograms with random zero origins, then
randomly cropped to 64×64×64 pixels before being fed into the models.

A.8.5    R IBOSOMES
Ribosome data is downloaded from the EMPIAR database and binned six times, yielding a pixel size
of 13.02 Å. IsoNet’s deconvolution is applied, following the same procedure as described by (Liu
et al., 2022). To ensure that subtomograms contain sufficient data, IsoNet’s mask generation tool
is used to extract subtomograms with at least 40% non-zero pixels based on the density mask. For
training, a tomogram is split into seventy 80×80×80 pixel subtomograms, resulting in a total of 490
subtomograms. These are randomly cropped to 64×64×64 pixels before being fed into the models.

A.8.6    H IV CAPSID
Raw tilt series for the HIV capsid is downloaded from the EMPIAR database. The movie stacks are
drift-corrected and reconstructed using the WBP algorithm, aided by the latest tomogram processing
tools such as Aretomo2. The processed tomograms, TS-01, TS-43, and TS-45, are then deconvolved
following the procedure outlined by (Liu et al., 2022). IsoNet’s mask generation tool is applied
to ensure that each subtomogram contains at least 50% non-zero pixels. During training, each
tomogram is split into one hundred 96×96×96 pixel subtomograms, resulting in 300 subtomograms.
These are randomly cropped to 64×64×64 pixels before being fed into the models.


                                                  21
