Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


IDA RB : I NTRINSIC D ECOMPOSITION FOR ARBITRARY
NUMBER OF INPUT VIEWS AND ILLUMINATIONS

 Zhibing Li1 , Tong Wu1† , Jing Tan1 , Mengchen Zhang2,3 , Jiaqi Wang3 , Dahua Lin1,3,4†
 1
   The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Zhejiang University
 3
   Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 CPII under InnoHK
 {lz022, wt020, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

                                               A BSTRACT

             Capturing geometric and material information from images remains a fundamen-
             tal challenge in computer vision and graphics. Traditional optimization-based
             methods often require hours of computational time to reconstruct geometry, ma-
             terial properties, and environmental lighting from dense multi-view inputs, while
             still struggling with inherent ambiguities between lighting and material. On the
             other hand, learning-based approaches leverage rich material priors from exist-
             ing 3D object datasets but face challenges with maintaining multi-view consis-
             tency. In this paper, we introduce IDArb, a diffusion-based model designed to
             perform intrinsic decomposition on an arbitrary number of images under varying
             illuminations. Our method achieves accurate and multi-view consistent estima-
             tion on surface normals and material properties. This is made possible through a
             novel cross-view, cross-domain attention module and an illumination-augmented,
             view-adaptive training strategy. Additionally, we introduce ARB-Objaverse, a
             new dataset that provides large-scale multi-view intrinsic data and renderings un-
             der diverse lighting conditions, supporting robust training. Extensive experiments
             demonstrate that IDArb outperforms state-of-the-art methods both qualitatively
             and quantitatively. Moreover, our approach facilitates a range of downstream
             tasks, including single-image relighting, photometric stereo, and 3D reconstruc-
             tion, highlighting its broad applications in realistic 3D content creation. Project
             website: https://lizb6626.github.io/IDArb/.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The color we perceive from objects results from a complex interaction between the incident light,
the material properties, and the surface geometry of those objects. Recovering these intrinsic prop-
erties from captured images is a fundamental challenge in computer vision, enabling a variety of
downstream applications, such as relighting (Wimbauer et al., 2022) and photo-realistic 3D content
generation (Zhang et al., 2024; Siddiqui et al., 2024). This decomposition process, commonly re-
ferred to as inverse rendering, is inherently ambiguous and severely under-constrained, particularly
when only one or a limited number of observation views are available. For instance, a black pixel
could indicate black base color or is the result of lacking incident light.
Existing inverse rendering research can be broadly categorized into two approaches: optimization-
based methods and learning-based methods. The former category (e.g. NeRFactor (Zhang et al.,
2021b), NVDiffRecMC (Hasselgren et al., 2022), TensoIR (Jin et al., 2023)) typically requires hun-
dreds of multi-view images as input and focuses on optimizing intrinsic properties for each case
independently. This approach involves time-consuming iterative optimization, often requiring sev-
eral hours. Moreover, without incorporating strong priors on material distribution or addressing
the inherent ambiguity between lighting and texture, these optimization-based methods frequently
converge to sub-optimal solutions. This can lead to unrealistic decompositions, such as embed-
ding lighting effects into intrinsic components, as shown in Fig. 1(b). To address these limitations,
learning-based methods aim to extract useful priors from large-scale training datasets and perform
fast inference in a feed-forward manner. While many of these approaches focus on single-image
decomposition, they tend to produce inconsistent intrinsic properties when applied across multiple
    †
        Corresponding authors.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Intrinsic                                      Multi-view under different illuminations        Single/multi-view under single illumination
       Decomposition

    albedo               roughness
             normal
                      metallic


                                                                                                    NVDiffRecMC
                                     IntrinsicAnything
                                     Ours


                                                                                                     Ours
             Outputs
                                                                Multi-view consistency (a)                          Material ambiguity (b)
       Relighting & Material Editing                                     Photometric Stereo                              3D Reconstruction


Figure 1: IDArb tackles intrinsic decomposition for an arbitrary number of views under un-
constrained illumination. Our approach (a) achieves multi-view consistency compared to learning-
based methods and (b) effectively disentangles intrinsic components from lighting effects compared
to optimization-based methods. Our method enhances a wide range of applications such as image
editing, photometric stereo, and 3D reconstruction.
views, as demonstrated in Fig. 1(a). Additionally, single-image models struggle to leverage comple-
mentary information from multiple views, making it difficult to resolve material ambiguities, which
results in less accurate outcomes in more complex cases.
To mitigate these challenges, we propose IDArb, a model capable of taking an arbitrary number
of images captured under unconstrained, varying lighting conditions and predicting correspond-
ing intrinsic components, including albedo, normal, metallic and roughness. Our key contribu-
tions are three-fold. First, we adopt the cross-view, cross-component attention module from Won-
der3D (Long et al., 2023) to fuse information across different views and intrinsic components. This
module facilitates holistic understanding of the multi-view correspondence and joint distribution
of intrinsic components, enabling consistency across viewpoints and reducing decomposition un-
certainty. Despite being trained on fixed number of input views, our model shows the flexibility
to decompose an arbitrary number of input images without requiring camera poses. Second, to
improve performance under complex lighting conditions, we create a custom dataset based on Obja-
verse (Deitke et al., 2022), namely ARB-Objaverse, which contains 5.7M multi-view RGB images
and intrinsic components with varying illumination scenarios for effective training. Lastly, we
devise a novel and effective illumination-augmented and view-adapted training strategy to achieve
robust performance under varying lighting conditions and leverage both multi-view cues and general
object material prior for better multi-view and single-view inverse rendering.
We evaluate our model extensively on both synthetic and real data. Our approach significantly out-
performs existing learning-based methods (Kocsis et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024)
by a large margin, both qualitatively and quantitatively, achieving state-of-the-art results in intrinsic
decomposition. Our model offers practical benefits for a range of downstream tasks, including ma-
terial editing, relighting, and photometric stereo, and it can also serve as a strong prior to improve
optimization-based methods by better disentangling lighting effects from intrinsic appearance. We
believe that IDArb provides a unified solution across different input regimes in inverse rendering,
advancing our ability to understand and model the physical world.

2      R ELATED W ORK
2.1      O PTIMIZATION - BASED INVERSE RENDERING
Optimization-based inverse rendering methods aim to jointly reconstruct shape, materials, and light-
ing from multi-view images. Volumetric representation methods (Boss et al., 2021a; Kuang et al.,


                                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2022; Boss et al., 2021b; Zhang et al., 2021b) extend NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020) to model in-
trinsic appearance and lighting conditions, rendering images using volume rendering techniques.
Surface-based representation methods (Zhang et al., 2021a; 2022a;b; Sun et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2023) extract surfaces as signed distance functions (SDFs) (Wang et al., 2021) or differentiable
meshes (Munkberg et al., 2022; Hasselgren et al., 2022), apply explicit material models such as
Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Functions (BRDFs) (Nicodemus, 1965), and render images
through physics-based procedures. Recent works explore 3D Gaussian representation Kerbl et al.
(2023); Gao et al. (2023) for this task, assigning intrinsic attributes to each Gaussian point.
While existing methods effectively simulate global illumination, they often require dense multi-
view inputs and can be computationally expensive, especially for complex scenes. In addition, they
face the inherent ambiguity between lighting and materials, which can lead to suboptimal solutions,
such as incorrectly baked lighting into textures. In contrast, our proposed method offers an efficient
solution for inverse rendering in a feed-forward manner. By leveraging well-learned priors from our
large-scale, multi-view, multi-lighting dataset, we can significantly mitigate the issue of ambiguity.
2.2   L EARNING - BASED INVERSE RENDERING
With advances in deep neural networks, learning-based approaches (Barron & Malik, 2020; Li et al.,
2019; Zhu et al., 2022; Bi et al., 2020; Careaga & Aksoy, 2023; Shi et al., 2016) have demonstrated
impressive performance in intrinsic decomposition. They typically take a single image as input and
decompose intrinsic properties from the input view, such as albedo, specular, and surface normal.
Early learning-based methods (Li et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2021; Wimbauer et al., 2022; Sang &
Chandraker, 2020; Boss et al., 2020; Yi et al., 2023) handle intrinsic decomposition as a determin-
istic problem, often leading to over-smoothed details in ambiguous pixels. Recent works (Kocsis
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024) adopt probabilistic distribution modeling with
diffusion (Ho et al., 2020), estimating accurate intrinsic components with high-frequency details
through a generative formulation. Zeng et al. (2024) presents a unified diffusion framework that ad-
dresses both RGB→X (estimating intrinsic properties) and X→RGB (generating realistic images)
by training diffusion pipelines on multiple data sources.
These learning-based approaches typically handle inverse rendering in a single-view setting, leading
to inconsistent results when applied to multi-view data. Our work extends the feed-forward diffusion
pipeline to address the under-explored challenge of multi-view inverse rendering, providing a unified
solution for various input types and offering valuable intrinsic priors for downstream applications.
2.3   D IFFUSION MODELS FOR OTHER MODALITIES
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) and their variants (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023) have gained significant attention in text-to-image generation, yield-
ing promising results across various applications. Researchers have also explored adapting diffusion
models to different output modalities such as normal (Fu et al., 2024), depth (Ke et al., 2024) and
novel view images (Liu et al., 2023; 2024b; Kong et al., 2024). To generate multiple modality simul-
taneously, Wonder3D (Long et al., 2023) introduces additional cross-domain attention modules into
diffusion model that generates multi-view normal maps and corresponding color images. We ex-
tend this concept to intrinsic decomposition by splitting the intrinsic components into three triplets
and modeling their joint distribution. By leveraging pre-trained diffusion models, which capture
rich structural, semantic, and material knowledge, we can overcome data limitations and ensure
generalization to real-world scenarios, even when the models are trained on synthetic data.

3     M ETHOD
IDArb is a diffusion-based model for intrinsic decomposition that can handle an arbitrary number
of input views and varying lighting conditions. We begin by outlining the problem statement in
Section 3.1. Then, in Section 3.2, we describe the construction of our custom dataset tailored to this
task. Finally, we discuss the model architecture and training strategy in Sec. 3.3. An overview of
IDArb is provided in Fig. 2.
3.1   P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

We frame intrinsic decomposition as a conditional generation problem:
                                     X1:N ∼ p(X1:N |I1:N ).                                        (1)


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Ni views
                   …                                                         specific text prompt                                                                     …
                                                               “albedo” / “normal” / “metallic&roughness”


                                Nv illumination
                   …                              Sample
                                                  N images
                                                                                                                                                                      …
   …        …          …    …
                                                                                      …               ℰ
                                                                                                          Concat

                   …                                                                                                                 𝒟
                                                                                                                                                                      …
                                                                                      …                            U-Net
                   …


                                                                               Attention Block
                cross-component attention                                                           cross-view attention                           feed-forward


                                                                                                                                                   cross attention

                  albedo    normal                     metallic&                          view1        view2            view3         view4            specific
                                                      roughness                                                                                          text
                                                                                                                                                       prompt
                                                      Attention Maps                                               KD           Attention Maps
                                KN
                                                                 N                                                                       D


                                                                                                                                           N×H×W
                                                                     D×H×W


                                QN                                                                                 QD

      D                                                                           D                                                                D
                                                             D×H×W                                                                 N×H×W

                                VN                                                                                 VD
             N                                                                              N                                                                     N
           Latent                                                                         Latent                                                           Latent


Figure 2: Top: Overview of IDArb. Bottom: Illustration of the attention block within the UNet.
Our training batch consists of N input images, sampled from Nv viewpoints and Ni illuminations.
The latent vector for each image is concatenated with Gaussian noise for denoising. Intrinsic com-
ponents are divided into three triplets (D=3): Albedo, Normal and Metallic&Roughness. Specific
text prompts are used to guide the model toward different intrinsic components. For attention block
inside UNet, we introduce cross-component and cross-view attention module into it, where attention
is applied across components and views, facilitating global information exchange.

Here, N ∈ N denotes the number of input views; I1:N denotes input RGB images, and X1:N
represents the intrinsic components of each view. We model X using the simplified Disney BRDF
parameterization (Burley & Studios, 2012; Karis & Games, 2013), which includes albedo A ∈
RH×W ×3 , roughness R ∈ RH×W ×1 , metallic M ∈ RH×W ×1 and surface normal N ∈ RH×W ×3 .
The number of input images N can take on an arbitrary value from one to many, and the input images
can be rendered under arbitrary unconstrained illuminations during both training and inference.

3.2       A RB -O BJAVERSE DATASET

Obtaining ground truth data for intrinsic decomposition in real-world settings is both time-
consuming and technically challenging. To overcome this, we rely on synthetic data for training.
Ideally, a suitable dataset should feature large-scale, diverse objects rendered under multiple light-
ing conditions. However, existing datasets have notable limitations. For example, G-Objaverse (Qiu
et al., 2024) employs a single, low-contrast lighting setup, while ABO (Collins et al., 2022) is re-
stricted to household items, suffering from a lack of diversity among the objects.
To address these shortcomings, we develop a custom dataset, Arb-Objaverse. We select 68k 3D
models from Objaverse Deitke et al. (2022), and filter out low-quality and texture-less cases. For
each object, we render 12 views, using the Cycles render engine from Blender. For each viewpoint,
we render 7 images under different lighting conditions. Six images are illuminated by randomly
sampled high-dynamic range (HDR) environment maps from Poly Haven, which offers a collection
of 718 varied environment maps. The last image is illuminated by two point light sources randomly
positioned on a surrounding shell. Our Arb-Objaverse dataset ends up with 5.7 million rendered
RGB images along with their intrinsic components. For training, we further enhance the variability
by combining this dataset with G-Objaverse and ABO. Fig. 3 offers a visualization and comparison
among these datasets.

      https://www.blender.org/
      https://polyhaven.com/


                                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          HDR maps & point lights



                                                                …


      ABO
  ✓ Multiple illuminations
  ✗ Universal objects


      G-Objaverse                 Arb-Objaverse
  ✗ Multiple illuminations     ✓ Multiple illuminations                            Albedo/ Normal
  ✓ Universal objects          ✓ Universal objects                                Metallic/ Roughness


Figure 3: Overview of the Arb-Objaverse dataset. Our custom dataset features a diverse collection
of objects rendered under various lighting conditions, accompanied by their intrinsic components.

3.3   A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING

Given an arbitrary number of views from single to multi-view images, IDArb generates multi-view
consistent intrinsic maps under unconstrained illumination using a text-guided diffusion model. We
base our model on the pre-trained Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2021) model to capitalize
on its robust prior knowledge from RGB domain. Different from the 3-channel RGB images, intrin-
sic components possess higher channel dimensions and cannot be directly processed by original SD
model. To repurpose the VAE in original SD for new intrinsic modalities, we divide intrinsic com-
ponents X into three triplets: albedo A, normal N and B = [M, R, 0], where M is metallic, R is
roughness and 0 is left unused. Each triplet latent is channel-concatenated with the Gaussian noise
for denoising. Specific text prompts for each triplet, i.e., ‘albedo’, ‘normal’, ‘metallic&roughness’,
are devised to indicate denoising targets.
Cross-view Cross-component Attention. In real-world scenarios, users may capture multiple im-
ages of an object, making it essential for the model to handle an arbitrary number of input views
and ensure consistent results across all views. It is also crucial for 3D reconstruction to have these
consistent decomposition results as material guidance. To address this, we propose cross-view at-
tention module within the original attention block of UNet. As shown in Fig. 2, we concatenate
input features from each view, enabling the attention operation to be performed across views. This
allows the model to leverage multi-view information to reduce ambiguity and enforce consistency
across different viewpoints.
The reflected color results from the interplay between incident light, material properties, and the
surface shape. For instance, a convex shape with a dark color increases the likelihood of a dark
albedo. To better capture these relationships, we propose to model the joint distribution of intrin-
sic components rather than predicting them separately. Inspired by Wonder3D (Long et al., 2023)
and GeoWizard (Fu et al., 2024), we adopt cross-component attention via repurposing the vanilla
self-attention module to fuse global interactions between different intrinsic components. As demon-
strated in Sec. 4.3, exchanging information between components effectively reduces decomposition
uncertainty, especially for roughness and metallic.
Illumination-Augmented and View-Adapted Training. Multi-view images captured in uncon-
trolled environments often experience varying lighting conditions, making it essential for algorithms
to handle such differences effectively. To address this, we propose an illumination-robust data aug-
mentation strategy, where multi-view images are sampled from various lighting conditions during
training. These conditions include a range of setups, such as uniform ambient light, HDR envi-
ronment maps, and point light sources. At each training step, given Nv views and Ni illumination
variations for each instance in the dataset, we randomly sample N images as input. This allows us to


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


simulate complex input scenarios, including same-view-different-illumination, different-view-same-
illumination, and different-view-different-illumination, thus enhancing the diversity of the training
data. As a result, our model learns to distinguish different lighting conditions without the need
for manually crafted modules, effectively leveraging photometric cues from multi-light captures to
achieve robust intrinsic decomposition. It also shows superior generalization capability to handle
unseen lighting conditions at inference time.
However, training with fixed N input images leads to downgraded performance when only one view
is given (as shown in Sec. 4.3). We suppose that this may be because multi-view training guides
the model to focus more on cross-view information to infer intrinsic information, while single-
image decomposition requires the learning of general object material priors. To overcome this,
we introduce a view-adapted training strategy, that swaps between multi-input and single-image
settings. By incorporating this approach, our model gains robust generalization capability with an
arbitrary number of input views.
Noise Scheduler. The original SD model uses the scaled linear noise scheduler, which prioritizes
generating high-frequency details and allocates fewer steps to low-frequency structures. However,
this approach limits model’s performance in intrinsic decomposition task, as the structure of intrinsic
components, particularly metallic M and roughness R, differs significantly from input RGB images.
Inspired by Shi et al. (2023), we shift the noise scheduler toward higher noise levels. As shown in
Sec. 4.3, increasing the number of high-noise steps significantly improves the prediction of metallic
and roughness components.


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Implementation Details. We finetune the UNet from the pretrained Stable Diffusion with the zero
terminal SNR schedule (Lin et al., 2024). We utilize the v-prediction as training objective and the
AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1×10−4 . The model is trained on downsampled 256×256
resolution over 80, 000 steps. During training, the number of input images N is randomly set to 3
or 1 per object. The entire training procedure takes approximately 4 days on a cluster of 16 Nvidia
Tesla A100 GPUs.
Baselines. We compare our method with two recent diffusion-based approaches: IID (Kocsis
et al., 2024) and RGB↔X (Zeng et al., 2024). Since RGB↔X is not yet publicly available, we
re-implemented it and trained the model on our training dataset. Additionally, we include Intrinsi-
cAnything (Chen et al., 2024) for albedo comparison and GeoWizard (Fu et al., 2024) for normal
comparison. We evaluate our model in two settings: (1) single-view setting, where each input im-
age is processed independently, and (2) multi-view setting, where intrinsic components are jointly
estimated from multiple views of each object.
Metrics. For albedo evaluation, we use Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Structural Similar-
ity Index Measure (SSIM) (Wang et al., 2004). Since albedo is defined up to a scale factor, we apply
a scale-invariant PSNR metric by rescaling the predicted albedo as A′ = argminα ||A − αÂ||2 Â.
For surface normals, we measure Cosine Similarity. Mean Squared Error (MSE) is used to evaluate
metallic and roughness components.
Evaluation Dataset. We evaluate the effectiveness and generalization capability of our model
on both synthetic and real-world datasets. For synthetic data, we sample 441 objects from Arb-
Objaverse and G-Objaverse, selecting four viewpoints for each object. For real-world data, we
collect a set of images from Pixabay. All evaluations are conducted at a resolution of 512 × 512.

4.2    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Results on Synthetic Data. We present quantitative results in Tab. 1, where our method consistently
achieves the highest accuracy across all metrics. Fig. 4 displays a visual comparison of our method
in single-view setting against baseline methods.

      https://pixabay.com/


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      Input                IID            RGB X            IntrinsicAnything       Ours             GT
       Input                IID           RGB X            IntrinsicAnything       Ours            GT
         Input               IID           RGB X           IntrinsicAnything      Ours            GT
        Input                IID           RGB X           IntrinsicAnything      Ours            GT


                 (a) Albedo estimation. Our method effectively removes highlights and shadows.
     Input                    RGB X                 GeoWizard                  Ours                 GT
      Input                    RGB X                GeoWizard                  Ours                GT
        Input                  RGB X                GeoWizard                  Ours               GT
       Input                   RGB X                GeoWizard                  Ours               GT


     (b) Normal estimation. Our
      Input                 IID method gives shape
                                              RGB geometry
                                                   X       while correctly
                                                                    Ours predicting flat surface.
                                                                                           GT
       Input                       IID              RGB X                      Ours                GT
         Input                      IID             RGB X                      Ours               GT
        Input                       IID             RGB X                      Ours               GT


  (c) Metallic estimation. Our method outperforms IID and RGB↔X with plausible results free of inter-
      Inputfrom texture patternsIID
       Input
  ference                        IID
                                  and           RGB
                                                RGB  X
                                                     X            Ours
                                                                 Ours                      GT
                                                                                          GT
         Input                    IID lighting. RGB X            Ours                    GT
        Input                      IID              RGB X                      Ours               GT


  (d) Roughness estimation. Our method outperforms IID and RGB↔X with plausible results free of
  interference from texture patterns and lighting.

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison on synthetic data. IDArb demonstrates superior intrinsic esti-
mation compared to all other methods.
Table 1: Quantitative evaluation of IDArb against baselines. IDArb consistently achieves the best
results among all albedo, normal, metallic and roughness metrics.
                                     Albedo                  Normal                   Metallic   Roughness
                              SSIM↑       PSNR↑         Cosine Similarity ↑           MSE ↓       MSE ↓
    IID                        0.901        27.35                -                     0.192       0.131
    RGB↔X                      0.902        28.09             0.834                    0.162       0.347
    IntrinsicAnything          0.901        28.17                -                       -           -
    GeoWizard                    -            -               0.871                      -           -
    Ours(single)               0.935        32.79             0.928                    0.037       0.058
    Ours(multi)                0.937        33.62             0.941                    0.016       0.033

For albedo estimation (Fig. 4a), our method effectively removes highlights and shadows, whereas
IID and RGB↔X tend to retain lighting effects in the albedo, and IntrinsicAnything produces un-
realistic results for metallic surfaces. In normal estimation (Fig. 4b), our method provides sharp
and accurate geometry, while RGB↔X suffers from interference of object textures, and GeoWizard
shows blurred details since it evaluates a number of samples and takes their mean. For metallic and
roughness estimation (Fig. 4c and Fig. 4d), our method delivers more plausible results, eliminating
interference from texture patterns and lighting. Additionally, we observe that incorporating multi-
view inputs significantly enhances metallic and roughness predictions, as they provide additional
information to resolve material ambiguities.
Results on Real-world Data. We present qualitative results on real-world data in Fig. 5 and compare
our method with IntrinsicAnything for albedo estimation. IntrinsicAnything predicts overly dark
albedo for metallic objects and produces blurry details (such as the toy’s mouth in the third row),


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Input image       IntrinsicAnything                        Ours (Albedo, Normal, Metallic, Roughness)


                                   Figure 5: Qualitative comparison on real-world data.
                                                                                          w/o single view training

                    w/o cross-component attention


                                                                               Input      w/o shift scheduler
        Input       w/ cross-component attention



                    Ground truth                                                          Ours


                       Albedo            Normal     Metallic   Roughness                   Albedo               Normal   Metallic   Roughness


         (a) Ablation on cross-component attention.                                    (b) Ablation on training strategy

       Figure 6: Ablative studies on (a) cross-component attention and (b) training strategy.
leading to a loss of fidelity. In contrast, our model generates accurate and convincing decompositions
with preserved details. Despite being trained on synthetic data, IDArb generalizes well to real-world
images. Additionally, we conduct experiments on standard benchmarks, MIT-Intrinsic (Grosse et al.,
2009) and Stanford-ORB (Kuang et al., 2023), with results presented in Appendix. D.

4.3     A NALYSIS AND A BLATIVE S TUDY

Ablation on Cross-component Attention. To assess the effect of cross-component attention, we
also trained our model without cross-component attention mechanism for comparison. As shown
in Fig. 6a, exchanging information between different intrinsic components helps reduce material
ambiguity, particularly for metallic and roughness, which are prone to uncertainty.
Ablation on Training Strategy. Fig. 6b shows ablative studies on multi-single view interleaved
training strategy and the noise scheduler. Training exclusively on multi-view inputs leads to perfor-
mance degradation for single-image inputs, as these two settings emphasize different capabilities of
the model, as discussed in Sec. 3.3. Additionally, shifting noise scheduler towards high noise level
helps the model better adapt to intrinsic domains.
Analysis of Viewpoints and Lighting Effects. We analysis the effects of the number of viewpoints
and lighting conditions on our custom dataset. We evaluate our model with 1, 2, 4, 8, and 12 view-
points under 1, 2 and 3 lighting conditions. As shown in Fig. 7, increasing the number of viewpoints


                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           # views (less to more)       # views (less to more)                    # views (less to more)       # views (less to more)


 # lights (less to more)


                                    Albedo ↑                     Normal ↑                                  Metallic ↓                 Roughness ↓



Figure 7: Effects of number of viewpoints and lighting conditions. We find increasing the number
of viewpoints and the lighting conditions generally improves decomposition performance.
Table 2: Quantitative results for photometric stereo on NeRFactor. We evaluate performance using 2, 4,
and 8 OLAT images, and achieve the best performance among all compared methods.
                           # OLAT Images                        2                                          4                              8
                           Methods                  Albedo↑          Normal↑             Albedo↑                 Normal↑   Albedo↑             Normal↑
                           IID                       22.23              -                 22.40                     -       22.86                 -
                           RGB ↔X                    21.29            0.71                22.08                   0.77      23.29               0.81
                           SDM-UniPS                 22.95            0.74                23.20                   0.76      23.37               0.81
                           Ours                      23.50            0.83                23.64                   0.84      25.15               0.85

or lights generally improves prediction accuracy. For metallic and roughness predictions, multi-light
captures are particularly effective in disentangling these components from lighting effects. Empiri-
cally, performance gains from adding more viewpoints diminish beyond eight viewpoints. Further
details are provided in Appendix. B.
More Results. Additional multi-view input results are provided in Appendix. E and supplementary
video. For more real-world data results, please refer to Appendix. D.

4.4                        A PPLICATIONS

IDArb offers valuable intrinsic priors for various downstream applications. Here, we demonstrate
the model’s ability in handling single-image relighting and material editing, and photometric stereo
problems. Additionally, we show that our generated intrinsic decompositions enhance the results of
optimization-based inverse rendering.
Single-image Relighting and Material Editing. Once high-quality intrinsic components are ob-
tained, our method enables relighting of captured images under novel illumination. Additionally,
we can optimize the lighting in the original scene and perform material editing. Specifically, we
represent environment lighting as a cube map and adopt a differentiable split-sum approximation in
NVDiffRec (Munkberg et al., 2022) to optimize its parameters. Fig. 8 showcases our relighting and
material editing results.


                           (a) Captured real data                                (b) Relighting                            (c) Material editing

Figure 8: Relighting and material editing results. From in-the-wild captures (a), our model allows
for relighting under novel illumination (b) and material property modifications (c).

Photometric stereo. Photometric stereo is a long-standing challenge in computer vision, aiming
to deducing the surface normal and albedo from images captured under varying lighting conditions
with a fixed camera. We evaluate our method under the harsh One-Light-At-a-Time (OLAT) condi-
tion, where each image is illuminated by a single point light source without ambient illumination,
leading to hard cast shadows. We additionally include SDM-UniPS (Ikehata, 2023) for comparison,
which is specifically designed and trained for this task. We conduct experiments on the real-world
OpenIllumination dataset (Liu et al., 2024a) and the synthetic NeRFactor dataset (Zhang et al.,


                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              NVDiffRecMC   NVDiffRecMC w/ ours           GT                NVDiffRecMC    NVDiffRecMC w/ ours            GT


    Albedo
    Relit 1
    Relit 2


Figure 9: Optimization-based inverse rendering results. Our method guides NVDiffecMC gen-
erate more plausible material results.
Table 3: Ablation on IDArb pseudo labels for optimization-based inverse rendering on NeRFactor and
Synthetic4Relight datasets.
                                             Nerfactor                                         Synthetic4Relight
                             Albedo (raw)   Albedo (scaled)    Relighting   Albedo (raw)   Albedo (scaled)   Relighting   Roughness
NVDiffRecMC                     17.89             25.88          22.65         17.03           29.64           24.05           0.046
NVDiffRecMC w/ Ours             20.90             26.61          27.20         26.42           30.73           31.01           0.014

2021b). Quantitative results on NeRFactor are summarized in Tab. 2, and qualitative results are
present in Appendix. C. Although our model is not explicitly trained for this setting, it still delivers
reasonable estimates, particularly when the number of input images is limited.
Optimization-based Inverse Rendering. Our method can be used as a prior to enhance
optimization-based inverse rendering techniques. Specifically, we decompose each training image
into its corresponding intrinsic components and treat these components as pseudo-material labels.
We adopt NVDiffRecMC (Hasselgren et al., 2022) as the codebase for our experiments, as it em-
ploys the same PBR material model as our method. During each iteration, we introduce an addi-
tional L2 regularization term between the intrinsic components predicted by NVDiffRecMC and
those predicted by our method to ensure physical plausibility. Tab. 3 presents material estimation
and relighting results on these dataset. As illustrated in Fig. 9, our method significantly mitigates the
color-shifting issue in the reconstructed albedo from NVDiffRecMC, leading to improved results in
relighting tasks.

5             C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present IDArb, that solves intrinsic decomposition via a feed-forward diffusion
pipeline. Our method can process arbitrary images captured under unknown and varying illumina-
tions and estimate consistent intrinsic components, including albedo, normal, metallic and rough-
ness. The cross-component attention module and illumination-augmented training further enhance
our model’s ability to reduce ambiguity, fostering more robust inverse rendering under complex,
high-contrast lighting conditions.
Limitations and Discussions. While our method demonstrates strong generalization capabilities on
real-world data, it faces challenges in accurately predicting material maps for intricate objects, such
as corroded bronze statues with spatially varying metallic and roughness properties due to corrosion
levels. Given that most synthetic data employ global metallic and roughness values, our method may
oversimplify estimations for complex real-world objects. Future research directions could involve
incorporating real data through unsupervised techniques. Moreover, the current implementation of
cross-view attention concatenates all input views, leading to a complexity of O(N 2 ) and posing
difficulties in handling dense input views with high resolutions. Future investigations could explore
more efficient cross-view attention mechanism. Further discussion on failure cases can be found in
Appendix F.


                                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This project is funded in part by Shanghai Artificial lntelligence Laboratory, the National Key R&D
Program of China (2022ZD0160201), the Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII)
Ltd under the Innovation and Technology Commission (ITC)’s InnoHK. Dahua Lin is a PI of CPII
under the InnoHK.

R EFERENCES
Jonathan T. Barron and Jitendra Malik. Shape, illumination, and reflectance from shading, 2020.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03592.
Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P. Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf
  360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. CVPR, 2022.
Sai Bi, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, David Kriegman, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Deep 3d capture:
  Geometry and reflectance from sparse multi-view images, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2003.12642.
Mark Boss, Varun Jampani, Kihwan Kim, Hendrik P.A. Lensch, and Jan Kautz. Two-shot spatially-
 varying brdf and shape estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
 nition (CVPR), 2020.
Mark Boss, Raphael Braun, Varun Jampani, Jonathan T. Barron, Ce Liu, and Hendrik P. A. Lensch.
 Nerd: Neural reflectance decomposition from image collections. In ICCV, pp. 12664–12674.
 IEEE, 2021a.
Mark Boss, Varun Jampani, Raphael Braun, Ce Liu, Jonathan T. Barron, and Hendrik P. A. Lensch.
 Neural-pil: Neural pre-integrated lighting for reflectance decomposition. In NeurIPS, pp. 10691–
 10704, 2021b.
Brent Burley and Walt Disney Animation Studios. Physically-based shading at disney. In Acm
  Siggraph, volume 2012, pp. 1–7. vol. 2012, 2012.
Chris Careaga and Yağız Aksoy. Intrinsic image decomposition via ordinal shading. ACM Transac-
  tions on Graphics, 43(1):1–24, November 2023. ISSN 1557-7368. doi: 10.1145/3630750. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3630750.
Xi Chen, Sida Peng, Dongchen Yang, Yuan Liu, Bowen Pan, Chengfei Lv, and Xiaowei Zhou.
  Intrinsicanything: Learning diffusion priors for inverse rendering under unknown illumination,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11593.
Jasmine Collins, Shubham Goel, Kenan Deng, Achleshwar Luthra, Leon Xu, Erhan Gundogdu,
  Xi Zhang, Tomas F Yago Vicente, Thomas Dideriksen, Himanshu Arora, Matthieu Guillaumin,
  and Jitendra Malik. Abo: Dataset and benchmarks for real-world 3d object understanding. CVPR,
  2022.
Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig
 Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of anno-
 tated 3d objects, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08051.
Xiao Fu, Wei Yin, Mu Hu, Kaixuan Wang, Yuexin Ma, Ping Tan, Shaojie Shen, Dahua Lin, and
  Xiaoxiao Long. Geowizard: Unleashing the diffusion priors for 3d geometry estimation from a
  single image. In ECCV, 2024.
Jian Gao, Chun Gu, Youtian Lin, Hao Zhu, Xun Cao, Li Zhang, and Yao Yao. Relightable
   3d gaussian: Real-time point cloud relighting with brdf decomposition and ray tracing.
   arXiv:2311.16043, 2023.
Roger Grosse, Micah K Johnson, Edward H Adelson, and William T Freeman. Ground truth dataset
  and baseline evaluations for intrinsic image algorithms. In 2009 IEEE 12th International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 2335–2342. IEEE, 2009.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jon Hasselgren, Nikolai Hofmann, and Jacob Munkberg. Shape, Light, and Material Decomposition
  from Images using Monte Carlo Rendering and Denoising. arXiv:2206.03380, 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Satoshi Ikehata. Scalable, detailed and mask-free universal photometric stereo. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

Haian Jin, Isabella Liu, Peijia Xu, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Songfang Han, Sai Bi, Xiaowei Zhou, Zex-
  iang Xu, and Hao Su. Tensoir: Tensorial inverse rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

James T Kajiya. The rendering equation. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 143–150, 1986.

Brian Karis and Epic Games. Real shading in unreal engine 4. Proc. Physically Based Shading
  Theory Practice, 4(3):1, 2013.

Bingxin Ke, Anton Obukhov, Shengyu Huang, Nando Metzger, Rodrigo Caye Daudt, and Konrad
  Schindler. Repurposing diffusion-based image generators for monocular depth estimation. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2024.

Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splat-
  ting for real-time radiance field rendering, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.
  04079.

Peter Kocsis, Vincent Sitzmann, and Matthias Nießner. Intrinsic image diffusion for indoor single-
  view material estimation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12274.

Xin Kong, Shikun Liu, Xiaoyang Lyu, Marwan Taher, Xiaojuan Qi, and Andrew J Davison. Esch-
  ernet: A generative model for scalable view synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03908, 2024.

Zhengfei Kuang, Kyle Olszewski, Menglei Chai, Zeng Huang, Panos Achlioptas, and Sergey
  Tulyakov. Neroic: neural rendering of objects from online image collections. ACM Trans. Graph.,
  41(4):56:1–56:12, 2022.

Zhengfei Kuang, Yunzhi Zhang, Hong-Xing Yu, Samir Agarwala, Elliott Wu, Jiajun Wu, et al.
  Stanford-orb: a real-world 3d object inverse rendering benchmark. 2023.

Zhengqin Li, Zexiang Xu, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Manmohan Chandraker.
  Learning to reconstruct shape and spatially-varying reflectance from a single image. In SIG-
  GRAPH Asia 2018 Technical Papers, pp. 269. ACM, 2018.

Zhengqin Li, Mohammad Shafiei, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Manmohan Chan-
  draker. Inverse rendering for complex indoor scenes: Shape, spatially-varying lighting and svbrdf
  from a single image, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.02722.

Shanchuan Lin, Bingchen Liu, Jiashi Li, and Xiao Yang. Common diffusion noise schedules and
  sample steps are flawed, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08891.

Isabella Liu, Linghao Chen, Ziyang Fu, Liwen Wu, Haian Jin, Zhong Li, Chin Ming Ryan Wong,
   Yi Xu, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Zexiang Xu, and Hao Su. Openillumination: A multi-illumination
   dataset for inverse rendering evaluation on real objects, 2024a.

Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object, 2023.

Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang.
  Syncdreamer: Generating multiview-consistent images from a single-view image, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.03453.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie Liu, Yuexin Ma,
  Song-Hai Zhang, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, et al. Wonder3d: Single image to 3d
  using cross-domain diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15008, 2023.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Wenzheng Chen, Alex Evans, Thomas
  Müller, and Sanja Fidler. Extracting Triangular 3D Models, Materials, and Lighting From Im-
  ages. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 8280–8290, June 2022.
Fred E Nicodemus. Directional reflectance and emissivity of an opaque surface. Applied optics, 4
  (7):767–775, 1965.
Lingteng Qiu, Guanying Chen, Xiaodong Gu, Qi Zuo, Mutian Xu, Yushuang Wu, Weihao Yuan,
  Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo, and Xiaoguang Han. Richdreamer: A generalizable normal-depth
  diffusion model for detail richness in text-to-3d. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9914–9925, 2024.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.
Shen Sang and M. Chandraker. Single-shot neural relighting and svbrdf estimation. In ECCV, 2020.
Jian Shi, Yue Dong, Hao Su, and Stella X. Yu. Learning non-lambertian object intrinsics across
   shapenet categories, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.08510.
Ruoxi Shi, Hansheng Chen, Zhuoyang Zhang, Minghua Liu, Chao Xu, Xinyue Wei, Linghao Chen,
  Chong Zeng, and Hao Su. Zero123++: a single image to consistent multi-view diffusion base
  model, 2023.
Yawar Siddiqui, Tom Monnier, Filippos Kokkinos, Mahendra Kariya, Yanir Kleiman, Emilien Gar-
  reau, Oran Gafni, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, Roman Shapovalov, and David Novotny.
  Meta 3d assetgen: Text-to-mesh generation with high-quality geometry, texture, and pbr materi-
  als. arXiv, 2024.
Cheng Sun, Guangyan Cai, Zhengqin Li, Kai Yan, Cheng Zhang, Carl S. Marshall, Jia-Bin Huang,
  Shuang Zhao, and Zhao Dong. Neural-pbir reconstruction of shape, material, and illumination.
  In ICCV, pp. 18000–18010. IEEE, 2023.
Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus:
  Learning neural implicit surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.10689, 2021.
Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment:
  from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–
  612, 2004.
Felix Wimbauer, Shangzhe Wu, and Christian Rupprecht. De-rendering 3d objects in the wild, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.02279.
Shangzhe Wu, Ameesh Makadia, Jiajun Wu, Noah Snavely, Richard Tucker, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
  De-rendering the world’s revolutionary artefacts, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2104.03954.
Tong Wu, Jiaqi Wang, Xingang Pan, Xudong Xu, Christian Theobalt, Ziwei Liu, and Dahua Lin.
  Voxurf: Voxel-based efficient and accurate neural surface reconstruction, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2208.12697.
Chongjie Ye, Lingteng Qiu, Xiaodong Gu, Qi Zuo, Yushuang Wu, Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo, Yuliang
  Xiu, and Xiaoguang Han. Stablenormal: Reducing diffusion variance for stable and sharp normal.
  ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Weicai Ye, Shuo Chen, Chong Bao, Hujun Bao, Marc Pollefeys, Zhaopeng Cui, and Guofeng Zhang.
 IntrinsicNeRF: Learning Intrinsic Neural Radiance Fields for Editable Novel View Synthesis. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.

Renjiao Yi, Chenyang Zhu, and Kai Xu. Weakly-supervised single-view image relighting, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13852.

Zheng Zeng, Valentin Deschaintre, Iliyan Georgiev, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Yiwei Hu, Fujun Luan,
  Ling-Qi Yan, and Miloš Hašan. RGB ↔ X: Image decomposition and synthesis using material-
  and lighting-aware diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00666, 2024.

Kai Zhang, Fujun Luan, Qianqian Wang, Kavita Bala, and Noah Snavely. Physg: Inverse rendering
  with spherical gaussians for physics-based material editing and relighting. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5453–5462, 2021a.

Kai Zhang, Fujun Luan, Zhengqi Li, and Noah Snavely. Iron: Inverse rendering by optimizing
  neural sdfs and materials from photometric images. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
  2022a.

Longwen Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Qixuan Zhang, Qiwei Qiu, Anqi Pang, Haoran Jiang, Wei Yang, Lan
  Xu, and Jingyi Yu. Clay: A controllable large-scale generative model for creating high-quality 3d
  assets, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13897.

Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models, 2023.

Xiuming Zhang, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Paul Debevec, William T. Freeman, and
  Jonathan T. Barron. Nerfactor: neural factorization of shape and reflectance under an unknown il-
  lumination. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 40(6):1–18, December 2021b. ISSN 1557-7368. doi:
  10.1145/3478513.3480496. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3478513.3480496.

Yuanqing Zhang, Jiaming Sun, Xingyi He, Huan Fu, Rongfei Jia, and Xiaowei Zhou. Modeling
  indirect illumination for inverse rendering. In CVPR, 2022b.

Rui Zhu, Zhengqin Li, Janarbek Matai, Fatih Porikli, and Manmohan Chandraker. Irisformer: Dense
  vision transformers for single-image inverse rendering in indoor scenes, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2206.08423.


A     P RELIMINARY

A.1   I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODEL

In Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020), a forward diffusion process
is defined, gradually introducing small
                                      √ amounts of Gaussian noise to the sample at each timestep,
represented by q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I), where t represents the timestep and β acts
as the variance scheduler. To recover samples from the random noise, DDPM learns to model the
reverse diffusion process as pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (x, t), Σθ (xt , t)) and construct x0 through
iterative denoising.
Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2021) employ an encoder E to compress the input image
x ∈ RH×W ×3 into a latent vector z ∈ RH/8×W/8×4 before performing the diffusion process in the
latent space. Following denoising, the latent representation is then converted back to pixel space
through a decoder x̂ = D(z0 ).
For conditional generation, the training objective of Stable Diffusion (SD) is formulated as:
                          L := EE(x),y,ϵ∼N (0,1),t [||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, τθ (y))||22 ],                (2)

where t is uniformly sampled from {1, ..., T }, τθ (y) represents the encoding of the condition y and
ϵθ is implemented as a UNet.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2    I NTRINSIC C OMPONENTS F ORMATION

Our image formation is based on the classic rendering equation (Kajiya, 1986) to ensure physical
correctness. For a point x with surface normal n, the incident light intensity at this point is denoted
as Li (ωi ; x), where ωi represents the incident light direction. The Bidirectional Reflectance Dis-
tribution Function (BRDF) (Nicodemus, 1965), denoted as fr (ωo , ωi ; x), describes the reflectance
properties of the material when viewed from direction ωo . The observed light intensity Lo (ω0 ; x) is
calculated over the hemisphere Ω = {ωi : ωi · n > 0} as follows:
                                       Z
                         Lo (ωo ; x) =    Li (ωi ; x)fr (ωo , ωi ; x)(ωi · n)dωi .                  (3)
                                           Ω

In our approach, we aim to recover the object’s surface normal and BRDF material from the ob-
served color on the left-hand side of Eq. 3, which are independent of illumination and view direction.
We adopt the Disney Basecolor-Metallic model(Burley & Studios, 2012) for BRDF parametrization,
which comprises the following components: albedo, representing the base color; roughness, con-
trolling the diffuse and specular response; and metallic, governing the specular reflection.
Specifically, given a single RGB image I ∈ RH×W ×3 , we aim to jointly estimate the surface normal
N ∈ RH×W ×3 , albedo A ∈ RH×W ×3 , roughness R ∈ RH×W ×1 and metallic M ∈ RH×W ×1 .

B     D ETAILS ABOUT THE E FFECTS OF VIEWPOINTS AND LIGHTING
We present the numerical performance results across varying numbers of viewpoints (# V) and
lighting conditions (# L), as shown in Tab. 4 to 7.

Table 4: Albedo Performance ↑ across different              Table 5: Normal Performance ↑ across different
numbers of viewpoints (# V) and lightings (# L).            numbers of viewpoints (# V) and lightings (# L).
      #V                                                         #V
            1       2       4       8           12                       1       2       4       8       12
#L                                                          #L
1          29.16   28.72   30.12   30.49       30.77        1          0.909   0.910   0.925   0.930   0.932
2          29.96   30.26   30.96   31.13       31.26        2          0.922   0.927   0.930   0.933   0.934
3          30.25   30.73   31.16   31.33       31.40        3          0.926   0.931   0.931   0.934   0.935

Table 6: Metallic Performance ↓ across different            Table 7: Roughness Performance ↓ across different
numbers of viewpoints (# V) and lightings (# L).            numbers of viewpoints (# V) and lightings (# L).
      #V                                                         #V
            1       2       4       8           12                      1       2       4       8       12
#L                                                          #L
1          0.105   0.116   0.068   0.059       0.050        1         0.049    0.050   0.024   0.019   0.021
2          0.061   0.068   0.047   0.044       0.042        2         0.043    0.026   0.019   0.016   0.015
3          0.061   0.056   0.048   0.045       0.040        3         0.031    0.022   0.016   0.014   0.013


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON P HOTOMETRIC S TEREO
We present qualitative results of photometric stereo in Fig. 10.

D     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON R EAL - WORLD DATA
We evaluate our method on two real-world benchmarks: MIT-Intrinsic (Grosse et al., 2009) and
Stanford-ORB (Kuang et al., 2023). For MIT-Intrinsic, we compared our albedo estimation results
with IntrinsicAnything (Chen et al., 2024), as shown in Tab. 8 and Fig. 11. For Stanford-ORB, we
presented results for normal estimation, albedo estimation, and re-rendering, comparing our method
with StableNormal (Ye et al., 2024) and IntrinsicNeRF (Ye et al., 2023), as shown in Tab. 9. For the
re-rendering evaluation, we utilized the ground truth environment maps to render our decomposition
results and compared them with the original images.
Additionally, we present qualitative results on real-world data from the Internet in Fig. 12 and
Fig. 13.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            OLAT images                                 Albedo        Normal

OpenIllumination
NeRFactor


Figure 10: Photometric stereo results using 4 OLAT images in OpenIllumination and NeRFactor.

                                      Table 8: Quantitative comparisons on MIT-Intrinsic.
                                                               SSIM↑   PSNR↑   LPIPS↓
                                         Ours                  0.876   27.98    0.117
                                         IntrinsicAnything     0.896   25.66    0.150


                                     Table 9: Quantitative comparisons on Stanford-ORB.
                                       Normal                   Albedo                        Re-rendering
                                   Cosine Distance↓   SSIM↑    PSNR↑ LPIPS ↓   PSNR-H↑      PSNR-L↑ SSIM↑       LPIPS ↓
                   Ours(single)         0.041          0.978    41.30  0.039     24.11        31.28     0.969    0.024
                   Ours(multi)          0.029          0.978    41.46  0.038     24.36        31.43     0.970    0.024
                   StableNormal         0.038
                   IntrinsicNeRF                      0.981    39.31   0.048



E                    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON M ULTI - VIEW I NPUTS
We present additional results on multi-view input in Fig. 14.

F                   FAILURE C ASES
Several failure cases are illustrated in Fig. 16. First, our model struggles with outdoor scenes, as it is
primarily trained on object-centric data. While the model exhibits some generalization capability, its
performance degrades in these scenarios. Second, when the model is faced with text, the decompo-
sition fails to recover the correct text structures. Finally, in the third row, the model produces overly
simplified outputs in certain cases, failing to preserve subtle material details, such as the metallic


                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Input Image          Intrinsic Anything               Ours                Ground Truth


Figure 11: Qualitative comparison on MIT-Intrinsic (Grosse et al., 2009) with Intrinsi-
cAnything (Chen et al., 2024). Input image and ground truth have been contrast-adjusted for better
visibility.


features of a telephone. This issue arises from the synthetic training data, which often contains
simpler material variations, leading the model to overly simplify fine-grained material properties.

G    GENERALIZATION TO SCENE - LEVEL DATA

Despite not being explicitly trained on such datasets, our model demonstrates generalization ability
in outdoor and indoor scenes. We provide qualitative results in Fig. 17, Fig. 18 and Fig. 19.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Input             Albedo             Normal             Metallic   Roughness


                          Figure 12: More results on real-world data.

                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Input Image             Albedo              Normal               Metallic          Roughness


                          Recon                Relit 1             Relit 2            Relit 3


                          Recon                Relit 1             Relit 2            Relit 3


                          Recon                Relit 1             Relit 2            Relit 3


                          Recon                Relit 1             Relit 2            Relit 3


Figure 13: More results on real-world data. We also provide the reconstructed and relighting images.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Input             Albedo             Normal              Metallic   Roughness


                          Figure 14: More results on multi-view data.

                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Input Image            Albedo            Normal        Metallic        Roughness


Figure 15: Multiview images with extreme lighting variation.   For each scene in NeRD
dataset (Boss et al., 2021a), we input 4 views.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Input Image            Albedo            Normal              Metallic   Roughness


                                   Figure 16: Failure cases.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Input Image          Albedo             Normal           Metallic         Roughness


Figure 17: Results on Mip-NeRF 360 (Barron et al., 2022) (Part 1, outdoor). We input 4 views
for each scene.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Input Image          Albedo             Normal             Metallic          Roughness


Figure 18: Results on Mip-NeRF 360 (Barron et al., 2022) (Part 2, indoor). We input 4 views for
each scene.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Input Image           Albedo             Normal             Metallic          Roughness


 Figure 19: Results on indoor and outdoor scenes. Input images are collected from the Internet.


                                               25
