Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H OW DNN S BREAK THE C URSE OF D IMENSIONALITY:
C OMPOSITIONALITY AND S YMMETRY L EARNING
 Arthur Jacot, Seok Hoan Choi & Yuxiao Wen
 Courant Institute
 New York University
 New York, NY 10012
 {arthur.jacot,shc443,yuxiaowen}@nyu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         We show that deep neural networks (DNNs) can efficiently learn any composition
         of functions with bounded F1 -norm, which allows DNNs to break the curse of
         dimensionality in ways that shallow networks cannot. More specifically, we
         derive a generalization bound that combines a covering number argument for
         compositionality, and the F1 -norm (or the related Barron norm) for large width
         adaptivity. We show that the global minimizer of the regularized loss of DNNs can
         fit for example the composition of two functions f вҲ— = h в—Ұ g from a small number
         of observations, assuming g is smooth/regular and reduces the dimensionality (e.g.
         g could be the quotient map of the symmetries of f вҲ— ), so that h can be learned in
         spite of its low regularity. The measures of regularity we consider is the Sobolev
         norm with different levels of differentiability, which is well adapted to the F1 norm.
         We compute scaling laws empirically and observe phase transitions depending on
         whether g or h is harder to learn, as predicted by our theory.


1    I NTRODUCTION
One of the fundamental features of DNNs is their ability to generalize even when the number of
neurons (and of parameters) is so large that the network could fit almost any function (Zhang et al.,
2017). Actually DNNs have been observed to generalize best when the number of neurons is infinite
(Belkin et al., 2019; Geiger et al., 2019; 2020). The now quite generally accepted explanation to this
phenomenon is that DNNs have an implicit bias coming from the training dynamic where properties
of the training algorithm lead to networks that generalize well. This implicit bias is quite well
understood in shallow networks (Chizat & Bach, 2018; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018), in linear
networks (Gunasekar et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020), or in the NTK regime (Jacot et al., 2018), but it
remains ill-understood in the general deep nonlinear case.
In both shallow networks and linear networks, one observes a bias towards small parameter norm
(either implicit (Chizat & Bach, 2020) or explicit in the presence of weight decay (Wang & Jacot,
2024)). Thanks to tools such as the F1 -norm (Bach, 2017), or the related Barron norm (Weinan et al.,
2019), or more generally the representation cost (Dai et al., 2021), it is possible to describe the family
of functions that can be represented by shallow networks or linear networks with a finite parameter
norm. This was then leveraged to prove uniform generalization bounds (based on Rademacher
complexity) over these sets (Bach, 2017), which depend only on the parameter norm, not on the
number of neurons or parameters.
Similar bounds have been proposed for DNNs (Bartlett et al., 2017; Golowich et al., 2020; Barron &
Klusowski, 2019; Schmidt-Hieber, 2020; Nitanda & Suzuki, 2020; Hsu et al., 2021; Sellke, 2024),
relying on different types of norms on the parameters of the network. Analogues of these bounds
have been extended to other architectures, such as CNNs (Ledent et al., 2021; Graf et al., 2022;
Truong, 2022; Galanti et al., 2023). But there remains many issues: these bounds are typically orders
of magnitude too large (Jiang et al., 2019; Gonon et al., 2023), and they tend to explode as the depth
L grows (Sellke, 2024).
It is difficult to compare these bounds, since they involve many terms that have complex behavior
as the depth increases. To justify our new complexity measure R(Оё) and bound, we pair it with an


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


approximation result on composition of Sobolev functions (functions with a certain decay of their
Fourier or spherical harmonics coefficients), which implies that DNNs can learn such composite
functions with almost optimal rates, allowing to break the curse of dimensionality in certain cases.
Previous works has shown that DNNs with either bounded width/depth (Schmidt-Hieber, 2020)
or with bounded number of non-zero parameters (Galanti et al., 2023; Poggio & Fraser, 2024)
can effectively learn such compositional functions. This paper shows that these strong sparsity
assumptions are not strictly necessary for DNNs to learn such compositional functions.
The family of composite Sobolev functions is also a useful theoretical baseline to compare different
norm-based bounds, by checking which complexity measure lead to tighter rates. This allows us to
show the importance of replacing operator norms by Lipschitz constants and other design choices.

1.1   C ONTRIBUTION

We consider Accordion Networks (AccNets), which are the composition fL:1 = fL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ f1 of
                     q fв„“ (x) = Wq
multiple shallow networks         в„“ Пғ(Vв„“ x + bв„“ ), we prove a uniform generalization bound for

the MSE L(fL:1 ) вҲ’ LМғN (fL:1 ) вүІ R(Оё)
         p
                                     вҲҡ , for a complexity measure
                                       N
                              L
                                         ! L                           !
                             Y               X вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘF p
                                                         1
                     R(Оё) =     Lip(fв„“ )                     dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1
                                                   Lip(fв„“ )
                                   в„“=1              в„“=1

that depends on the F1 -norms вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘF1 (which is upper bounded by the parameter norm of the
corresponding shallow network вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘ2F + вҲҘVв„“ вҲҘ2F + вҲҘbв„“ вҲҘ2 ) and Lipschitz constanst Lip(fв„“ ) of the
subnetworks, and the intermediate dimensions d0 , . . . , dL . This use of the F1 -norms makes this
bound independent of the widths w1 , . . . , wL of the subnetworks, though it does depend on the depth
L (it typically grows linearly in L which is still better than the exponential growth often observed).
Any traditional DNN can be mapped to an AccNet (and вҲҡ vice versa),
                                                               вҲҡ by spliting the middle weight
matrices Wв„“ with SVD U SV T into two matrices U S and SV T to obtain an AccNet with
dimensions dв„“ = RankWв„“ , so that the bound can be applied to traditional DNNs with bounded rank.
We then show an approximation result: any composition of Sobolev functions f вҲ— = fLвҲ— вҲ— в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ f1вҲ—
can be approximated with a network with either a bounded complexity R(Оё) or a slowly growing
one. Thus under certain assumptions one can show that DNNs can learn general compositions of
Sobolev functions (i.e. functions whose first ОҪ вҲҲ N derivatives are bounded in L2 norm). This ability
can be interpreted as DNNs being able to learn symmetries, allowing them to avoid the curse of
dimensionality in settings where kernel methods or even shallow networks suffer heavily from it.
Empirically, we observe a good match between the scaling laws of learning and our theory, as well as
qualitative features such as transitions between regimes depending on whether it is harder to learn the
symmetries of a task, or to learn the task given its symmetries.

2     ACCORDION N EURAL N ETWORKS AND R ES N ETS
Our analysis is most natural for a slight variation on the traditional fully-connected neural networks
(FCNNs), which we call Accordion Networks, which we define here. Nevertheless, all of our results
can easily be adapted to FCNNs.
Accordion Networks (AccNets) are simply the composition of L shallow networks, that is fL:1 =
fL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ f1 where fв„“ (z) = Wв„“ Пғ(Vв„“ z + bв„“ ) for the nonlinearity Пғ : R вҶ’ R, the dв„“ Г— wв„“ matrix
Wв„“ , wв„“ Г— dв„“вҲ’1 matrix Vв„“ , and wв„“ -dim. vector bв„“ , and for the widths w1 , . . . , wL and dimensions
d0 , . . . , dL . We will focus on the ReLU Пғ(x) = max{0, x} for the nonlinearity. The parameters Оё are
made up of the concatenation of all (Wв„“ , Vв„“ , bв„“ ). More generally, we denote fв„“2 :в„“1 = fв„“2 в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ fв„“1
for any 1 вүӨ в„“1 вүӨ в„“2 вүӨ L.
We will typically be interested in settings where the widths wв„“ is large (or even infinitely large), while
the dimensions dв„“ remain finite or much smaller in comparison, hence the name accordion.
                                          res
If we add residual connections, i.e. fL:1     = (fL + id) в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ (f1 + id) for the same shallow nets
f1 , . . . , fL we recover the typical ResNets.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark. The only difference between AccNets and FCNNs is that each weight matrix Mв„“ of the
FCNN is replaced by a product of two matrices Mв„“ = Vв„“ Wв„“вҲ’1 in the middle of the network (such a
structure has already been proposed (Ongie & Willett, 2022; Parkinson et al., 2023)). Given an AccNet
one can recover an equivalent FCNN by choosing Mв„“ = Vв„“ Wв„“вҲ’1 , M0 = V0 and ML+1 = WL . In
                                                 to split Mв„“ into the product of two matrices, but we
the other direction there couldвҲҡbe multiple ways вҲҡ
will focus on taking Vв„“ = U S and Wв„“вҲ’1 = SV T for the SVD decomposition Mв„“ = U SV T ,
along with the choice dв„“ = RankMв„“ . One can thus think of AccNets as rank-constrained FCNNs.

2.1   L EARNING S ETUP

We consider a traditional MSE regression setup, where we want to find a function f : в„Ұ вҠӮ Rdin вҶ’
                                                                             2
Rdout that minimizes the population loss L(f ) = ExвҲјПҖ вҲҘf (x) вҲ’ f вҲ— (x)вҲҘ for the вҖҳtrue functionвҖҷ f вҲ— ,
and input distribution ПҖ. Given a training set x1 , . . . , xN of size N we approximate the population
                                        PN                           2
loss by the empirical loss LМғN (f ) = N1 i=1 вҲҘf (xi ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xi )вҲҘ that can be minimized.
To ensure that the empirical loss remains representative q   of the population loss, we will prove high
                                                 p                            p        1
probability bounds on the generalization gap L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) = O( RN вҲ’ 2 ) uniformly over
function families with complexity bounded by R. Thus as long as the train error is small enough
                     1                                               1
LМғN (f ) = O(RN вҲ’ 2 ), so will the test error L(f ) = O(RN вҲ’ 2 ). This type of bound on the gap
between squared roots of the losses is more natural for the MSE loss and allows for so-called fast
rates under the assumption that the train error is itself small. Note that our generalization bounds rely
on covering number arguments, so they could easily be applied to Lipschitz losses using DudleyвҖҷs
theorem.
For simplicity of analysis, we will assume that the true function f вҲ— and estimator fЛҶ are uniformly
bounded вҲҘf вҲ— вҲҘвҲһ , вҲҘfЛҶвҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B. This can be guaranteed easily by adding a renormalizing nonlinearity
                                            Bx
at the end of the network ОіB (x) = max{B,вҲҘxвҲҘ}        . Since this is a contraction it does not affect the
covering number argument that we rely on.


3     G ENERALIZATION B OUND FOR DNN S

The reason we focus on accordion networks is that there exists generalization bounds for shallow
networks (Bach, 2017; Weinan et al., 2019), that are (to our knowledge) widely considered to be
tight, which is in contrast to the deep case, where many bounds exist but no clear optimal bound has
been identified. Our strategy is to extend the results for shallow nets to the composition of multiple
shallow nets, i.e. AccNets. Roughly speaking, we will show that the complexity of an AccNet fОё is
bounded by the sum of the complexities of the shallow nets f1 , . . . , fL it is made of.
We will therefore first review (and slightly adapt) the existing generalization bounds for shallow
networks in terms of their so-called F1 -norm (Bach, 2017), and then prove a generalization bound for
deep AccNets.

3.1   S HALLOW N ETWORKS

The complexity of a shallow net f (x) = W Пғ(V x + b), with weights V вҲҲ qRwГ—din and
                                                                                 Pw                  2
W вҲҲ Rdout Г—w , can be bounded in terms of the quantity C =                         i=1 вҲҘWВ·i вҲҘ  вҲҘViВ· вҲҘ + b2i .
First note that the rescaled function C1 f can be written as a convex combination C1 f (x) =
            вҲҡ
Pw вҲҘWВ·i вҲҘ вҲҘViВ· вҲҘ2 +b2i                                    WВ·i
   i=1         C        WМ„В·i Пғ(VМ„iВ· x + bМ„i ) for WМ„В·i = вҲҘW В·i вҲҘ
                                                                 , VМ„iВ· = вҲҡ ViВ·2 2 , and bМ„i = вҲҡ bi 2 2 ,
                                                                           вҲҘViВ· вҲҘ +bi            вҲҘViВ· вҲҘ +bi
                             вҲҡ
                       вҲҘWВ·i вҲҘ вҲҘViВ· вҲҘ2 +b2i
since the coefficients         C            are positive and sum up to 1. Thus f belongs to C times the
convex hull                       n                                                    o
                                                                    2      2
                   BF1 = Conv x 7вҶ’ wПғ(v T x + b) : вҲҘwвҲҘ = вҲҘvвҲҘ + b2 = 1 .

This set can be thought as the unit ball w.r.t. to the F1 -norm (Bach, 2017). The F1 -norm вҲҘf вҲҘF1 itself
can then be defined as the smallest positive scalar s such that 1s f вҲҲ BF1 . Note that by the AM-GM


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


inequality, we have
                               w                                  w
                                                               1X
                               X               q
                                                      2                    2        2
               вҲҘf вҲҘF1 вүӨ C =           вҲҘWВ·i вҲҘ    вҲҘViВ· вҲҘ + b2i вүӨ       вҲҘWВ·i вҲҘ + вҲҘViВ· вҲҘ + b2i
                                i=1
                                                               2 i=1

The generalization gap over any F1 -ball can be uniformly bounded with high probability:
Theorem 1. For any input distribution ПҖ supported on the L2 ball B(0, b) with radius b, we have with
probability 1 вҲ’ p, over the training samples x1 , . . . , xN , that for all f вҲҲ {f : вҲҘf вҲҘF1 вүӨ R, вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ
B}                                                                      r
                                                                            вҲ’ log p/2
                                 q             p
                                                               1
                      p
                        L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0 BRN вҲ’ 2 + c1 B                          .
                                                                               N
                                   1                               1
Therefore if LМғN (f ) = O(BRN вҲ’ 2 ) then L(f ) = O(BRN вҲ’ 2 ).
This theorem is a slight variation of the one found in (Bach, 2017): we simply generalize it to multiple
outputs, and apply to the (non-Lipschitz) MSE loss instead of a general Lipschitz loss. The proof
technique however relies on covering numbers rather than Rademacher complexity, which will be
key to obtaining a generalization bound for the deep case.
Notice how this bound does not depend on the width w, because the F1 -norm (and the F1 -ball)
themselves do not depend on the width. This matches with empirical evidence that shows that
increasing the width does not hurt generalization (Belkin et al., 2019; Geiger et al., 2019; 2020).
To use Theorem 1 effectively we need to be able to guarantee that the learned function will have a
small enough F1 -norm. The F1 -norm is hard to compute
                                                            exactly, but it is bounded
                                                                                       by the parameter
                                                 1        2         2         2
norm: if f (x) = W Пғ(V x + b), then вҲҘf вҲҘF1 вүӨ 2 вҲҘW вҲҘF + вҲҘV вҲҘF + вҲҘbвҲҘ , and this bound is tight
if the width w is large enough and the parameters are chosen optimally. Adding weight decay/L2 -
regularization to the cost then leads to bias towards learning with small F1 norm.

3.2    D EEP N ETWORKS

Since an AccNet is simply the composition of multiple shallow nets, the functions represented by an
                                                                                  2       2       2
AccNet is included in the set of composition of F1 balls. More precisely, if вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘ + вҲҘVв„“ вҲҘ + вҲҘbв„“ вҲҘ вүӨ
2Rв„“ then fL:1 belongs to the set {gL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ g1 : gв„“ вҲҲ BF1 (0, Rв„“ )} for some Rв„“ .
As noticed in (Bartlett et al., 2017), the covering number is well-behaved under composition, therefore
the complexity of AccNets can be bounded in terms of the individual shallow nets it is made of:
Theorem 2. Consider an accordion net of depth L and widths dL , . . . , d0 , with corresponding set of
functions F = {fL:1 : вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘF1 вүӨ Rв„“ , Lip(fв„“ ) вүӨ ПҒв„“ , вҲҘfL:1 вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B} with input space в„Ұ = B(0, r).
Then with probability 1 вҲ’ p over the sampling of the training set X from the distribution ПҖ, we have
for all f вҲҲ F
                                v
                                              L
                                u                                                         r
                                                  Rв„“вҖІ p                1                      вҲ’ log p/2
  p           q                 u           X
     L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0 BПҒL:1 r
                                t                        dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 вҲҡ (1 + o(1)) + c1 B               ,
                                                  ПҒ в„“вҖІ                 N                         N
                                            в„“вҖІ =1
                                                                       PL
for c0 вүҲ 14.6 and c1 вүҲ 7.4. Thus if LМғN (f ) = O(BПҒL:1 r в„“вҖІ =1 R
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                  dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N вҲ’ 2 ) then
                                                                                p
                                                                             в„“вҖІ
                                                                            ПҒв„“вҖІ
                    PL
L(f ) = O(BПҒL:1 r в„“вҖІ =1 R
                                                       1
                                    dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N вҲ’ 2 ).
                                   p
                                в„“вҖІ
                               ПҒ вҖІ
                               в„“


Theorem 2 can be extended to ResNets (fL + id) в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ (f1 + id) by simply replacing the Lipschitz
constant Lip(fв„“ ) by Lip(fв„“ + id).
The Lipschitz constants Lip(fв„“ ) are difficult to compute exactly, so it is easiest to simply bound it
by the product of the operator norms Lip(fв„“ ) вүӨ вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘop вҲҘVв„“ вҲҘop , but we see in Theorem 4 how this
bound can be very loose1 The fact that our bound depends on the Lipschitz constants rather than the
operator norms вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘop , вҲҘVв„“ вҲҘop is thus a significant advantage.
   1
     A simple example of a function whose Lipschitz constant is much smaller than its F1 norm (and thus
                                      вҲҘW вҲҘF
its operator norms since вҲҘW вҲҘop вүҘ RankW      ) is is the вҖҳzig-zagвҖҷ function f (x) = |x вҲ’ aвҲ’1 round(ax)| on the
interval [0, 1]: we have Lip(f ) = 1 but вҲҘf вҲҘF1 = в„Ұ(a) since one neuron is needed for each up or down, each
contributing a constant to the parameter norm.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Visualization of scaling laws. We observe that deep networks (either AccNets or DNNs)
achieve better scaling laws than kernel methods or shallow networks on certain compositional tasks,
in agreement with our theory. We also see that our new generalization bounds approximately recover
the right scaling laws (even though they are orders of magnitude too large overall). We consider
a compositional true function f вҲ— = h в—Ұ g where g maps from dimension 15 to 3 while h maps
from 3 to 20, and we denote ОҪg , ОҪh for the number of times g, h are differentiable. In the first plot
ОҪg = 8, ОҪh = 2 so that g is easy to learn while h is hard, whereas in the second plot ОҪg = 9, ОҪh = 10,
so both g and h are relatively easier. The third plot presents the test error and generalization bounds
for MNIST and WESAD (Schmidt et al., 2018).


This bound can be applied to a FCNNs with weight matrices M1 , . . . , ML+1 ,вҲҡ
                                                                             by replacing the middle
                                                                                                  вҲҡ
Mв„“ with SVD decomposition U SV T in the middle by two matrices Wв„“вҲ’1 = SV T and Vв„“ = U S,
with dimensions dв„“ = RankMв„“+1 . The Frobenius norm of the new matrices equals the nuclear norm
                             2         2
of the original one вҲҘWв„“вҲ’1 вҲҘF = вҲҘVв„“ вҲҘF = вҲҘMв„“ вҲҘвҲ— . Recent results have shown that weight-decay
leads to a low-rank bias on the weight matrices of the network (Jacot, 2023a;b; Galanti et al., 2022).
This allows us compare our complexity measure to the one in (Bartlett et al., 2017), whose
                                            3/2
                  Q            P вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘ2/3
                                       2,1
complexity measure в„“ вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘop     в„“     2/3      is closest to ours. We obtain three improve-
                                          вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘop
ments: replacing the operator norm by the Lipschitz constant of fв„“ , replacing the (2, 1)-norm
(вҲҘAвҲҘ2,1 = вҲҘ(вҲҘA:,1 вҲҘ2 , . . . , вҲҘA:,d вҲҘ2 )вҲҘ1 ) by the nuclear norm, and removing the 2/3 and 3/2 expo-
nents. These three changes play a significant role in Theorem 4, as we discuss later. Note however
that since our bound relies on the rank of the weight matrices being bounded, we cannot say that it is
a strict improvement over (Bartlett et al., 2017).
We compute in Figure 1 the upper bound of Theorem 2 for both AccNets and DNNs, and even though
we observe a very large gap (roughly of order 107 ), we do observe that it captures rate/scaling of the
test error (the log-log slope) well. So this generalization bound could be well adapted to predicting
rates, which is what we will do in the next section.

Remark. Note that if one wants to compute this upper bound in practical setting, it is important to
train with L2 regularization until the parameter norm also converges (this often happens after the
train and test loss have converged). The intuition is that at initialization, the weights are initialized
randomly, and they contribute a lot to the parameter norm, and thus lead to a larger generalization
bound. During training with weight decay, these random initial weights slowly vanish, thus leading
to a smaller parameter norm and better generalization bound. It might be possible to improve our
generalization bounds to take into account the randomness at initialization to obtain better bounds
throughout training, but we leave this to future work.



                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     B REAKING THE C URSE OF D IMENSIONALITY WITH C OMPOSITIONALITY
In this section we study a large family of functions spaces, obtained by taking compositions of
Sobolev balls. We focus on this family of tasks because they are well adapted to the complexity
measure we have identified, and because kernel methods and even shallow networks do suffer from
the curse of dimensionality on such tasks, whereas deep networks avoid it (e.g. Figure 1).
More precisely, we will show that these sets of functions can be approximated by a AccNets with
bounded (or in some cases slowly growing) complexity measure
                                    L                L
                                    Y                X вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘF1 p
                           R(Оё) =         Lip(fв„“ )              dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1 .
                                                       Lip(fв„“ )
                                    в„“=1              в„“=1

This will then allow us show that AccNets can (assuming global convergence) avoid the curse of
dimensionality, even in settings that should suffer from the curse of dimensionality, when the input
dimension is large and the function is not very smooth (only a few times differentiable).
Since the regularization term R(Оё) is difficult to optimize directly because of the Lipschitz constants,
we also consider the upper bound RМғ(Оё) obtained by replacing each Lip(fв„“ ) with вҲҘVв„“ вҲҘop вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘop .

4.1     C OMPOSITION OF S OBOLEV BALLS

The family of Sobolev norms capture the regularity of a function, by measuring the size of its
derivatives. Consider a function f : Rdin вҶ’ R with derivatives вҲӮxОұ f for some din -multi-index Оұ, the
W ОҪ,p (ПҖ)-Sobolev norm with integer ОҪ and p вүҘ 1 is defined as
                                      p
                                                  X         p
                                  вҲҘf вҲҘW ОҪ,p (ПҖ) =   вҲҘвҲӮxОұ f вҲҘLp (ПҖ) .
                                                     |Оұ|вүӨОҪ

Note that the derivative вҲӮxОұ f only needs to be defined in the вҖҳweakвҖҷ sense, which means that even
non-differentiable functions such as the ReLU functions can actually have finite Sobolev norm.
The Sobolev balls BW ОҪ,p (ПҖ) (0, R) = {f : вҲҘf вҲҘW ОҪ,p (ПҖ) вүӨ R} are a family of function spaces with a
range of regularity (the larger ОҪ, the more regular). This regularity makes these spaces of functions
learnable purely from the fact that they enforce the function f to vary slowly as the input changes.
Indeed we can prove the following generalization bound:
Proposition 3. Given a distribution ПҖ with support in B(0, b), we have that with probability 1 вҲ’ p
for all functions f вҲҲ F = {f : вҲҘf вҲҘW ОҪ,2 вүӨ R, вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B}
                                                 2 r   2+r  1         r
                                                 B R                    вҲ’ log p/2
                    p           q
                       L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) = c0                  + c1 B              ,
                                                   N                       N
                                                2    r       2                2   r   2
where r = dОҪin . Therefore if LМғN (f ) = O(( B NR ) 2+r ), then L(f ) = O(( B NR ) 2+r ).

But this result also illustrates the curse of dimensionality: the differentiability ОҪ needs to scale with
the input dimension din to obtain a reasonable rate. If instead ОҪ is constant and din grows, then the
number of datapoints N needed to guarantee a test error of at most Пө2 scales exponentially in din , i.e.
                          din
N вҲј ПөвҲ’(2+r) = ПөвҲ’(2+ ОҪ ) . One way to interpret this issue is that regularity becomes less and less
useful the larger the dimension: knowing that similar inputs have similar outputs is useless in high
dimension where the closest training point xi to a test point x is typically very far away.

4.1.1    B REAKING THE C URSE OF D IMENSIONALITY WITH C OMPOSITIONALITY
To break the curse of dimensionality, we need to assume some additional structure on the data or task
which introduces an вҖҳintrinsic dimensionвҖҷ that can be much lower than the input dimension din :
Manifold hypothesis: If the input distribution lies on a dsurf -dimensional manifold, the error rates
typically depends on dsurf instead of din (Schmidt-Hieber, 2019; Chen et al., 2022).
Known Symmetries: If f вҲ— (g В· x) = f вҲ— (x) for a group action В· w.r.t. a group G, then f вҲ— can be
written as the composition of a quotient map g вҲ— : Rdin вҶ’ R in/G which maps pairs of inputs which
                                                           d


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: A comparison of empirical and theoretical error rates. The frist two columns show
the log decay rate of the test error with respect to the dataset size N based on our empirical
simulations for 4 different models. The top right plot depicts the theoretical decay rate of the test
                    2ОҪg
error вҲ’ min{ 12 , 2ОҪg +d  , 2ОҪh }. The bottom right plot displays the difference between the rates
                        in 2ОҪh +dmid
of AccNets and shallow nets. The lower left region represents the area where g is easier to learn than
h, the upper right where h is easier to learn than g, and the lower right region where both f and g are
easy. We see that the biggest gain of AccNets over shallow nets are in the. lower left regions, where
learning h is hard.


are equivalent up to symmetries to the same value (pairs x, y s.t. y = g В· x for some g вҲҲ G), and then
a second function hвҲ— : R in/G вҶ’ Rdout , then the complexity of the task will depend on the dimension
                        d

                       din
of the quotient space R /G which can be much lower. If the symmetry is known, then one can for
example fix g вҲ— and only learn hвҲ— (though other techniques exist, such as designing kernels or features
that respect the same symmetries) (Mallat, 2012).
Symmetry Learning: However if the symmetry is not known then both g вҲ— and hвҲ— have to be learned,
and this is where we require feature learning and/or compositionality. Shallow networks are able
to learn translation symmetries, since they can learn so-called low-index functions which satisfy
f вҲ— (x) = f вҲ— (P x) for some projection P (with a statistical complexity that depends on the dimension
of the space one projects into, not the full dimension (Bach, 2017; Abbe et al., 2021)). Low-index
functions correspond exactly to the set of functions that are invariant under translation along the
kernel ker P . To learn general symmetries, one needs to learn both hвҲ— and the quotient map g вҲ—
simultaneously, hence the importance of feature learning.
For g вҲ— to be learnable efficiently, it needs to be regular enough to not suffer from the curse of
dimensionality, but many traditional symmetries actually have smooth quotient maps, for example
                               2
the quotient map g вҲ— (x) = вҲҘxвҲҘ for rotation invariance. This can be understood as a special case of
composition of Sobolev functions, whose generalization gap can be bounded:
Theorem
                4.   Let    F          =        FL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ F1            where    Fв„“        =
  fв„“ : Rdв„“вҲ’1 вҶ’ Rdв„“ s.t. вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘW ОҪв„“ ,2 вүӨ R, вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B, Lip(fв„“ ) вүӨ ПҒв„“ , and let rmax = maxв„“ rв„“ for
rв„“ = dв„“вҲ’1
        ОҪв„“ , then with probability 1 вҲ’ p we have for all f вҲҲ F

                                                                     2+r1                r
                                                       B 2 Rrmax

                                                                                             вҲ’ log p
                 p             q                                        max
                     L(f ) вҲ’       LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0                                + c1 B               ,
                                                           N                                   N
                                                                            2                            2
where c0 depends only on rв„“ , ПҒв„“ . Thus if LМғN (f ) вүӨ O(N вҲ’ 2+rmax ) then L(f ) вүӨ O(N вҲ’ 2+rmax ).


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We see that only the largest ratio rmax matters when it comes to the rate of learning. Coming back to
the symmetry learning example, we see that the hardness of learning a function of the type f вҲ— = h в—Ұ g
with inner dimension dmid and regularities ОҪg and ОҪh leading to ratios rg = dОҪin   g
                                                                                      and rh = dmid
                                                                                                ОҪh , the
test error will of order (assuming the train error is small enough)
                                                                    2ОҪg        2ОҪh

                                       2
                                          , 2 }

                              вҲ’ min{ 2+r                   вҲ’ min{ 2ОҪg +d   ,          }
                  L=O N                  g 2+rh   =O N                   in 2ОҪh +dmid     .

This suggests the existence of two regimes depending on whether g or h is harder to learn, which is
determined by which ratio rg or rh is larger.
In contrast, without taking advantage of the compositional structure, we expect f вҲ— to be only
min{ОҪg , ОҪh } times differentiable, so trying to learn it as a single Sobolev function would lead to an er-
                  2 min{ОҪg ,ОҪh }                     2ОҪg       2ОҪh
              вҲ’                         вҲ’ min{             ,           }
ror rate of N 2 min{ОҪg ,ОҪh }+din = N     2ОҪg +din 2ОҪh +din
                                                           which is no better than the compositional
rate assuming dmid вүӨ din , and can in some cases be arbitrarily worse.
Furthermore, since multiple compositions are possible, one can imagine a hierarchy of symmetries
that slowly reduce the dimensionality with less and less regular quotient maps. For example one could
imagine a composition fL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ f1 with dimensions dв„“ = d0 2вҲ’в„“ and regularities ОҪв„“ = d0 2вҲ’в„“ so that
                                      2вҲ’в„“                                                      1
the ratios remain constant rв„“ = d0d20вҲ’в„“+1   = 21 , leading to an almost parametric rate of N вҲ’ 2 log N ,
                                                                                 вҲ’L
improving significantly over to the non-compositional rate of N вҲ’2                    .
                                                                     вҲ’ 2+r2max
Remark. A naive argument suggests that the rate of N               should be optimal: assume that the
maximum rв„“ is attained at a layer в„“, then one can consider the subset of functions such that the image
fв„“вҲ’1:1 (B(0, r)) contains a ball B(z, rвҖІ ) вҠӮ Rdв„“вҲ’1 and that the function fL:в„“+1 is ОІ-non-contracting
вҲҘfL:в„“+1 (x) вҲ’ fL:в„“+1 (y)вҲҘ вүҘ ОІ вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ, then learning fL:1 should be as hard as learning fв„“ over the
                                                       2
ball B(z, rвҖІ ), thus forcing a rate of at least N вҲ’ 2+rmax . An analysis of minimax rates in a similar
setting has been done in (Giordano et al., 2022).

4.2   B REAKING THE C URSE OF D IMENSIONALITY WITH ACC N ETS

Now that we know that composition of Sobolev functions can be easily learnable, even in settings
where the curse of dimensionality should make it hard to learn them, we need to find a model that can
achieve those rates. Though many models are possible 2 , we focus on DNNs, in particular AccNets.
Assuming convergence to a global minimum of the loss of sufficiently wide AccNets with two types
of regularization, one can guarantee close to optimal rates:
Theorem 5. Given a true function fLвҲ— вҲ— :1 = fLвҲ— вҲ— в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ f1вҲ— going through the dimensions dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— ,
along with a continuous input distribution ПҖ0 supported in B(0, b0 ), such that the distributions ПҖв„“
                                                                                         вҲ—
of fв„“вҲ— (x) (for x вҲј ПҖ0 ) are continuous too and supported inside B(0, bв„“ ) вҠӮ Rdв„“ . Further assume
that there are differentiabilities ОҪв„“ and radii Rв„“ such that вҲҘfв„“вҲ— вҲҘW ОҪв„“ ,2 (B(0,bв„“ )) вүӨ Rв„“ , and ПҒв„“ such that
Lip(fв„“вҲ— ) вүӨ ПҒв„“ . For an infinite width AccNet with L вүҘ LвҲ— and dimensions dв„“ вүҘ dвҲ—1 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— вҲ’1 , we
                                   dвҲ—   +3
have for the ratios rМғв„“ = max{ в„“вҲ’1
                                ОҪв„“           , 2}:
                                                                                            2
(1) At a global min fЛҶL:1 of LМғN (fL:1 ) + О»R(Оё), we have L(fЛҶL:1 ) = O(N вҲ’ 2+rМғmax ) for rМғmax =
max{rМғ1 , . . . , rМғL }.
                  ЛҶ                                       ЛҶ            вҲ’ 2+rМғ2sum
    Pa global min fL:1 of LМғN (fL:1 ) + О»RМғ(Оё), we have L(fL:1 ) = O(N
(2) At                                                                            ) for rМғsum =
2 + в„“ (rМғв„“ вҲ’ 2).

In the proof, we build a network fЛҶL:1 that approximates fLвҲ— вҲ— :1 in the following manner: we adapt
approximation results from (Bach, 2017) to approximate each Sobolev function fв„“вҲ— by a shallow
network fЛҶв„“вҖІ and if L > LвҲ— we add L вҲ’ LвҲ— identity layers where the dimensionality dвҲ—в„“ is minimal (the
parameter norm required to represent the identity on a d-dimensional representation is proportional
to d, so it is optimal to add identity layers at the smallest dimension).
   2
     One could argue that it would be more natural to consider compositions of kernel method models, for
example a composition of random feature models. But this would lead to a very similar model: this would be
equivalent to a AccNet where only the Wв„“ weights are learned, while the Vв„“ , bв„“ weights remain constant. Another
family of models that should have similar properties is Deep Gaussian Processes (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013).


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F1 -norm/Barron norm: This shows the power of replacing other parameter norm measures (such
as the (2, 1)-norm from Bartlett et al. (2017)) with the F1 -norm, by allowing us to repurpose the
already existing approximation results for shallow networks. While we do not prove that a similar
approximations cannot be achieved with small (2, 1)-norm too, it seems unlikely, since generic
Sobolev functions require a high variety of active neurons (a natural way to approximate them is
to use a random feature approach (Rahimi & Recht, 2008)) which seems in contradiction with the
(2, 1)-norm which imposes a sparsity on the neurons.
Norm based vs Sparsity based: In (Schmidt-Hieber, 2020; Poggio & Fraser, 2024) a similar class of
                                                 2                    dвҲ—           dвҲ— вҲ—
functions is considered and optimal rates N вҲ’ 2+rmax with rmax = max{ ОҪ01 , . . . , LОҪLвҲ’1
                                                                                        вҲ—
                                                                                          } instead of
                dвҲ— +3       dвҲ— вҲ—   +3
rМғmax = max{ 0ОҪ1 , . . . , L ОҪвҲ’1
                               LвҲ—
                                    , 2} are proven. The presence off the +3 comes from the shallow
network approximation results and could potentially be removed. The bigger gap happens for easy
tasks, where the вҖҳfastвҖҷ rates can be achieved N вҲ’1 when rmax вүҲ 0, whereas our result can never
                              1
predict rates faster than N вҲ’ 2 because rМғmax вүҘ 2. This might be a fundamental gap, because norm-
based complexity measures are known to be unable to yield fast rates (Srebro et al., 2010), so a
control on the dimensionality of the model might be required to obtain these fast rates. Real world
                                                                       1
tasks are probably rarely easy enough to achieve rates faster than N вҲ’ 2 , e.g. LLMs scaling laws have
                                  вҲ’0.095
been observed to be roughly N            in (Kaplan et al., 2020).
Lipschitz constant vs operator norm: By evaluating the complexities R, RМғ on this approximation,
we obtain two bounds illustrating the tradeoff between these two complexities. The first complexity
measure based on Lipschitz constant Lip(fв„“ ) leads to almost optimal rates, whereas the second
                                                                                         dвҲ— +3
complexity measure can lead to arbitrarily suboptimal rates when two or more ratios в„“вҲ’1    ОҪв„“    are
larger than 2. This is due to the fact to approximate a general Sobolev functions with a large ratio
dвҲ—в„“вҲ’1 +3
   ОҪв„“    with a shallow network, the parameter norm вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘ2F + вҲҘVв„“ вҲҘ2F needs to grow to infinity as
Пө вҶҳ 0, leading to exploding operator norms, even though the Lipschitz constant remains bounded.
Obviously, the Lipschitz constants Lip(fв„“ ) are difficult to optimize over. For finite width networks it
is in theory possible to take the max over all linear regions, but the complexity might be unreasonable.
It might be more reasonable to leverage an implicit bias instead, such as a large learning rate, because
a large Lipschitz constant implies that the network is sensible to small changes in its parameters,
so GD with a large learning rate should only converge to minima with a small Lipschitz constant
(such a bias is described in (Jacot, 2023b)). For this reason, we apply standard weight-decay to
minimize the F1 -norms, and rely on the implicit bias to control the Lipschitz constants. Going further,
techniques from (Wei & Ma, 2019) could be used to replace the Lipschitz constant in the bound with
the maximum Jacobian over the dataset, which could then be optimized directly.
Impact of Depth: As can be seen in the proof of Theorem 5, when the depth L is strictly larger than
the true depth LвҲ— , one needs to add identity layers, leading to a so-called Bottleneck structure, which
was proven emerge as a result of weight decay in (Jacot, 2023a;b; Wen & Jacot, 2024). These identity
                                                                  (LвҲ’LвҲ— )dвҲ—
layers add a term that scales linearly in the additional depth        вҲҡ min to the first regularization,
                                                                        N
(and multiplicative factor of order L to the second), see the proof for more details. The removal of
the 2/3 and 3/2 exponents3 in our bounds in comparison to previous bounds Bartlett et al. (2017)
                                                         3
allow us to get such a O(L) bound instead of O(L 2 ). Interestingly, the first bound proposed in
Golowich et al. (2020) to obtain a better depth dependence depends on the product of the Frobenius
                                                                       вҲ—
norms, which would grow exponentially as minв„“ {dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—L }(LвҲ’L ) if the minimum dimension is 2
or more. Finally, note that by switching to a ResNet, there is no need for those identity layers, and
the generalization becomes constant in depth.
Limitations: There are a number of limitations to this result. First we assume that one is able to
recover the global minimizer of the regularized loss, which should be hard in general4 (we already
know from (Bach, 2017) that this is NP-hard for shallow networks and a simple F1 -regularization).
Note that it is sufficient to recover a network fL:1 whose regularized loss is within a constant of the

   3
    We achieve this by applying chaining accross the layers instead of applying to each layer separately.
   4
    Note that the unregularized loss can be optimized polynomially, e.g. in the NTK regime (Jacot et al.,
2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019), but this is an easier task than finding the global minimum of the
regularized loss where one needs to both fit the data, and do it with an minimal regularization term.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


global minimum, which might be easier to guarantee, but should still be hard in general. The typical
method of training with GD on the regularized loss is a greedy approach, which might fail in general
but could recover almost optimal parameters under the right conditions (some results suggest that
training relies on first order correlations to guide the network in the right direction (Abbe et al., 2021;
2022; Petrini et al., 2023)).
Another limitation is that our proof requires an infinite width, because we were not able to prove
that a function with bounded F1 -norm and Lipschitz constant can be approximated by a sufficiently
wide shallow networks with the same (or close) F1 -norm and Lipschitz constant (we know from
(Bach, 2017) that it is possible without preserving the Lipschitzness). We are quite hopeful that this
condition might be removed in future work.

4.2.1    E XPERIMENTS
We train our models on a synthetic dataset obtained by composing two Gaussian processes Y =
h(g(X)) with MateМҒrn kernels Kg , Kh chosen so that g and h have the right differentiability. In Figure
2, we compare the empirical rates (by doing a linear fit on a log-log plot of test error as a function of
                          2ОҪg
N ) and rates min{ 21 , 2ОҪg +d  , 2ОҪh } which seem to yield the best match. Note that this best fit
                              in 2ОҪh +dmid
                                                                     2ОҪ
                                                                g
for the rates is a mix of the theoretical lower bound min{ 2ОҪg +d   , 2ОҪh } and the upper bound
                                                                  in 2ОҪh +dmid
             2ОҪ               2ОҪh
min{ 12 , 2ОҪg +dgin +3 , 2ОҪh +d mid +3
                                       }, suggesting that the appearance of the +3 in the denominator might
be an artifact of the proofs, whereas the 12 might actually be optimal. But the amount of noise in our
approximation of the rates does not allow us to give a definite answer for what the rates should be.
Notice also that all experiments were done with a simple L2 -regularization, which suggests the
Lipshitz constants Lip(fв„“ ) do not need to be optimized directly. The use of large learning rates
and the edge of stability phenomenon (Cohen et al., 2021) could explain this implicit control of the
Lipschitzness, because a large Lipschitz constant can lead to exploding gradients, and training with
large learning rates could implicit avoid such parameters. Stability under large learning rate has been
shown to control the regularity of the representations in previous works (Jacot, 2023a;b).

4.2.2    C OMPUTATIONAL GRAPHS
Theorem 5 can be adapted to show that AccNets can also learn any вҖҳcomputational graphвҖҷ as in
(Schmidt-Hieber, 2020; Poggio & Fraser, 2024), where a variables v1 , . . . , vK each with their
own dimension dk . Each variable has a set of parents P (k) вҠӮ {1, . . . , K} on whom it depends
vk = fk ((vm : m вҲҲ P (k))) for a ОҪk -Sobolev or F1 function gk . We assume that the variables can be
ordered in such a way that all parents of a variable belong have smaller indices, or equivalently that
the directed graph with K vertices, with edges connecting parents to their child is acyclic. The input
variable is 1 and output one is K.
It is then possible to organize the variables into вҖҳlayersвҖҷ of variables that only have parents in the
previous layers (possibly adding identities to keep certain variables from previous layers until they
are needed). We say that the depth LвҲ— of the computational graph is the minimal number of layers
required to find such a representation, and it matches the length of the longest directed path in the
graph. Thus the complete function can be written as the composition of LвҲ— functions fL:1           вҲ—
                                                                                                      , where each
  вҲ—                                    вҲ—
fв„“ is the product of a few gk s, e.g. fв„“ (v1 , v2 , v3 ) = (g1 (v1 , v2 ), g2 (v3 ), g3 (v1 , v3 )). The F1 -norm
has the property that F1 -norm of the product of multiple functions is upper bounded by the sum
of the F1 norms, e.g. вҲҘfв„“вҲ— вҲҘF1 = вҲҘg1 вҲҘF1 + вҲҘg2 вҲҘF1 + вҲҘg3 вҲҘF1 , as well as the Lipshchitz constant
Lip(fв„“вҲ— ) = Lip(g1 ) + Lip(g2 ) + Lip(g3 ). One can then easily see that, assuming bounded             P
                                                                                                         Lipschitz
                                                              2                                  3+    mвҲҲP (k) dk
constants, we can guarantee a rate of learning of N вҲ’ 2+rМғmax for rМғmax = maxk=1,...,K                  ОҪk          .

5    C ONCLUSION
We have given a generalization bound for Accordion Networks and as an extension Fully-Connected
networks. It depends on the F1 -norms and Lipschitz constants of its shallow subnetworks. This
allows us to prove under certain assumptions that AccNets can learn general compositions of Sobolev
functions efficiently, making them able to break the curse of dimensionality in certain settings, such
as in the presence of unknown symmetries.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-AdseraМҖ, Matthew Stewart Brennan, Guy Bresler, and Dheeraj Mysore
 Nagaraj. The staircase property: How hierarchical structure can guide deep learning. In A. Beygelz-
 imer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fj6rFciApc.

Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
 necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
 networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4782вҖ“4887. PMLR, 2022.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-
  parameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 242вҖ“252. PMLR, 2019.

Kendall Atkinson and Weimin Han. Spherical harmonics and approximations on the unit sphere: an
  introduction, volume 2044. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 18(1):629вҖ“681, 2017.

Andrew R Barron and Jason M Klusowski. Complexity, statistical risk, and metric entropy of deep
  nets using total path variation. stat, 1050:6, 2019.

Peter L Bartlett, Dylan J Foster, and Matus J Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-learning
 practice and the classical biasвҖ“variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 116(32):15849вҖ“15854, 2019.

M. S. Birman and M. Z. Solomjak. Piecewise-polynomial approximations of functions of the
 classes WpОұ . Mathematics of The USSR-Sbornik, 2:295вҖ“317, 1967. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:120210661.

Minshuo Chen, Haoming Jiang, Wenjing Liao, and Tuo Zhao. Nonparametric regression on low-
 dimensional manifolds using deep relu networks: Function approximation and statistical recovery.
 Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 11(4):1203вҖ“1253, 2022.

LeМҒnaДұМҲc Chizat and Francis Bach.     On the Global Convergence of Gradient
   Descent for Over-parameterized Models using Optimal Transport.   In Ad-
   vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, pp. 3040вҖ“3050. Cur-
   ran Associates,  Inc.,  2018.       URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
   7567-on-the-global-convergence-of-gradient-descent-for-over-parameterized-models-u
   pdf.

LeМҒnaДұМҲc Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit bias of gradient descent for wide two-layer neural networks
   trained with the logistic loss. In Jacob Abernethy and Shivani Agarwal (eds.), Proceedings of Thirty
   Third Conference on Learning Theory, volume 125 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
   pp. 1305вҖ“1338. PMLR, 09вҖ“12 Jul 2020. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v125/
   chizat20a.html.

Jeremy Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on
  neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jh-rTtvkGeM.

Feng Dai. Approximation theory and harmonic analysis on spheres and balls. Springer, 2013.

Zhen Dai, Mina Karzand, and Nathan Srebro. Representation costs of linear neural networks:
  Analysis and design. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=3oQyjABdbC8.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andreas Damianou and Neil D. Lawrence. Deep Gaussian processes. In Carlos M. Carvalho and
  Pradeep Ravikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence and Statistics, volume 31 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 207вҖ“215,
  Scottsdale, Arizona, USA, 29 AprвҖ“01 May 2013. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v31/damianou13a.html.
Simon S. Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1eK3i09YQ.
I. Dumer, M.S. Pinsker, and V.V. Prelov. On coverings of ellipsoids in euclidean spaces. IEEE
   Transactions on Information Theory, 50(10):2348вҖ“2356, 2004. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2004.834759.
Lawrence C Evans. Partial differential equations, volume 19. American Mathematical Society, 2022.
Tomer Galanti, Zachary S Siegel, Aparna Gupte, and Tomaso Poggio. Sgd and weight decay provably
  induce a low-rank bias in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05794, 2022.
Tomer Galanti, Mengjia Xu, Liane Galanti, and Tomaso Poggio. Norm-based generalization bounds
  for compositionally sparse neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12033, 2023.
Mario Geiger, Stefano Spigler, SteМҒphane dвҖҷAscoli, Levent Sagun, Marco Baity-Jesi, Giulio Biroli,
 and Matthieu Wyart. Jamming transition as a paradigm to understand the loss landscape of deep
 neural networks. Physical Review E, 100(1):012115, 2019.
Mario Geiger, Arthur Jacot, Stefano Spigler, Franck Gabriel, Levent Sagun, SteМҒphane dвҖҷAscoli,
 Giulio Biroli, CleМҒment Hongler, and Matthieu Wyart. Scaling description of generalization with
 number of parameters in deep learning. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,
 2020(2):023401, 2020.
Matteo Giordano, Kolyan Ray, and Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. On the inability of gaussian process
 regression to optimally learn compositional functions. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle
 Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
 URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fhO6vCGuuag.
Noah Golowich, Alexander Rakhlin, and Ohad Shamir. Size-independent sample complexity of
  neural networks. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 9(2):473вҖ“504, 2020.
Antoine Gonon, Nicolas Brisebarre, Elisa Riccietti, and ReМҒmi Gribonval. A path-norm toolkit
  for modern networks: consequences, promises and challenges. In The Twelfth International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Florian Graf, Sebastian Zeng, Bastian Rieck, Marc Niethammer, and Roland Kwitt. On measuring
  excess capacity in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  10164вҖ“10178, 2022.
Suriya Gunasekar, Jason Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Characterizing implicit bias
  in terms of optimization geometry. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1832вҖ“1841. PMLR, 10вҖ“15 Jul 2018. URL http://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/gunasekar18a.html.
Daniel Hsu, Ziwei Ji, Matus Telgarsky, and Lan Wang. Generalization bounds via distillation. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=EGdFhBzmAwB.
Arthur Jacot. Implicit bias of large depth networks: a notion of rank for nonlinear functions.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=6iDHce-0B-a.
Arthur Jacot. Bottleneck structure in learned features: Low-dimension vs regularity tradeoff. In
  A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 23607вҖ“23629. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/4a6695df88f2de0d49f875189ea181ef-Paper-Conference.pdf.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and CleМҒment Hongler. Neural Tangent Kernel: Convergence and
  Generalization in Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31,
  pp. 8580вҖ“8589. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
  8076-neural-tangent-kernel-convergence-and-generalization-in-neural-networks.
  pdf.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantastic
  generalization measures and where to find them. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02178, 2019.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Antoine Ledent, Waleed Mustafa, Yunwen Lei, and Marius Kloft. Norm-based generalisation bounds
  for deep multi-class convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 8279вҖ“8287, 2021.
Zhiyuan Li, Yuping Luo, and Kaifeng Lyu. Towards resolving the implicit bias of gradient descent
  for matrix factorization: Greedy low-rank learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.
SteМҒphane Mallat. Group invariant scattering. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 65
   (10):1331вҖ“1398, 2012.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan and J Zico Kolter. Uniform convergence may be unable to explain generalization
  in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Atsushi Nitanda and Taiji Suzuki. Optimal rates for averaged stochastic gradient descent under neural
  tangent kernel regime. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Greg Ongie and Rebecca Willett. The role of linear layers in nonlinear interpolating networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.00856, 2022.
Suzanna Parkinson, Greg Ongie, and Rebecca Willett. Linear neural network layers promote learning
  single-and multiple-index models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15598, 2023.
Leonardo Petrini, Francesco Cagnetta, Umberto M Tomasini, Alessandro Favero, and Matthieu Wyart.
  How deep neural networks learn compositional data: The random hierarchy model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.02129, 2023.
Tomaso Poggio and Maia Fraser. Compositional sparsity of learnable functions. Bulletin of the
  American Mathematical Society, 61(3):438вҖ“456, 2024.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. In J. Platt,
  D. Koller, Y. Singer, and S. Roweis (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 20. Curran Associates, Inc., 2008. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2007/file/013a006f03dbc5392effeb8f18fda755-Paper.pdf.
Grant Rotskoff and Eric Vanden-Eijnden.      Parameters as interacting particles:
  long time convergence and asymptotic error scaling of neural networks.      In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, pp. 7146вҖ“7155. Cur-
  ran Associates,   Inc., 2018.       URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
  7945-parameters-as-interacting-particles-long-time-convergence-and-asymptotic-erro
  pdf.
Philip Schmidt, Attila Reiss, Robert Duerichen, Claus Marberger, and Kristof Van Laerhoven.
  Introducing wesad, a multimodal dataset for wearable stress and affect detection. In Proceedings
  of the 20th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, ICMI вҖҷ18, pp. 400вҖ“408,
  New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450356923. doi:
  10.1145/3242969.3242985. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3242969.3242985.
Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. Deep relu network approximation of functions on a manifold. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1908.00695, 2019.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. Nonparametric regression using deep neural networks with ReLU activa-
  tion function. The Annals of Statistics, 48(4):1875 вҖ“ 1897, 2020. doi: 10.1214/19-AOS1875. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1214/19-AOS1875.
Mark Sellke. On size-independent sample complexity of relu networks. Information Processing
 Letters, pp. 106482, 2024.
Nathan Srebro, Karthik Sridharan, and Ambuj Tewari. Smoothness, low noise and fast rates.
 ArXiv, abs/1009.3896, 2010. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  1984524.
Lan V Truong. On rademacher complexity-based generalization bounds for deep learning. arXiv
  e-prints, pp. arXivвҖ“2208, 2022.
Rui Tuo and C. F. Jeff Wu. A theoretical framework for calibration in computer models: parametriza-
  tion, estimation and convergence properties, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1508.
  07155.
Zihan Wang and Arthur Jacot. Implicit bias of SGD in l2 -regularized linear DNNs: One-way jumps
  from high to low rank. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=P1aobHnjjj.
Colin Wei and Tengyu Ma. Data-dependent sample complexity of deep neural networks via lipschitz
  augmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
E Weinan, Chao Ma, and Lei Wu. Barron spaces and the compositional function spaces for neural
  network models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08039, 2019.
Yuxiao Wen and Arthur Jacot. Which frequencies do cnns need? emergent bottleneck structure in
  feature learning. to appear at ICML, 2024.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. ICLR 2017 proceedings, Feb 2017. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.03530.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The Appendix is structured as follows:

      1. In Section A, we describe the experimental setup and provide a few additional experiments.
      2. in Section B, we introduce the notion of covering numbers and prove a Theorem that we
         will use to obtain generalization bounds from covering numbers bound.
      3. In Section C, we prove Theorems 1 and 2 from the main.
      4. In Section D, we prove Proposition 3 and Theorem 4.
      5. In Section E, we prove Theorem 5 and other approximation results concerning Sobolev
         functions.
      6. In Section F, we prove a few technical results on the covering number.

A     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
In this section, we review our numerical experiments and their setup both on synthetic and real-
world datasets in order to address theoretical results more clearly and intuitively. The code used for
experiments is publicly available here.

A.1     DATASET

A.1.1    E MPIRICAL DATASET
By Corollary A.6 from (Tuo & Wu, 2015), the Reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) generated
by MateМҒrn kernel is norm equivalent to the Sobolev space H ОҪ+d/2 (в„Ұ), so we utilized MateМҒrn kernels
to generate the synthetic dataset which retains Sobolev properties.
The MateМҒrn kernel is considered a generalization of the radial basis function (RBF) kernel. It
controls the differentiability, or smoothness, of the kernel through the parameter ОҪ. As ОҪ вҶ’ вҲһ, the
MateМҒrn kernel converges to the RBF kernel, and as ОҪ вҶ’ 0, it converges to the Laplacian kernel, a
0-differentiable kernel. In this study, we utilized the MateМҒrn kernel to generate Gaussian Process (GP)
samples based on the composition of two MateМҒrn kernels, Kg and Kh , with varying differentiability
in the range [0.5,10]Г—[0.5,10]. The input dimension (din ) of the kernel, the bottleneck mid-dimension
(dmid ), and the output dimension (dout ) are 15, 3, and 20, respectively.
This outlines the general procedure of our sampling method for synthetic data:

      1. Sample the training dataset X вҲҲ RDГ—din
      2. From X, compute the D Г— D kernel Kg with given ОҪg
      3. From Kg , sample Z вҲҲ RDГ—dmid with columns sampled from the Gaussian N (0, Kg ).
      4. From Z, compute Kg with given ОҪh
      5. From Kh , sample the test dataset Y вҲҲ RDГ—dout with columns sampled from the Gaussian
         N (0, Kh ).

We used 128 GB of RAM to generate our synthetic dataset. Due to the MateМҒrn KernelвҖҷs time
complexity of O(n3 ) and the space complexity of O(n2 ), the maximum possible dataset size for 128
GB of memory is approximately 52,500. Among the 52,500 dataset points, 50,000 were allocated for
training, and 2,500 were used for the test dataset.

A.1.2    R EAL - WORLD DATASET: MNIST AND WESAD
In our study, we utilized both MNIST (Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology)
and WESAD (Wearable Stress and Affect Detection) to train our AccNets for classification tasks. As
a standard benchmark for image classification tasks, MNIST consists of 60,000 grayscale images
of 10 different handwritten digits. On the other hand, the WESAD dataset provides multimodal
physiological and motion data collected from 15 subjects using devices worn on the wrist and
chest. For the purpose of our experiment, we specifically employed the Empatica E4 wrist device to
distinguish between non-stress (baseline) and stress conditions.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: A comparison: singular values of the weight matrices for DNN and AccNets models.
The first two plots represent cases where N = 10000 while the right two plots correspond to N =
200.The number of outliers at the top of each plot signifies the rank of each network. The plots with
N = 10000 datasets demonstrate a clearer capture of the true rank compared to those with N = 200
indicating that a higher dataset count provides more accurate rank determination.


After preprocessing, the dataset comprised a total of 136,482 instances. We implemented a train-test
split ratio of approximately 75:25, resulting in 100,000 dataset for the training set and the rest 36,482
dataset for the test set. The overall hyperparameters and architecture of the AccNets model applied
to the WESAD dataset were largely consistent with those used for our synthetic data. The primary
differences were the use of 100 epochs for each iteration of Ni from N in the model setup and a
learning rate set to 1e-5.

A.2    M ODEL SETUPS

For analyzing the scaling law of test error for our synthetic dataset, we trained mod-
els with gradually increasing Ni data points from our training data, where N =
[100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10000, 20000, 50000]. The models utilized for our analysis are
the kernel method, shallow networks, fully connected deep neural networks (FCNN), and Acc-
Nets. For FCNN and AccNets, we set the network depth to 12 layers, with the layer widths as
[din , 500, 500, ..., 500, dout ] for DNNs, and [din , 900, 100, 900, ..., 100, 900, dout ] for AccNets.
In order to have a comparable number of neurons between the shallow networks and other deeper
networks, the width for the shallow networks was set to 50,000, resulting in dimensions of
[din , 50000, dout ].
We utilized ReLU as the activation function and L2 -norm as the cost function, with the Adam
optimizer. The total number of batch was set to 5, and the training process was conducted over 3600
epochs, divided into three phases. The detailed optimizer parameters are as follows:

      1. For the first 1200 epochs: learning rate (lr) = 1.5 вҲ— 0.001, weight decay = 0
      2. For the second 1200 epochs: lr = 0.4 вҲ— 0.001, weight decay = 0.002
      3. For the final 1200 epochs: lr = 0.1 вҲ— 0.001, weight decay = 0.005

We conducted experiments utilizing 12 NVIDIA V100 GPUs (each with 32GB of memory) over
approximately 7 days to train all the synthetic datasets. In contrast, training the WESAD and MNIST
dataset required only one hour on a single V100 GPU.


B     C OVERING N UMBERS

We will use a covering number argument to prove generalization bounds. Before we start, we must
define a few notions.
The Пө-covering number N2 (F; Пө) of set F of functions f : в„Ұ вҶ’ Rd , is the smallest integer n such
that for any distribution ПҖ supported on в„Ұ there is a covering FМғ, i.e. a finite set with no more than n


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Comparison of our bounds to a number of previous bounds on the composition of two
functions dataset across different differentiabilities of g and h. For simplicity, we drop the constant
prefactors in each bound, since they are mostly an artifact of the proofs. We see that our bound
(Jacot24 Jacobian) obtains strictly better than previous ones, even when using upper bounding the
Lipschitz constants by the operator norms (Jacot24 OP). Since we cannot compute the Lipschitz
constant, we approximate them by a max over 100 random points (taking more points does not
significantly change the final bound). The lines appear flat because most of the variation is between
different bounds rather than as N increases, but by zooming in, we can see a downward trend, albeit a
slow and noisy one. The case (2, 2) lies in the regime where both g and h are hard, in which case our
theory predicts that the operator norm bound should have a worse scaling exponent than the Lipschitz
based bound. The experiments appear to match our prediction, because the Lipschitz-constant based
bound seems to be the only one that is decreasing in N , while the operator norm bound, as well as all
previous bounds, are increasing (the fact that uniform generalization bounds can be increasing in N
has been observed in previous work (Nagarajan & Kolter, 2019)). Though these trends are interesting,
there is clearly a lot of noise in the resulting curves, so it is difficult to confidently conclude anything
from these experiments.


elements, such that for all f вҲҲ F there is a cover fЛң вҲҲ FМғ with
                                           r
                                                                2
                              f вҲ’ f = ExвҲјПҖ f (x) вҲ’ fЛң(x) вүӨ Пө.
                                   Лң
                                       ПҖ

We will also sometimes say that fЛң covers f in such case.
The covering number allows us to bound the difference between the errors of two datasets uniformly
over the whole functions set F with high-probability:
Theorem 6. Let F be a space of functions such that вҲҘgвҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B for all g вҲҲ F. Given a true function
f вҲ— such that вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B, we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ p over the sampling of two
datasets S, S вҖІ from a distribution ПҖ, one has for all g вҲҲ F:
                                                            r
                         вҲ—              вҲ—                     log N (F, Пө) вҲ’ log p
                  вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲҘS вүӨ 2 min Пө + B 2                          .
                                                   Пө                  N

Proof. We start with a Chernoff bound:

PS,S вҖІ sup вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вүҘ c вүӨ ES,S вҖІ exp t sup вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS    eвҲ’tc
        gвҲҲF                                                       gвҲҲF

Defining M (t) = ES,S вҖІ exp t supgвҲҲF вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS , this can be reformulated as

saying that with probability 1 вҲ’ p, we have that for all g вҲҲ F
                                                              log M (t) вҲ’ log p
                         вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS < min                      .
                                                          t           t

Let us now bound M (t). For any pair of datasets S, S вҖІ , we consider the Пө-covering FМғ of F w.r.t. to
                 вҖІ
the measure S+S2   which is the empirical measure corresponding to the dataset of size 2N made up
of the union of S and S вҖІ . Thus for any function g вҲҲ F, there is a gМғ вҲҲ FМғ such that вҲҘg вҲ’ gМғвҲҘ S+SвҖІ вүӨ Пө
                                                                                                   2

and FМғ вүӨ N (F, Пө).

We can now bound


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       M (t) = ES,S вҖІ exp t sup вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS
                                       gвҲҲF

                                                                вҲ—              вҲ—
              вүӨ ES,S exp t sup вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ gвҲҘS + вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ + вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲҘS
                    вҖІ
                                       gвҲҲF

                 2tПө                      вҲ—              вҲ—
              вүӨ e ES,S вҖІ exp t sup вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲҘS
                                             gвҲҲF
                                 "                                                                       !#
                                                   PN                  вҲ—     2                       2
                  2tПө                               i=1 вҲҘgМғ(xi ) вҲ’ f  (xi )вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘgМғ(xвҖІi ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xвҖІi )вҲҘ
              =e        ES,S вҖІ sup exp t
                                   gвҲҲF                      N (вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вҖІ + вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS )
                                 пЈ®            пЈ«                                                           пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                 вҲ— вҖІ 2
                                                   PN                 вҲ—        2         вҖІ
                                                        вҲҘgМғ(x i ) вҲ’ f   (x i )вҲҘ  вҲ’ вҲҘgМғ(x i ) вҲ’ f  (x i )вҲҘ
              вүӨ e2tПө ES,S вҖІ пЈ° sup exp пЈӯt            i=1
                                                                  вҲҡ                                       пЈёпЈ»
                                     gвҲҲF                            2N вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘ S+SвҖІ
                                                                                     2

                                           q
                                                 2        2
where we used the fact that вҲҘhвҲҘS + вҲҘhвҲҘS вҖІ вүӨ 2 вҲҘhвҲҘS + 2 вҲҘhвҲҘS вҖІ = 2 вҲҘhвҲҘ S+SвҖІ вүӨ 2Пө and conversely
                                                                       2
                   q
                          2       2     вҲҡ
вҲҘhвҲҘS + вҲҘhвҲҘS вҖІ вүҘ вҲҘhвҲҘS + вҲҘhвҲҘS вҖІ = 2 вҲҘhвҲҘ S+SвҖІ . We may now introduce i.i.d. Rademacher
                                                                2
random variables Пғi equal to 1 and вҲ’1 with prob. 12 :


                     пЈ®         пЈ®             пЈ« PN                                                   пЈ¶пЈ№пЈ№
                                                                     2                          2
                                                вҲҘgМғ(xi ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xi )вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘgМғ(xвҖІi ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xвҖІi )вҲҘ
                                                   i=1 Пғi
 M (t) вүӨ e2tПө ES,S вҖІ пЈ°EПғ пЈ° sup exp пЈӯt                  вҲҡ                                            пЈёпЈ»пЈ»
                           gМғвҲҲFМғ                         2N вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘ S+SвҖІ
                                                                          2
                     пЈ®             пЈ®    пЈ«                                                        пЈ¶пЈ№пЈ№
                                                                   2                         2
                       XY  N              tПғi вҲҘgМғ(xi ) вҲ’ f (xi )вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘgМғ(xвҖІi ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xвҖІi )вҲҘ
                                                           вҲ—

       вүӨ e2tПө ES,S вҖІ пЈ°         EПғi пЈ°exp пЈӯ               вҲҡ                                        пЈёпЈ»пЈ» .
                          i=1
                                                          2N вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘ S+SвҖІ
                         gМғвҲҲFМғ                                                           2


To understand why adding the Rademacher random variables Пғi does not change the expectation, one
can think of these random variables as randomly switching the i-th datapoints xi from S and xвҖІi from
S вҖІ with each other (not that these switches leave the denominator unchanged too). Sampling two
datasets S and S вҖІ followed by random switches is equivalent to sampling without the switches.
We now use Hoeffdings Lemma, which tells us that for any random var X with EX = 0 and
                                         2 2
X вҲҲ [вҲ’b, b] a.s. one has E exp tX вүӨ exp t 2b to obtain
                           пЈ®       пЈ«
                                         PN                                                             2 пЈ¶пЈ№
                                       2                       вҲ—        2            вҖІ        вҲ— вҖІ 2
                          X          t     i=1   вҲҘgМғ(x i ) вҲ’ f   (x i )вҲҘ  вҲ’    вҲҘgМғ(x i )  вҲ’ f  (x i )вҲҘ
    M (t) вүӨ e2tПө ES,S вҖІ пЈ°      exp пЈӯ
                        пЈҜ          пЈ¬                                                                      пЈ·пЈә
                                                              2           вҲ—   2                           пЈёпЈ»
                                                           2N вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲҘ S+SвҖІ
                         gМғвҲҲFМғ                                                   2
                        пЈ®          пЈ«                                                                    пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                вҲ— вҖІ 2
                                       2 2
                                            PN                    вҲ—       2             вҖІ
                                     t B       i=1 вҲҘgМғ(xi ) вҲ’ f (xi )вҲҘ + вҲҘgМғ(xi ) вҲ’ f (xi )вҲҘ пЈёпЈ»
                          X
          вүӨ e2tПө ES,S вҖІ пЈ°      exp пЈӯ                                        2
                                                           N 2 вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘ S+SвҖІ
                         gМғвҲҲFМғ                                                 2
                        пЈ®          пЈ«                                             пЈ¶пЈ№
                                       2 2           вҲ— 2                вҲ— 2
                          X          t B вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲҘS + вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲҘS вҖІ
          = e2tПө ES,S вҖІ пЈ°      exp пЈӯ                          2
                                                                                  пЈёпЈ»
                                               N вҲҘgМғ вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘ S+SвҖІ
                         gМғвҲҲFМғ                                   2
                        пЈ®                      пЈ№
                                     t2 2B 2 пЈ»
                          X
          вүӨ e2tПө ES,S вҖІ пЈ°      exp
                                        N
                         gМғвҲҲFМғ

                                    t2 2B 2

          вүӨ N (F, Пө) exp 2tПө +                .
                                       N


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This bound on M (t) then implies that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ p over the sampling of S, S вҖІ for
all g вҲҲ F
                                                        log M (t) вҲ’ log p
                  вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘS вүӨ min
                                                     t          t
                                                             2B 2 t log N (F, Пө) вҲ’ log p
                                               вүӨ min 2Пө +          +
                                                  t,Пө         N                t
                                                               r
                                                                   log N (F, Пө) вҲ’ log p
                                               = 2 min Пө + B 2                          .
                                                      Пө                    N


We can then use the above to bound the generalization error uniformly:
Theorem 7. Under the same setup as Theorem 6, we have that with prob. 1 вҲ’ p for all g вҲҲ F
                                               r                      r
                вҲ—            вҲ—                     log N (F, Пө)          вҲ’ log p/2
          вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲҘS вүӨ min 2Пө + B 8                  + cB               ,
                                      Пө                 N                   N
       вҲҡ      вҲҡ
for c = 2(3 + 5).

                                                                     2                          2
Proof. Our goal is to approximate the population error вҲҘf вҲ— вҲ’ gвҲҘПҖ by the test error вҲҘf вҲ— вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ for a
sample S вҖІ independent of g, and this test error is itself close to the train error thanks to Theorem 6.
                                                                                                    2
We use BennettвҖҷs inequality which relies on the fact that the function h(x) = вҲҘf вҲ— (x) вҲ’ g(x)вҲҘ is
bounded by 4B 2 :
                                      "N                             #
  h                            i        X
     вҲ—     2       вҲ—     2
P вҲҘf вҲ’ gвҲҘПҖ вҲ’ вҲҘf вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ вүҘ a = P             h(xi ) вҲ’ N Eh(x) вүҘ N a
                                               i=1
                                                                                              !
                                              N EПҖ (h(x) вҲ’ Eh(x))2             4B 2 a
                                      вүӨ exp вҲ’                       П•
                                                     (4B 2 )2          EПҖ [(h(x) вҲ’ Eh(x))2 ]

for П•(u) = (1 + u) log(1 + u) вҲ’ u.
                                      вҲҡ
Lemma 8 gives us the bound П•вҲ’1 (v) вүӨ 2v + 2v, which implies that with probability p
                                                  s                                                   !
   вҲ—      2     вҲ—      2     EПҖ (h(x) вҲ’ Eh(x))2            вҲ’2(4B 2 )2 log p         вҲ’2(4B 2 )2 log p
вҲҘf вҲ’ gвҲҘПҖ вҲ’ вҲҘf вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ вүӨ                                                         +
                                     4B 2             N EПҖ [(h(x) вҲ’ Eh(x))2 ] N EПҖ [(h(x) вҲ’ Eh(x))2 ]
                            r
                                                     вҲ’ log p        вҲ’ log p
                           = 2EПҖ [(h(x) вҲ’ Eh(x))2 ]          + 8B 2         .
                                                       N               N
                                                                                           2
We now use the facts that EПҖ (h(x) вҲ’ Eh(x))2 вүӨ EПҖ h(x)2 вүӨ 4B 2 EПҖ [h(x)] = 4B 2 вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘПҖ

to obtain                                             r
                 вҲ—      2     вҲ—     2            вҲ—        вҲ’ log p         вҲ’ log p
             вҲҘf вҲ’ gвҲҘПҖ вҲ’ вҲҘf вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ вүӨ B вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲҘПҖ 8                + 8B 2          .
                                                             N               N
Reordering this is implies
                                           r
                  вҲ—       2                  вҲ’ log p             2         вҲ’ log p
             вҲҘf       вҲ’ gвҲҘПҖ вҲ’ вҲҘf вҲ— вҲ’ gвҲҘПҖ   8B 2      вҲ’ вҲҘf вҲ— вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ 8B 2         вүӨ0
                                               N                             N
which by the quadratic formula yields the inequality
                         r                 r
             вҲ—                  вҲ’ log p           вҲ’ log p             2         вҲ’ log p
           вҲҘf вҲ’ gвҲҘПҖ вүӨ 2B      2         + 2B 2            + вҲҘf вҲ— вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ + 8B 2
                                  N                  N                             N
                                                       r
                                         вҲҡ      вҲҡ         вҲ’ log p
                      вүӨ вҲҘf вҲ— вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ + ( 2 + 10)B
                                                            N


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This implies that with probability 1 вҲ’ 2p we have that for all g вҲҲ F,
                                                                                       r
          вҲ—              вҲ—              вҲ—                       вҲ—
                                                                         вҲҡ
                                                                    вҲ’ log p     вҲҡ
  вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲҘS вүӨ вҲҘf вҲ’ gвҲҘS вҖІ вҲ’ вҲҘg вҲ’ f вҲҘS + ( 2 + 10)B
                                                                      N
                                      r                                      r
                                         log N (F, Пө) вҲ’ log p    вҲҡ   вҲҡ           вҲ’ log p
                        вүӨ min 2Пө + 2B 2                       + ( 2 + 10)B
                           Пө                      N                                N
                                     r                              r
                                        log N (F, Пө)   вҲҡ       вҲҡ       вҲ’ log p
                        вүӨ min 2Пө + B 8               + 2(3 + 5)B               .
                           Пө                 N                           N


Let us now prove the lemma we used in the proof:
Lemma 8. The function П•(u) = (1 + u) log(1 + u) вҲ’ u satisfies
                                                            1 u2
                                                  П•(u) вүӨ         .
                                                           1+u 2
It is also invertible over the non-negative reals and its inverse satisfies
                                                    вҲҡ
                                         П•вҲ’1 (v) вүӨ 2v + 2v.

Proof. To obtain the first inequality, we compute the derivatives of П•:
                                 П•вҖІ (u) = log(1 + u) + 1 вҲ’ 1 = log(1 + u)
                                            1
                                 П•вҖІвҖІ (u) =      .
                                           1+u
which implies that
                          Z uZ v                                    Z uZ v
                                         1          1                                   1 u2
                 П•(u) =                     dwdv вүҘ                            dwdv =         .
                             0     0    1+w        1+u               0    0            1+u 2

Solving for a non-negative u in
                                                           1 u2
                                                    v=
                                                          1+u 2
yields
                                         1
                                       2v =
                                     uвҲ’2 + uвҲ’1
                                             1
                             =вҮ’ uвҲ’2 + uвҲ’1 вҲ’    =0
                                            2v
                                            q
                                                 вҲ’1 +     1 + v2
                                        вҲ’1
                             =вҮ’ u            =
                                        вҲҡ 2
                                       2 v     вҲҡ вҲҡ        вҲҡ
                             =вҮ’ u = вҲҡ       вҲҡ = v( 2 + v + v)
                                      2+vвҲ’ v
which implies that                                               вҲҡ
                                                 вҲҡ вҲҡ        вҲҡ
                                 П•вҲ’1 (v) вүӨ        v( 2 + v + v) вүӨ 2v + 2v.


Example 1. As an example consider a function space F whose log covering number (this is also
called the metric entropy) grows polynomially:
                                                 log N2 (F, Пө) вүӨ cПөвҲ’r .
Therefore we get that
                                                                        вҲҡ           r
                  вҲ—                 вҲ—
                                                                вҲҡ          c          вҲ’ log p/2
               вҲҘf вҲ’ f вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ вҲҘf вҲ’ f вҲҘS вүӨ min 2Пө +                     8B вҲҡ     + c1 B             .
                                                      Пө                   r
                                                                         Пө N             N

                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                            1
Choosing Пө = 2B 2 Nc
                           2+r
                            (chosen so that the two terms depending on Пө match), we obtain
                                                            1
                                                                      r
                     вҲ—            вҲ—

                                                     2 c
                                                           2+r          вҲ’ log p/2
                   вҲҘf вҲ’ f вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ вҲҘf вҲ’ f вҲҘS вүӨ 2 2B                + c1 B             ,
                                                       N                   N
                         1
which is of order N вҲ’ 2+r .
                                                                                          1
Assuming that the train error is zero (or sufficiently small, i.e. O(N вҲ’ 2+r )), we get that
                                                           2               2
                                              вҲҘf вҲ— вҲ’ f вҲҘПҖ = O(N вҲ’ 2+r ).

C    ACC N ET G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS
The proof of generalization for shallow networks (Theorem 1) is the special case L = 1 of the proof
of Theorem 2, so we only prove the second:
Theorem 9. Consider an accordion net of depth L and widths dL , . . . , d0 , with corresponding set of
functions F = {ПғL в—Ұ fL:1 : вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘF1 вүӨ Rв„“ , Lip(fв„“ ) вүӨ ПҒв„“ } with input space в„Ұ = B(0, r) and with a
final nonlinearity ПғL that is 1-Lipschitz and uniformly bounded by B. Then with probability 1 вҲ’ p
over the sampling of the training set X from the distribution ПҖ, we have for all f вҲҲ F
                             v
                                          L
                             u                                                          r
                                              Rв„“вҖІ p                                        вҲ’ log p/2
             q               u          X                          1
   p
     L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0 BПҒL:1 r
                             t                                   вҲ’
                                                   dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N 2 (1 + o(1)) + c1 B                 ,
                                              ПҒ в„“вҖІ                                             N
                                        в„“вҖІ =1
                                           q              q          PL
for c0 вүҲ 14.6 and c1 вүҲ 7.4. Thus if LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0 BПҒL:1 r в„“вҖІ =1 R
                                                                                  p                  1
                                                                               в„“вҖІ
                                                                             ПҒ в„“вҖІ   dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N вҲ’ 2 +
     q
c1 B вҲ’ log
            p/2
          N     we have
                                   L
                                   X R в„“вҖІ p                            1                             вҲ’ log p/2
           L(f ) вүӨ 8c20 BПҒL:1 r                     dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N вҲ’ 2 (1 + o(1)) + 8c21 B 2                   .
                                           ПҒ   в„“вҖІ                                                       N
                                   в„“вҖІ =1


Proof. The strategy is: (1) prove a covering number bound on F, (2) use it to bound the generalization
error.
(1) We define fв„“ = Vв„“ в—Ұ Пғ в—Ұ Wв„“ so that fОё = fL:1 = fL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ f1 . First notice that we can write each
fв„“ as convex combination of its neurons:
                                        wв„“
                                        X                             wв„“
                                                                      X
                                                      T                                    T
                             fв„“ (x) =         vв„“,i Пғ(wв„“,i x) = Rв„“           cв„“,i vМ„в„“,i Пғ(wМ„в„“,i x)
                                        i=1                           i=1
             wв„“,i              vв„“,i          Pв„“                              1
for wМ„в„“,i = вҲҘwв„“,i вҲҘ , vМ„в„“,i = вҲҘvв„“,i вҲҘ , Rв„“ =  i=1 вҲҘvв„“,i вҲҘ вҲҘwв„“,i вҲҘ and cв„“,i = Rв„“ вҲҘvв„“,i вҲҘ вҲҘwв„“,i вҲҘ.

                                                                                              (k)   (k)
Let us now consider a sequence Пөk = 2вҲ’k for k = 0, . . . , K and define vМғв„“,i , wМғв„“,i to be the Пөk -covers
                                                     (0)        (0)
of vМ„в„“,i , wМ„в„“,i , furthermore we may choose vМғв„“,i = wМғв„“,i = 0 since every unit vector is within a Пө0 = 1
distance of the origin. We will now show that one can approximate fОё by approximating each of the
fв„“ by functions of the form
                                 Kв„“         Mk,в„“
                                 X      1 X (k)             (k)T        (kвҲ’1)    (kвҲ’1)T
                 fЛңв„“ (x) = Rв„“                    vМғ     Пғ(wМғ (k) x) вҲ’ vМғ (k) Пғ(wМғ (k) x)
                                       Mk,в„“ m=1 в„“,i(k)
                                                    в„“,m     в„“,iв„“,m      в„“,iв„“,m   в„“,iв„“,m
                                 k=1
             (k)
for indices iв„“,m = 1, . . . , wв„“ choosen adequately. Notice that the number of functions of this type
                                           (k)    (k)T    (kвҲ’1)    (kвҲ’1)T
equals the number of Mk,в„“ quadruples (vМғ (k) , wМғ (k) , vМғ (k) , wМғ (k) ) where these vectors belong
                                           в„“,iв„“,m в„“,iв„“,m в„“,iв„“,m    в„“,iв„“,m
to the Пөk - resp. ПөkвҲ’1 -coverings of the din - resp. dout -dimensional unit sphere. Thus the number of
such functions is bounded by
          Kв„“
          Y                                                                                    Mk,в„“
                N2 (Sdin вҲ’1 , Пөk )N2 (Sdout вҲ’1 , Пөk )N2 (Sdin вҲ’1 , ПөkвҲ’1 )N2 (Sdout вҲ’1 , ПөkвҲ’1 )      ,
          k=1


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and we have this choice for all в„“ = 1, . . . , L. We will show that with sufficiently large Mk,в„“ this set
of functions Пө-covers F which then implies that


                                Kв„“
                              L X
                              X
                                             Mk,в„“ log N2 (Sdin вҲ’1 , ПөkвҲ’1 ) + log N2 (Sdin вҲ’1 , ПөkвҲ’1 ) .

          log N2 (F, Пө) вүӨ 2
                              в„“=1 k=1


                                                                                (k)
We will use the probabilistic method to find the right indices iв„“,m to approximate a function fв„“ =
     Pwв„“                                                              (k)
Rв„“ i=1                      T
             cв„“,i vМ„в„“,i Пғ(wМ„в„“,i x) with a function fЛңв„“ . We take all iв„“,m to be i.i.d. equal to the index i =
1, В· В· В· , wв„“ with probability cв„“,i , so that in expectation


                                       wв„“
                                    Kв„“ X
                                                       (k)     (k)T       (kвҲ’1)   (kвҲ’1)T
                                    X
                 EfЛңв„“ (x) = Rв„“                  cв„“,i vМғв„“,i Пғ(wМғв„“,i x) вҲ’ vМғв„“,i Пғ(wМғв„“,i    x)
                                    k=1 i=1
                                     wв„“
                                                (K)          (K)T
                                    X
                          = Rв„“            cв„“,i vМғв„“,i Пғ(wМғв„“,i        x).
                                    i=1


We will show that this expectation is O(ПөKв„“ )-close to fв„“ and that the variance of fЛңв„“ goes to zero as
                                                                          2
the Mв„“,k s grow, allowing us to bound the expected error E fL:1 вҲ’ fЛңL:1 вүӨ Пө2 which then implies
                                                                                                ПҖ
                                                   (k)
that there must be at least one choice of indices iв„“,m such that                fL:1 вҲ’ fЛңL:1            вүӨ Пө.
                                                                                                    ПҖ
Let us first bound the distance


                              wв„“
                                                              (K)     (K)T
                              X
 fв„“ (x) вҲ’ EfЛңв„“ (x) = Rв„“                            T
                                    cв„“,i vМ„в„“,i Пғ(wМ„в„“,i x) вҲ’ vМғв„“,i Пғ(wМғв„“,i x)
                              i=1
                            wв„“
                                                         (K)                          (K)                           (K)T
                            X
                                                                       T                            T
                     вүӨ Rв„“         cв„“,i         vМ„в„“,i вҲ’ vМғв„“,i       Пғ(wМ„в„“,i x) + vМғв„“,i           Пғ(wМ„в„“,i x) вҲ’ Пғ(wМғв„“,i       x)
                            i=1
                            wв„“
                                                       (K)                     (K)                       (K)T
                            X
                                                                     T                    T
                     вүӨ Rв„“         cв„“,i       vМ„в„“,i вҲ’ vМғв„“,i         wМ„в„“,i x + vМғв„“,i      wМ„в„“,i x вҲ’ wМғв„“,i         x
                            i=1
                             Xwв„“
                     вүӨ 2Rв„“          cв„“,i ПөKв„“ вҲҘxвҲҘ
                              i=1
                     = 2Rв„“ ПөKв„“ вҲҘxвҲҘ .


                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we bound the trace of the covariance of fЛңв„“ which equals the expected square distance between
fЛңв„“ and its expectation:
                        2
E fЛңв„“ (x) вҲ’ EfЛңв„“ (x)
  Kв„“      Mk,в„“                                                                                        2
     Rв„“2 X

                   (k)      (k)T        (kвҲ’1)    (kвҲ’1)T        (k)      (k)T        (kвҲ’1)    (kвҲ’1)T
  X
=     2        E vМғ (k) Пғ(wМғ (k) x) вҲ’ vМғ (k) Пғ(wМғ (k) x) вҲ’ E vМғ (k) Пғ(wМғ (k) x) вҲ’ vМғ (k) Пғ(wМғ (k) x)
     Mk,в„“ m=1
                   в„“,iв„“,m   в„“,iв„“,m      в„“,iв„“,m   в„“,iв„“,m        в„“,iв„“,m   в„“,iв„“,m      в„“,iв„“,m   в„“,iв„“,m
    k=1
    Kв„“      Mk,в„“
    X  Rв„“2 X         (k)     (k)T       (kвҲ’1)   (kвҲ’1)T
                                                       2
вүӨ       2        E vМғв„“,m Пғ(wМғв„“,m x) вҲ’ vМғв„“,m Пғ(wМғв„“,m x)
       Mk,в„“ m=1
    k=1
    Kв„“       wв„“
    X  Rв„“2 X         (k)

                             (k)T

                                       (kвҲ’1)

                                               (kвҲ’1)T
                                                          2
=               ci vМғв„“,i Пғ wМғв„“,i x вҲ’ vМғв„“,i Пғ wМғв„“,i    x
       Mk,в„“ i=1
    k=1
    Kв„“        2 wв„“
    X  2R2 вҲҘxвҲҘ X
            в„“                      (k)
                                             2
                                                    (k)         (kвҲ’1)
                                                                        2
                                                                                    (k)      (kвҲ’1)
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                  (kвҲ’1)
                                                                                                                          2
вүӨ                             ci vМғв„“,i            wМғв„“,i вҲ’ wМғв„“,i             + ci vМғв„“,i вҲ’ vМғв„“,i            wМғв„“,i
          Mk,в„“        i=1
    k=1
    Kв„“        2
    X  4R2 вҲҘxвҲҘ
            в„“                            2
вүӨ                    (Пөk + ПөkвҲ’1 )
          Mk,в„“
    k=1
    Kв„“          2
    X  36R2 вҲҘxвҲҘ
вүӨ               в„“
                      Пө2k .
            Mk,в„“
    k=1

Putting both together, we obtain
                                                                                     Kв„“         2
                                                          2
                                                                                2
                                                                                     X  36R2 вҲҘxвҲҘ
                        E fв„“ (x) вҲ’ fЛңв„“ (x)                    вүӨ 4Rв„“2 Пө2Kв„“ вҲҘxвҲҘ +                   в„“
                                                                                                          Пө2k
                                                                                              Mk,в„“
                                                                                     k=1
                                                                                           Kв„“
                                                                                                      !
                                                                         2
                                                                                           X   Пө2k
                                                              = 4Rв„“2 вҲҘxвҲҘ        Пө2Kв„“ + 9                  .
                                                                                              Mk,в„“
                                                                                           k=1


We will now use this bound, together with the Lipschitzness of fв„“ to bound the error
                       2                                                                      2
E fL:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңL:1 (x) . We will do this by induction on the distances E fв„“:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңв„“:1 (x) .
We start by
                                                                                            Kв„“
                                                                                                          !
                                                          2
                                                                         2
                                                                                            X   Пө2k
                         E f1 (x) вҲ’ fЛң1 (x)                   вүӨ 4R12 вҲҘxвҲҘ         Пө2Kв„“ + 9                     .
                                                                                               Mk,1
                                                                                            k=1
And for the induction step, we condition on the first в„“ вҲ’ 1 layers

                      2                                2
E fв„“:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңв„“:1 (x) = E E fв„“:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңв„“:1 (x) |fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1
                                                 h                 i 2                   h                  i 2
                                = E fв„“:1 (x) вҲ’ E fЛңв„“:1 (x)|fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1     + EE fЛңв„“:1 (x) вҲ’ E fЛңв„“:1 (x)|fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1     |fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1

                                                               2                                   2
                                = E fв„“:1 (x) вҲ’ fв„“ (fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1 (x)) + EE fЛңв„“:1 (x) вҲ’ fв„“ (fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1 (x)) |fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1
                                                                                                    Kв„“
                                                                                                               !
                                   2                  Лң
                                                                 2
                                                                        2  Лң
                                                                                      2
                                                                                          2
                                                                                                   X      Пө2k
                                вүӨ ПҒв„“ E fв„“вҲ’1:1 (x) вҲ’ fв„“вҲ’1:1 (x) + 4Rв„“ E fв„“вҲ’1:1 (x)        ПөKв„“ + 9                 .
                                                                                                        Mk,в„“
                                                                                                                              k=1

Now since
                                         2                                                                        2
                                                                   2
                    E fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1 (x)                вүӨ вҲҘfв„“вҲ’1:1 (x)вҲҘ + E fв„“вҲ’1:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1 (x)
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                        2
                                                 вүӨ ПҒ2в„“вҲ’1 В· В· В· ПҒ21 вҲҘxвҲҘ + E fв„“вҲ’1:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1 (x)


                                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we obtain that
                                                                        Kв„“
                                                                                       !!
                                2                                       X   Пө2k                                              2
    E fв„“:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңв„“:1 (x)           вүӨ    ПҒ2в„“ + 4Rв„“2       Пө2Kв„“ + 9                          E fв„“вҲ’1:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1 (x)
                                                                           Mk,в„“
                                                                        k=1
                                                                                       Kв„“
                                                                                                  !
                                                                2
                                                                                       X   Пө2k
                                     + 4Rв„“2 ПҒ2в„“вҲ’1 В· В· В· ПҒ21 вҲҘxвҲҘ             Пө2Kв„“ + 9                  .
                                                                                          Mk,в„“
                                                                                       k=1

                           R2          PKв„“ Пө2k  i
                    h
We define ПҒМғ2в„“ = ПҒ2в„“ 1 + 4 ПҒ2в„“ Пө2Kв„“ + 9 k=1 Mk,в„“  and obtain
                                    в„“

                                                                                                           Kв„“
                                                     L
                                                                                                                     !
                                            2        X                             2
                                                                                                           X   Пө2k
           E fL:1 (x) вҲ’ fЛңL:1 (x)               вүӨ4         ПҒМғ2L:в„“+1 Rв„“2 ПҒ2в„“вҲ’1:1 вҲҘxвҲҘ          Пө2Kв„“ + 9                    .
                                                                                                              Mk,в„“
                                                     в„“=1                                                   k=1


                                                                                                            (k)
Thus for any distribution ПҖ over the ball B(0, r), there is a choice of indices iв„“,m such that
                                                                          Kв„“
                                       L
                                                                                    !
                               2                                                 2
                                      X                                   X    Пө
                  fL:1 вҲ’ fЛңL:1 вүӨ 4          2      2  2      2   2
                                          ПҒМғL:в„“+1 Rв„“ ПҒв„“вҲ’1:1 r ПөKв„“ + 9            k
                                                                                      .
                               ПҖ                                              Mk,в„“
                                                 в„“=1                                            k=1


We now simply need to choose Kв„“ and Mk,в„“ adequately. To reach an error of 2Пө, we choose
              &                "               L
                                                                      !               #'
                          1         2     2
                                             X     Rв„“вҖІ p                     Rв„“
         Kв„“ = вҲ’ log Пө + log 4ПҒL:1 r                      dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1     p
                          2                        ПҒ в„“вҖІ                 ПҒв„“ dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1
                                             в„“вҖІ =1
                                                                                вҲҡ
            QL                                                1               ПҒв„“ dв„“ +dв„“вҲ’1 2
where ПҒL:1 = в„“=1 ПҒв„“ . Notice that that Пө2Kв„“ вүӨ 2 2  PL R         в„“вҖІ
                                                                   вҲҡ
                                                                                  Rв„“     Пө .
                                                               4ПҒL:1 r          в„“вҖІ =1 ПҒв„“вҖІ
                                                                                             dв„“вҖІ +dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1
             PвҲһ вҲҡ
Given s0 =       k=1     k2вҲ’k вүҲ 1.3473 < вҲһ, we define

                         &                        L
                                                                                 !                       '
                                                 X  Rв„“вҖІ p                                  Rв„“      2вҲ’k 1
             Mk,в„“ =        36ПҒ2L:1 r2 s0                 dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1                              вҲҡ       .
                                                                                       ПҒв„“ dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1 k Пө2
                                                                                         p
                                                 вҖІ
                                                    ПҒв„“вҖІ
                                                в„“ =1

So that for all в„“
                               Kв„“                                  Rв„“
                                            !                    p
          R2                   X   Пө2k                             ПҒв„“ dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1
         4 2в„“       Пө2Kв„“ + 9                    вүӨ           P                              Пө2
          ПҒв„“                      Mk,в„“            ПҒ2L:1 r2
                                                                L       Rв„“
                                                                           p
                                                                             d   + d
                               k=1                              в„“вҖІ =1 ПҒв„“       в„“     в„“вҲ’1
                                                             Rв„“
                                                                p                             PKв„“ вҲҡ вҖІ вҲ’kвҖІ
                                                             ПҒв„“      dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1              2    kвҖІ =1 k 2
                                                +           P                             Пө
                                                   2
                                                  ПҒL:1 r 2      L      Rв„“
                                                                           p
                                                                            dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1                 s0
                                                                в„“вҖІ =1 ПҒв„“
                                                              Rв„“
                                                                   p
                                                               ПҒв„“      dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1
                                                вүӨ2            P                             Пө2 .
                                                     2     2       L     Rв„“
                                                                            p
                                                   ПҒL:1 r          в„“вҖІ =1 ПҒв„“   dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1

Now this also implies that
                                                пЈ«                                пЈ¶
                                                                   Rв„“
                                                                        p
                                                           dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1
                                                                   ПҒв„“
                             ПҒМғв„“ вүӨ ПҒв„“ exp пЈӯ2           P                      Пө2 пЈё
                                                        L    Rв„“
                                                                p
                                             ПҒ2L:1 r2    вҖІ
                                                        в„“ =1 ПҒв„“   dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1

and thus
                                пЈ«          PL                   пЈ¶
                                                          Rв„“
                                                               p
                                               dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1

                                                в„“вҖІ =в„“+1   ПҒв„“  2                     2      2
    ПҒМғL:в„“+1 вүӨ ПҒL:в„“+1 exp 2
                        пЈӯ                                   Пө   пЈё вүӨ ПҒL:в„“+1 exp            Пө .
                                                                                 ПҒ2L:1 r2
                                     P
                                      L     Rв„“
                                               p
                           ПҒ2L:1 r2   в„“вҖІ =1 ПҒв„“   dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1


                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Putting it all together, we obtain that
                                                                                               Kв„“
                                         L
                                                                                                           !
                               2         X                                                     X   Пө2k
              fL:1 вҲ’ fЛңL:1         вүӨ4          ПҒМғ2L:в„“+1 Rв„“2 ПҒ2в„“вҲ’1:1 r2             Пө2Kв„“ + 9
                               ПҖ                                                                  Mk,в„“
                                         в„“=1                                                   k=1
                                                                                                           Kв„“
                                                                              L
                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                R2                             Пө2k

                                                   2      2
                                                                              X                            X
                                   вүӨ exp            Пө             ПҒ2L:1 r2     4 2в„“             Пө2Kв„“ + 9
                                           ПҒ2L:1 r2                             ПҒв„“                            Mk,в„“
                                                                           в„“=1                             k=1

                                                 2
                                   вүӨ 2 exp            Пө Пө2
                                                       2
                                             ПҒ2L:1 r2
                                   = 2Пө2 + O(Пө4 ).
Now since log N2 (Sdв„“ вҲ’1 , Пө) = dв„“ log            1

                                                  Пө +1        and
                                          L
                                                                               !
                                          X R в„“вҖІ p                                             Rв„“      2вҲ’k 1
            Mk,в„“ вүӨ 36ПҒ2L:1 r2 s0                          dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1                                 вҲҡ     + 1,
                                                                                              dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1 k Пө2
                                                                                          p
                                                  ПҒ в„“вҖІ                               ПҒв„“
                                          в„“вҖІ =1

we have
                                                  Kв„“
                                                L X
          вҲҡ               Пө2
                                                X
                                                          Mk,в„“ log N2 (Sdв„“ вҲ’1 , ПөkвҲ’1 ) + log N2 (Sdв„“вҲ’1 вҲ’1 , ПөkвҲ’1 )

log N2 (F, 2 exp                       Пө) вүӨ 2
                        ПҒ2L:1 r2
                                                в„“=1 k=1
                                                  Kв„“
                                                L X
                                                X                                                 1
                                         вүӨ2               Mk,в„“ (dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1 ) log(                     + 1)
                                                                                                ПөkвҲ’1
                                                в„“=1 k=1
                                                                                                                              Kв„“ 2вҲ’k log( 1 + 1)
                                                                   L
                                                                                                    ! L
                                                                   X Rв„“вҖІ p                           X Rв„“ p                   X          Пө       1
                                         вүӨ 72s0 ПҒ2L:1 r2                             dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1                   dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1           вҲҡ kвҲ’1      2
                                                                          ПҒ в„“вҖІ                                 ПҒв„“                         k      Пө
                                                                  в„“вҖІ =1                                 в„“=1                   k=1
                                                L                         Kв„“
                                                X                         X                 1
                                         +2           (dв„“ + dв„“вҲ’1 )                 log(        + 1)
                                                                                          ПөkвҲ’1
                                                в„“=1                       k=1
                                                                   L
                                                                                                   !2
                                                                   X Rв„“вҖІ p                                 1
                                         вүӨ 72s20 ПҒ2L:1 r2                            dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1             + o(ПөвҲ’2 ).
                                                                          ПҒ   в„“вҖІ                           Пө2
                                                                  в„“вҖІ =1


The diameter of F is smaller than ПҒ L:1 r, so for all Оҙ вүҘ ПҒL:1 r, log N2 (F, Оҙ) = 0. For all Оҙ вүӨ ПҒL:1 r
                          вҲҡ              2
we choose Пө = вҲҡОҙ2e so that 2 exp ПҒ2Пө r2 Пө вүӨ Оҙ and therefore
                                                L:1

                                                              L
                                                                                                 !2
                                                             X  Rв„“вҖІ p                                 1
              log N2 (F, Оҙ) вүӨ 144s20 eПҒ2L:1 r2                       dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1                        + o(Оҙ вҲ’2 ).
                                                             вҖІ
                                                                ПҒв„“вҖІ                                   Оҙ2
                                                             в„“ =1

(2) We now apply Theorem 7 along the lines of Example 1 with r = 2 and
                                             L
                                                                   !2
                               2 2      2
                                           X   R в„“вҖІ p                 1
                      c = 144s0 eПҒL:1 r               dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1      2
                                                                          ,
                                            вҖІ
                                                ПҒ в„“ вҖІ                 Оҙ
                                                          в„“ =1

to obtain
                       v
                       u                   L
                                 вҲҡ             Rв„“вҖІ p
          q
                                                                      1
  p                    u                 X
   L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) вүӨ 2t24Bs0 eПҒL:1 r                dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N вҲ’ 4 (1 + o(1))
                                               ПҒ в„“ вҖІ
                                         в„“вҖІ =1
                           r
                             вҲ’ log p/2
                    + c1 B
                                N
                         v
                                     L
                         u                                                         r
                         u         X   Rв„“вҖІ p                вҲ’ 14                     вҲ’ log p/2
                    = c0 BПҒL:1 r
                         t                    dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N (1 + o(1)) + c1 B                 ,
                                    вҖІ
                                       ПҒв„“вҖІ                                              N
                                                  в„“ =1



                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



          p     вҲҡ                 вҲҡ        вҲҡ
for c0 = 2 24s0 e вүҲ 14.6 and c1 = 2(3 + 5) вүҲ 7.4.
            q             q                                                q
                                  PL                                         вҲ’ log p/2
Therefore if LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0 BПҒL:1 r в„“вҖІ =1 R                    вҲ’ 14
                                             p
                                          в„“вҖІ
                                         ПҒ вҖІ  d в„“ вҖІ + d вҖІ
                                                       в„“ вҲ’1 N      + c 1 B      N      , we have
                                                         в„“

              пЈ« v                                                                       пЈ¶2
                             L
                   u                                                        r
                   u        X  Rв„“ вҖІ p                  1                      вҲ’ log p/2
      L(f ) вүӨ пЈӯ2c0 tBПҒL:1 r           dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N вҲ’ 4 (1 + o(1)) + 2c1 B             пЈё
                            вҖІ
                               ПҒв„“вҖІ                                               N
                                      в„“ =1
                              L
                              X       Rв„“вҖІ p                  1                       вҲ’ log p/2
             вүӨ 8c20 BПҒL:1 r                 dв„“вҖІ + dв„“вҖІ вҲ’1 N вҲ’ 2 (1 + o(1)) + 8c21 B 2           .
                                      ПҒ в„“вҖІ                                              N
                              в„“вҖІ =1


D     C OMPOSITION OF S OBOLEV BALLS
Let us first prove a simple generalization bound for Sobolev balls:
Proposition 10 (Proposition 3 from the main.). Given a distribution ПҖ with support in B(0, b), we
have that with probability 1 вҲ’ p for all functions f вҲҲ F = {f : вҲҘf вҲҘW ОҪ,2 вүӨ R, вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B}
                                                          1
                                                  2 r   2+r         r
                                                 B R                   вҲ’ log p/2
                     p         q
                        L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) = c0                + c1 B              ,
                                                   N                        N
                            q                        1
                                              2 r   2+r       q
                                                        + c1 B вҲ’ log
                                                                      p/2
where r = ОҪd . Therefore if LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0 B NR                      N     , we have
                                                              2
                                                  B 2 Rr
                                                             2+r
                                                                                вҲ’ log p/2
                              L(f ) вүӨ 8c20                         + 8c21 B 2             .
                                                   N                               N

Proof. (1) We know from Theorem 5.2 of (Birman & Solomjak, 1967) that the Sobolev ball
BW ОҪ,2 (0, R) over any d-dimensional hypercube в„Ұ satisfies
                                                                 ОҪd
                                                              R
                              log N2 (BW ОҪ,2 (0, R), Пө) вүӨ C0
                                                              Пө
for a constant c and any measure ПҖ supported in the hypercube.
(2) We now apply Theorem 7 along the lines of Example 1 with r = ОҪd and c = C0 Rr , to obtain that
                                                     1                r
                                                  r 2+r     вҲҡ

                                           2 C0 R                         вҲ’ log p/2
             p         q
                L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) вүӨ 2 2B                 + ( 2 + c1 B
                                               N                             N
                                         2 r   2+r 1        r
                                         B R                  вҲ’ log p/2
                                 = c0                + c1 B             .
                                           N                     N



The bound on the covering number of Sobolev balls, can then be used to bound compositions of
Sobolev balls, thanks to the following general result:
Proposition 11. Let F1 , . . . , FL be set of functions mapping through the sets в„Ұ0 , . . . , в„ҰL , then if all
functions in Fв„“ are ПҒв„“ -Lipschitz, we have
                                                   L
                                                   X                      L
                                                                          X
                      log N2 (FL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ F1 ,          ПҒL:в„“+1 Пөв„“ ) вүӨ           log N2 (Fв„“ , Пөв„“ ).
                                                   в„“=1                    в„“=1


Proof. For any distribution ПҖ0 on в„Ұ there is a Пө1 -covering FЛң1 of F1 with FЛң1 вүӨ N2 (F1 , Пө1 ) then
for any fЛң1 вҲҲ FЛң1 we choose a Пө2 -covering FМғ2 w.r.t. the measure ПҖ1 which is the measure of f1 (x) if


                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


x вҲј ПҖ0 of F2 with FМғ2 вүӨ N2 (F2 , Пө), and so on until we obtain coverings for all в„“. Then the set
       n                                              o     PL
FМғ = fЛңL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ fЛң1 : fЛң1 вҲҲ FМғ1 , . . . , fЛңL вҲҲ FМғL is a в„“=1 ПҒL:в„“+1 Пөв„“ -covering of F = FL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ F1 ,
indeed for any f = fL:1 we choose fЛң1 вҲҲ FМғ1 , . . . , fЛңL вҲҲ FМғL that cover f1 , . . . , fL , then fЛңL:1 covers
fL:1 :
                                                  XL
                           fL:1 вҲ’ fЛңL:1 вүӨ              fL:в„“ в—Ұ fЛңв„“вҲ’1:1 вҲ’ fL:в„“+1 в—Ұ fЛңв„“:1
                                           ПҖ                                                           ПҖ
                                                    в„“=1
                                                    L
                                                    X
                                                вүӨ          fL:в„“ вҲ’ fL:в„“+1 в—Ұ fЛңв„“
                                                                                             ПҖв„“вҲ’1
                                                    в„“=1
                                                    L
                                                    X
                                                вүӨ         ПҒL:в„“+1 Пөв„“ ,
                                                    в„“=1
                                                      PL
and log cardinality of the set FМғ is bounded               в„“=1 log N2 (Fв„“ , Пөв„“ ).

We can now put the two previous results together to obtain a generalization bound for composition of
Sobolev balls:
Theorem         12. Let       F          =       FL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ F1                  where     Fв„“       =
  fв„“ : Rdв„“вҲ’1 вҶ’ Rdв„“ s.t. вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘW ОҪв„“ ,2 вүӨ R, вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B, Lip(fв„“ ) вүӨ ПҒв„“ , and let rвҲ— = minв„“ rв„“

           ОҪв„“
for rв„“ = dв„“вҲ’1  , then with probability 1 вҲ’ p we have for all f вҲҲ F
                                                 2 rвҲ—   2+r  1          r
                                                               вҲ—
                                                 B R                       вҲ’ log p/2
                    p          q
                       L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0                     + c1 B              ,
                                                   N                            N
                                                     q                             1
                                                                         2 rвҲ—   2+rвҲ—         q
                                                                                       + c1 B вҲ’ log
                                                                                                    p/2
where c0 , c1 depend only on rв„“ , ПҒв„“ and L. Thus if LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0 B NR                           N      ,
we have
                                           2 rвҲ—   2+r2
                                                       вҲ—
                                       2  B R                       вҲ’ log p/2
                            L(f ) вүӨ 8c0                  + 8c21 B 2           .
                                             N                         N

Proof. (1) We know from Theorem 5.2 of (Birman & Solomjak, 1967) that the Sobolev ball
BW ОҪв„“ ,2 (0, R) over any dв„“ -dimensional hypercube в„Ұ satisfies
                                                                         r
                                                                     R в„“
                             log N2 (BW ОҪ,2 (0, R), ПҖв„“вҲ’1 , Пөв„“ ) вүӨ Cв„“
                                                                     Пөв„“
for rв„“ = dОҪв„“в„“ and a constant Cв„“ that depends on the size of hypercube and the dimension dв„“ and the
regularity ОҪв„“ and any measure ПҖв„“вҲ’1 supported in the hypercube.
Thus Proposition 11 tells us that the composition of the Sobolev balls satisfies
                                               L               L           r
                                               X               X        R в„“
                     log N2 (FL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ F1 ,   ПҒL:в„“+1 Пөв„“ ) вүӨ      Cв„“         .
                                                                       Пөв„“
                                                          в„“=1                       в„“=1

                                                                 вҲ—   PL                     r вҲ—
Given rвҲ— = maxв„“ rв„“ , we can bound it by Rr                              в„“=1       Cв„“ Пө1в„“          and by then choosing Пөв„“ =
                      rвҲ—
ПҒвҲ’1
 L:в„“+1 (ПҒL:в„“+1 Cв„“ )
                    1+r вҲ—
                    rвҲ—      Пө, we obtain that
                   1+r вҲ—
 P
    в„“ (ПҒL:в„“+1 Cв„“ )

                                                           L
                                                                                             !1+rвҲ—          r вҲ—
                                                           X                          rвҲ—
                                                                                     1+r вҲ—
                                                                                                       R
                    log N2 (FL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ F1 , Пө) вүӨ               (ПҒL:в„“+1 Cв„“ )                                     .
                                                                                                       Пө
                                                           в„“=1

(2) Again, we apply Theorem 7 along the lines of Example 1, we obtain that
                                             2 rвҲ—   2+r1          r
                                                         вҲ—
                                             B R                    вҲ’ log p/2
                  p        q
                    L(f ) вҲ’ LМғN (f ) вүӨ c0                  + c1 B             .
                                                N                       N



                                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E      G ENERALIZATION AT THE R EGULARIZED G LOBAL M INIMUM
In this section, we first give the proof of Theorem 5 and then present detailed proofs of lemmas used
in the proof. The lemmas are largely inspired by (Bach, 2017) and may be of independent interest.

E.1     T HEOREM 5 IN S ECTION 4.2

Theorem 13 (Theorem 5 in the main). Given a true function fLвҲ— вҲ— :1 = fLвҲ— вҲ— в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ f1вҲ— going through the
dimensions dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— , along with a continuous input distribution ПҖ0 supported in B(0, b0 ), such
that the distributions ПҖв„“ of fв„“вҲ— (x) (for x вҲј ПҖ0 ) are continuous too and supported inside B(0, bв„“ ) вҠӮ
   вҲ—
Rdв„“ . Further assume that there are differentiabilities ОҪв„“ and radii Rв„“ such that вҲҘfв„“вҲ— вҲҘW ОҪв„“ ,2 (B(0,bв„“ )) вүӨ
Rв„“ , and ПҒв„“ such that Lip(fв„“вҲ— ) вүӨ ПҒв„“ . For an infinite width AccNet with L вүҘ LвҲ— and dimensions
                                                                            dвҲ—    +3
dв„“ вүҘ dвҲ—1 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— вҲ’1 , we have for the ratios rМғв„“ = max{ в„“вҲ’1
                                                                ОҪв„“                     , 2}:
                                                                               2
(1) At a global min fЛҶL:1 of LМғN (fL:1 ) + О»R(Оё), we have L(fЛҶL:1 ) = O(N вҲ’ 2+rМғmax ) for rМғmax =
max{rМғ1 , . . . , rМғL }.
                                                                                                                  2
                  ЛҶ                                       ЛҶ            вҲ’ 2+rМғsum
    Pa global min fL:1 of LМғN (fL:1 ) + О»RМғ(Оё), we have L(fL:1 ) = O(N
(2) At                                                                           ) for rМғsum =
2 + в„“ rМғв„“ вҲ’ 2.

Proof. If f вҲ— = fLвҲ— вҲ— в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ f1вҲ— with LвҲ— вүӨ L, intermediate dimensions dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— , along with a
continuous input distribution ПҖ0 supported in B(0, b0 ), such that the distributions ПҖв„“ of fв„“вҲ— (x) (for
                                                                          вҲ—
x вҲј ПҖ0 ) are continuous too and supported inside B(0, bв„“ ) вҠӮ Rdв„“ . Further assume that there are
differentiabilities ОҪв„“вҲ— and radii Rв„“ such that вҲҘfв„“вҲ— вҲҘW ОҪв„“вҲ— ,2 (B(0,b )) вүӨ Rв„“ .
                                                                                   в„“

We first focus on the L = L case and then extend to the L > LвҲ— case.
                                      вҲ—

Each fв„“вҲ— can be approximated by another function fЛңв„“ with bounded F1 -norm and Lipschitz constant.
Actually if 2ОҪв„“ вүҘ dвҲ—в„“вҲ’1 + 3 one can choose fЛңв„“ = fв„“вҲ— since вҲҘfв„“вҲ— вҲҘF1 вүӨ Cв„“ Rв„“ by Lemma 16, and by
assumption Lip(fЛңв„“ ) вүӨ ПҒв„“ . If 2ОҪв„“ < dвҲ— + 3, then by Lemma 15 we know that there is a fЛңв„“ with
                                                     в„“вҲ’1
                         dвҲ—   +3
                     вҲ’ в„“вҲ’1         +1
 fЛңв„“                                    and Lip(fЛңв„“ ) вүӨ Cв„“ Lip(fв„“вҲ— ) вүӨ Cв„“ ПҒв„“ and error
                        2ОҪ
            вүӨ Cв„“ Rв„“ Пөв„“        в„“

       F1

                                  fв„“вҲ— вҲ’ fЛңв„“                 вүӨ cв„“ f вҲ— вҲ’ fЛңв„“                       вүӨ cв„“ Пөв„“ .
                                               L2 (ПҖв„“вҲ’1 )                        L2 (B(0,bв„“ ))
                                                                                                         rМғ
                                              dвҲ—   +3                                                  вҲ’ в„“ +1
Note that by setting rМғв„“ = max{ в„“вҲ’1
                                 ОҪв„“                     , 2}, we can write fЛңв„“              вүӨ Cв„“ Rв„“ Пөв„“ 2          in both cases.
                                                                                       F1

Therefore the composition fЛңL:1 satisfies
                                                            L
                                                            X
                      вҲ—
                     fL:1 вҲ’ fЛҶL:1                       вүӨ          fЛңL:в„“+1 в—Ұ fв„“:1
                                                                              вҲ—
                                                                                  вҲ’ fЛңL:в„“ в—Ұ fв„“вҲ’1:1
                                                                                             вҲ—
                                          L2 (ПҖв„“вҲ’1 )                                                          L2 (ПҖ)
                                                            в„“=1
                                                            L
                                                            X
                                                        вүӨ         Lip(fЛңL:в„“+1 )cв„“ Пөв„“
                                                            в„“=1
                                                            L
                                                            X
                                                        вүӨ         ПҒL:в„“+1 CL:в„“+1 cв„“ Пөв„“ .
                                                            в„“=1

For any L вүҘ LвҲ— , dimensions dв„“ вүҘ dвҲ—в„“ and widths wв„“ вүҘ N , we can build an AccNet that fits exactly
fЛңL:1 , by simply adding zero weights along the additional dimensions and widths, and by adding
identity layers if L > LвҲ— , since it is possible to represent the identity on Rd with a shallow network
with 2d neurons and F1 -norm 2d (by having two neurons ei Пғ(eTi В·) and вҲ’ei Пғ(вҲ’eTi В·) for each basis
ei ). Since the cost in parameter norm of representing the identity scales with the dimension, it is
best to add those identity layers at the minimal dimension min{dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— }. We therefore end up
with a AccNet with L вҲ’ LвҲ— identity layers (with F1 norm 2 min{dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— }) and LвҲ— layers that
approximate each of the fв„“вҲ— with a bounded F1 -norm function fЛңв„“ .


                                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         вҲ—
Since fL:1   has zero population loss, the population loss of the AccNet fЛңL:1 is bounded by
   PL
(ПҒ в„“=1 ПҒL:в„“+1 CL:в„“+1 cв„“ Пөв„“ )2 .Using BennettвҖҷs inequality as in the proof of Theorem 7 (though in the
вҖҳother directionвҖҷ since we want to bound LМғN in terms of L and not vice versa), we obtain that with
probability 1 вҲ’ p
                                               r
                                                                вҲ’ log p        вҲ’ log p
                    LМғN (fЛңL:1 ) вүӨ L(fЛңL:1 ) + 8B 2 L(fЛңL:1 )           + 8B 2
                                                                  N               N
                                                    r               !2
                                                           вҲ’ log p
                                    q
                                 вүӨ     L(fЛңL:1 ) + 8B 2
                                                               N
                                        L                         r               !2
                                       X
                                                                        2
                                                                          вҲ’ log p
                                 вүӨ ПҒ        ПҒL:в„“+1 CL:в„“+1 cв„“ Пөв„“ + 8B
                                                                            N
                                             в„“=1

(1) At the global minimizer fЛҶL:1 = fЛҶL в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ fЛҶ1 of the regularized loss (with the first regularization
term), the regularized loss is upper bounded by
                     L                           r               !2
                    X                                    вҲ’ log p
                  ПҒ     ПҒL:в„“+1 CL:в„“+1 cв„“ Пөв„“ + 8B 2
                                                           N
                    в„“=1
                                    пЈ®           2вҲ’rМғв„“
                                                                                           пЈ№
                    вҲҡ Y   LвҲ—          LвҲ—
                                     X    R в„“ Пө   2

                + О» 2d        Cв„“ ПҒв„“ пЈ°           в„“
                                                      + 2(L вҲ’ LвҲ— ) min{dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— }пЈ» .
                                            Cв„“ ПҒв„“
                              в„“=1            в„“=1

                    1
                вҲ’ 2+rМғ                      1
Taking Пөв„“ = N         and О» = N вҲ’ 2 , this is upper bounded by
                         в„“


                L                                  r              !2
               X                          1
                                      вҲ’ 2+rМғ              вҲ’ log p
             ПҒ     ПҒL:в„“+1 CL:в„“+1 cв„“ N        в„“ +     8B 2
                                                            N
               в„“=1
                   LвҲ—           LвҲ—
                              "                                                            #
              вҲҡ Y              X    Rв„“          2
                                            вҲ’ 2+rМғ              вҲ—     вҲ—           вҲ—      1
                                                                                        вҲ’2
            + 2d       C в„“ ПҒв„“            N         в„“ + 2(L вҲ’ L ) min{d , . . . , d вҲ— }N      .
                                                                      0           L
                                   Cв„“ ПҒв„“
                    в„“=1             в„“=1
                               вҲ’ 2+rМғ2max
The above is of order N                for rМғmax = max{rМғв„“ : в„“ = 1, . . . , L}, which implies that at the
                                                                                                2
global minimizer of the regularized loss, the (unregularized) train loss is of order N вҲ’ 2+rМғmax and the
                                                       1      2
complexity measure R(fЛҶ1 , . . . , fЛҶL ) is of order N 2 вҲ’ 2+rМғmax which implies that the test error will be
                2
of order N вҲ’ 2+rМғmax as well.
(2) Let us now focus on the RМғ(Оё) regularizer instead. Taking the same approximation fЛңL:1 , we see
that the global minimum fЛҶL:1 of the RМғ-regularized loss is upper bounded by
                         L                           r                !2
                        X
                                                            2
                                                              вҲ’ log p
                      ПҒ     ПҒL:в„“+1 CL:в„“+1 cв„“ Пөв„“ + 8B
                                                                 N
                             в„“=1
                                                                                  вҲ—
                             вҲҡ                                                   L
                                                                                 Y           2вҲ’rМғв„“
                                      вҲ—
                     + О» 2d (L            + (L вҲ’ L ) min{dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— })
                                                     вҲ—
                                                                                       Cв„“ Rв„“ Пөв„“ 2 .
                                                                                 в„“=1


where we used the bound вҲҘWв„“ вҲҘop вҲҘVв„“ вҲҘop вүӨ вҲҘfв„“ вҲҘF1 .
                      2                                                1
Choosing Пөв„“ = N вҲ’ 2+rМғsum for rМғsum = 2 + в„“ (rМғв„“ вҲ’ 2) and О» = N вҲ’ N is upper bounded by
                                            P

                   L                                  r               !2
                  X
                                          вҲ’ 2+rМғ1sum        2
                                                              вҲ’ log p
                ПҒ      ПҒL:в„“+1 CL:в„“+1 cв„“ N            + 8B
                                                                N
                  в„“=1
                                                             " LвҲ—        #
                 вҲҡ                                            Y                 2
              + 2d (LвҲ— + (L вҲ’ LвҲ— ) min{dвҲ—0 , . . . , dвҲ—LвҲ— })      Cв„“ Rв„“ N вҲ’ 2+rМғsum .
                                                                          в„“=1



                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                     2
Which implies that both the train error is of order N вҲ’ 2+rМғsum and the regularization term is of order
  1       2
N 2 вҲ’ 2+rМғsum .
And since the RМғ-regularized loss bounds the R-regularized loss, the test error will be of order
        2
N вҲ’ 2+rМғsum .
Note that if there is at a most one в„“ where rМғв„“ > 2 then the rate is the same for both regularizers.

E.2   L EMMAS ON APPROXIMATING S OBOLEV FUNCTIONS

Now we present the lemmas used in this proof above that concern the approximation errors and
Lipschitz constants of Sobolev functions and compositions of them. We will bound the F2 -norm and
note that the F2 -norm is larger than the F1 -norm, cf. (Bach, 2017, Section 3.1).
Lemma 14 (Approximation for Sobolev function with bounded error and Lipschitz constant). Sup-
pose g : Sd вҶ’ R is an even function with bounded Sobolev norm вҲҘgвҲҘW ОҪ,2 вүӨ R with 2ОҪ вүӨ d + 2,
with inputs on the unit d-dimensional sphere. Then for every Пө > 0, there is gМӮ вҲҲ G2 with small
approximation error вҲҘg вҲ’ gМӮвҲҘL2 (Sd ) = C(d, ОҪ)RПө, bounded Lipschitzness Lip(gМӮ) вүӨ C вҖІ (d)Lip(g),
and bounded norm                                            d+3вҲ’2ОҪ
                                    вҲҘgМӮвҲҘF2 вүӨ C вҖІвҖІ (d, ОҪ)RПөвҲ’ 2ОҪ .
                                                                                       PвҲһ
Proof. Given our assumptions on the target function  R g, we may decompose g(x) = k=0 gk (x)
along the basis of spherical harmonics with g0 (x) = Sd g(y)dП„d (y) being the mean of g(x) over the
uniform distribution П„d over Sd . The k-th component can be written as
                                                Z
                              gk (x) = N (d, k)    g(y)Pk (xT y)dП„d (y)
                                                        Sd
                       k+dвҲ’2
with N (d, k) = 2k+dвҲ’1

                   k    dвҲ’1             and a Gegenbauer polynomial of degree k and dimension d + 1:
                                          О“(d/2)                   dk
                Pk (t) = (вҲ’1/2)k                   (1 вҲ’ t2 )(2вҲ’d)/2 k (1 вҲ’ t2 )k+(dвҲ’2)/2 ,
                                        О“(k + d/2)                 dt
known as RodriguesвҖҷ formula. Given the assumption that the Sobolev norm вҲҘgвҲҘ2W ОҪ,2 is upper
bounded, we have вҲҘf вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) вүӨ C0 (d, ОҪ)R for f = вҲҶОҪ/2 g where вҲҶ is the Laplacian on Sd (Evans,
2022; Bach, 2017). Note that gk are eigenfunctions of the Laplacian with eigenvalues k(k + d вҲ’ 1)
(Atkinson & Han, 2012), thus
        вҲҘgk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) = вҲҘfk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) (k(k + d вҲ’ 1))вҲ’ОҪ вүӨ вҲҘfk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) k вҲ’2ОҪ вүӨ C0 (d, ОҪ)R2 k вҲ’2ОҪ   (1)
where in the last inequality holds we use вҲҘf вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) = kвүҘ0 вҲҘfk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) . Note using the Hecke-Funk
                                                            P

formula, we can also write gk as scaled pk for the underlying density p of the F1 and F2 -norms:
                                               gk (x) = О»k pk (x)
               ПүdвҲ’1 R 1
where О»k = Пүd вҲ’1 Пғ(t)Pk (t)(1 вҲ’ t )           2 (dвҲ’2)/2
                                                        dt = в„Ұ(k вҲ’(d+3)/2 ) (Bach, 2017, Appendix D.2)
and Пүd denotes the surface area of Sd . Then by definition of вҲҘ В· вҲҘF2 , for some probability density p,
                       Z                                 X                   X
           вҲҘgвҲҘ2F2 =       |p|2 dП„ (v) = вҲҘpвҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) =      вҲҘpk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) =     О»вҲ’2      2
                                                                                  k вҲҘgk вҲҘL2 (Sd ) .
                      Sd                                     0вүӨk                    0вүӨk
Now to approximate g, consider function gМӮ defined by truncating the вҖңhigh frequenciesвҖқ of g, i.e.
setting gМӮk = 1[k вүӨ m]gk for some m > 0 we specify later. Then we can bound the norm with
                               X                         X
                    вҲҘgМӮвҲҘ2F2 =       О»вҲ’2       2
                                     k вҲҘgМӮk вҲҘL2 (Sd ) =       О»вҲ’2      2
                                                               k вҲҘgk вҲҘL2 (Sd )
                                  0вүӨk:О»k Мё=0                         0вүӨkвүӨm
                                                                      О»k Мё=0
                            (a)                 X
                            вүӨ C1 (d, ОҪ)                вҲҘfk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) k d+3вҲ’2ОҪ
                                               0вүӨkвүӨm
                                                             X
                            вүӨ C1 (d, ОҪ)md+3вҲ’2ОҪ                     вҲҘfk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd )
                                                        0вүӨkвүӨm
                                               2   d+3вҲ’2ОҪ
                            вүӨ C2 (d, ОҪ)R m


                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where (a) uses Eq 1 and О»k = в„Ұ(k вҲ’(d+3)/2 ).
To bound the approximation error,
                                                        2
                                           X                            X
            вҲҘg вҲ’ gМӮвҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) =                   gk                вүӨ         вҲҘgk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd )
                                       k>m              L2 (Sd )        k>m
                                      X
                                  вүӨ              вҲҘfk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) k вҲ’2ОҪ
                                      k>m
                                                                                X
                                  вүӨ C0 (d, ОҪ)R2 mвҲ’2ОҪ                    since         вҲҘfk вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) вүӨ вҲҘf вҲҘ2L2 (Sd ) .
                                                                                k>m
                           вҲ’ ОҪ1
Finally, choosing m = Пө           , we obtain вҲҘg вҲ’ gМӮвҲҘL2 (Sd ) вүӨ C(d, ОҪ)RПө and
                                                                                 d+3вҲ’2ОҪ
                                  вҲҘgМӮвҲҘF2 вүӨ C вҖІ (d, ОҪ)RПөвҲ’ 2ОҪ .
Then it remains to bound Lip(gМӮ) for our constructed approximation. By construction and by (Dai,
2013, Theorem 2.1.3), we have gМӮ = g вҲ— h with now
                                       Xm
                               h(t) =      hk Pk (t), t вҲҲ [вҲ’1, 1]
                                                        k=0
by orthogonality of the Gegenbauer polynomial Pk вҖҷs and the convolution is defined as
                                                  Z
                                              1
                              (g вҲ— h)(x)  :=         g(y)h(вҹЁx, yвҹ©)dy.
                                              Пүd Sd
The coefficients for 0 вүӨ k вүӨ m given by (Dai, 2013, Theorem 2.1.3) are
                                      k!(k + (d вҲ’ 1)/2)О“((d вҲ’ 1)/2)2 (b)

       (a) Пүd+1     О“(d вҲ’ 1)                                                        k
    hk =                       Pk (1)                                 = O
             Пүd О“(d вҲ’ 1 + k)                 ПҖ22вҲ’d О“(d вҲ’ 1 + k)               О“(d вҲ’ 1 + k)
where (a) follows from the (inverse of) weighted L2 norm of Pk ; (b) plugs in the unit constant
Pk (1) = О“(k+dвҲ’1)                                                                         О“(dвҲ’1)
           О“(dвҲ’1)k! and suppresses the dependence on d. Note that the constant factor О“(dвҲ’1+k)
comes from the difference in the definitions of the Gegenbauer polynomials here and in (Dai, 2013).
Then we can bound
               Z
вҲҘвҲҮgМӮ(x)вҲҘop вүӨ       вҲҘвҲҮg(y)вҲҘop |h(вҹЁx, yвҹ©)|dy
                Sd
                       Z
            вүӨ Lip(g)      |h(вҹЁx, yвҹ©)|dy
                          Sd
                                 Z                               1/2
                вҲҡ                                           2
            вүӨ       Пүd Lip(g)              h(вҹЁx, yвҹ©) dy                         by Cauchy-Schwartz
                                      Sd
                                пЈ«                                                                пЈ¶1/2
                                    m Z
                вҲҡ                   X
            =       Пүd Lip(g) пЈӯ                       hk hj Pk (вҹЁx, yвҹ©)Pj (вҹЁx, yвҹ©)dy пЈё
                                   k,j=0         Sd
                                пЈ«                                                                 пЈ¶1/2
                                    m Z 1
                вҲҡ                   X                                                      dвҲ’2
            =       Пүd Lip(g) пЈӯ                        hk hj Pk (t)Pj (t)(1 вҲ’ t2 )          2    dtпЈё           by (Dai, 2013, Eq A.5.1)
                                   k,j=0         вҲ’1

                                   m             Z 1                                      !1/2
                вҲҡ                  X                                           dвҲ’2
            =       Пүd Lip(g)              h2k                  2
                                                        Pk (t) (1 вҲ’ t )   2     2    dt                by orthogonality of Pk вҖҷs w.r.t. this measure
                                   k=0             вҲ’1

                                   m
                                                                    !1/2
                вҲҡ                  X     ПҖ22вҲ’d О“(d вҲ’ 1 + k)
           = Пүd Lip(g)                     h2k
                                   k!(k + (d вҲ’ 1)/2)О“((d вҲ’ 1)/2)2
                            k=0
                                     m                      !1/2
              вҲҡ                     X              k
           = Пүd Lip(g) O(1) +           O
                                            О“(d вҲ’ 1 + k)k!
                                    k=1
              вҲҡ
           = Пүd Lip(g)C(d)
for some constant C(d) that only depends on d. Hence Lip(gМӮ) = C вҖІ (d)Lip(g).


                                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The next lemma adapts Lemma 14 to inputs on balls instead of spheres following the construction in
(Bach, 2017, Proposition 5).
Lemma 15. Suppose f : B(0, b) вҶ’ R has bounded Sobolev norm вҲҘf вҲҘW ОҪ,2 вүӨ R with ОҪ вүӨ (d + 2)/2
even, where B(0, b) = {x вҲҲ Rd : вҲҘxвҲҘ2 вүӨ b} is the radius-b ball. Then for every Пө > 0 there exists
fПө вҲҲ F2 such that вҲҘf вҲ’ fПө вҲҘL2 (B(0,b)) = C(d, ОҪ)bОҪ RПө, Lip(fПө ) вүӨ C вҖІ (d)Lip(f ), and
                                                                       d+3вҲ’2ОҪ
                                      вҲҘfПө вҲҘF2 вүӨ C вҖІвҖІ (d, ОҪ)bОҪ RПөвҲ’        2ОҪ


                                2bz
                                          a on (z, a) вҲҲ Sd with z вҲҲ Rd and вҲҡ12 вүӨ a вҲҲ R. One may

Proof. Define g(z, a) = f        a
verify that unit-norm (z, a) with a вүҘ вҲҡ12 is sufficient to cover B(0, b) by setting x = bz a and
                                                        ОҪ
solve for (z, a). Then we have bounded вҲҘgвҲҘW ОҪ,2 вүӨ b R  and may apply Lemma 14 to get  gМӮ with
                                                            вҲ’1
вҲҘg вҲ’ gМӮвҲҘL2 (Sd ) вүӨ C(d, ОҪ)bОҪ RПө. Letting fПө (x) = gМӮ ax
                                                      b ,a a   for the corresponding ax
                                                                                      b , a вҲҲ Sd
gives the desired upper bounds.

Lemma 16. Suppose f : B(0, b) вҶ’ R has bounded Sobolev norm вҲҘf вҲҘW ОҪ,2 вүӨ R with ОҪ вүҘ (d + 3)/2
even. Then f вҲҲ F2 and вҲҘf вҲҘF2 вүӨ C(d, ОҪ)bОҪ R.
In particular, W ОҪ,2 вҠҶ F2 for ОҪ вүҘ (d + 3)/2 even.

Proof. This lemma reproduces (Bach, 2017, Proposition 5) to functions with bounded Sobolev L2
norm instead of LвҲһ norm. The proof follows that of Lemma 14 and Lemma 15 and noticing that by
Eq 1,
                                       X
                          вҲҘgвҲҘ2F2 =            О»вҲ’2     2
                                               k вҲҘgk вҲҘL2 (Sd )
                                               0вүӨk:О»k Мё=0
                                               X
                                           вүӨ         k d+3вҲ’2ОҪ вҲҘ(вҲҶОҪ/2 g)k вҲҘ2L2 (Sd )
                                               0вүӨk

                                           вүӨ вҲҘвҲҶОҪ/2 gвҲҘ2L2 (Sd )
                                           вүӨ C1 (d, ОҪ)вҲҘgвҲҘ2W ОҪ,2
                                           вүӨ C1 (d, ОҪ)R2 .



                                                                                                     вҖІ
Finally, we remark that the above lemmas extend straightforward to functions f : B(0, b) вҶ’ Rd
with multi-dimensional outputs, where the constants then depend on the output dimension dвҖІ too.

E.3   L EMMA ON APPROXIMATING COMPOSITIONS OF S OBOLEV FUNCTIONS

With the lemmas given above and the fact that the F2 -norm upper bounds the F1 -norm, we can find
infinite-width DNN approximations for compositions of Sobolev functions, which is also pointed out
in the proof of Theorem 5.
Lemma 17. Assume the target function f : в„Ұ вҶ’ Rdout , with в„Ұ вҠҶ B(0, b) вҠҶ Rdin , satisfies:

       вҖў f = gk в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ g1 a composition of k Sobolev functions gi : Rdi вҶ’ Rdi+1 with bounded
         norms вҲҘgi вҲҘ2W ОҪi ,2 вүӨ R for i = 1, . . . , k, with d1 = din ;

       вҖў f is Lipschitz, i.e. Lip(gi ) < вҲһ for i = 1, . . . , k.

If ОҪi вүӨ (di + 2)/2 for any i, i.e. less smooth than needed, for depth L вүҘ k and any Пө > 0, there is an
infinite-width DNN fЛң such that
                        Qk
       вҖў Lip(fЛң) вүӨ C1      i=1 Lip(gi );
                           ОҪmax 1
       вҖў вҲҘfЛң вҲ’ f вҲҘL2 вүӨ C2 b 2 R 2 Пө;


                                                            32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with ОҪmax = maxi=1,...,k ОҪi , the constants C1 depends on all of the input dimensions di (to gi ) and
dout , and C2 depends on di , dout , ОҪi , k, and Lip(gi ) for all i.
If otherwise ОҪi вүҘ (di + 3)/2 for all i, we can have fЛң = f where each layer has a parameter norm
                 ОҪmax  1
bounded by C3 b 2 R 2 , with C3 depending on di , dout , and ОҪi .

Proof. Note that by Lipschitzness,
                                                                            пЈ«                     пЈ¶
                                                                                     i
                                                                                     Y
                                    (gi в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ g1 )(в„Ұ) вҠҶ B пЈӯ0, b                        Lip(gj )пЈё ,
                                                                                     j=1

i.e. the pre-image of each component lies in a ball. By Lemma 15, for each gi , if ОҪi вүӨ (di + 2)/2,
                                                              QiвҲ’1
we have an approximation gМӮi on a slightly larger ball bвҖІi = b j=1 C вҖІвҖІ (dj , dj+1 )Lip(gj ) such that
                                                             ОҪi        1
       вҖў вҲҘgi вҲ’ gМӮi вҲҘL2 вүӨ C(di , di+1 , ОҪi )(bвҖІi ) 2 R 2 Пө;
                                                       ОҪi         di +3вҲ’2ОҪi
                                                             1
       вҖў вҲҘgМӮi вҲҘF2 вүӨ C вҖІ (di , di+1 , ОҪi )(bвҖІi ) 2 R 2 Пө               2ОҪi
                                                                                 ;
                         вҖІвҖІ
       вҖў Lip(gМӮi ) вүӨ C (di , di+1 )Lip(gi );

where di is the input dimension of gi . Write the constants as Ci , CiвҖІ , and CiвҖІвҖІ for notation simplicity.
Note that the Lipschitzness of the approximations gМӮi вҖҷs guarantees that, when they are composed,
                                                          QiвҲ’1
(gМӮiвҲ’1 в—Ұ В· В· В· в—Ұ gМӮ1 )(в„Ұ) lies in a ball of radius bвҖІi = b j=1 CjвҖІвҖІ Lip(gj ), hence the approximation error
remains bounded while propagating. While each gМӮi is a (infinite-width) layer, for the other L вҲ’ k
layers, we may have identity layers5 .
Let fЛң be the composed DNN of these layers. Then we have
                                       k
                                       Y                                                           k
                                                                                                   Y
                      Lip(fЛң) вүӨ               CiвҖІвҖІ Lip(gi ) = C вҖІвҖІ (d1 , . . . , dk , dout )             Lip(gi )
                                       i=1                                                         i=1

and approximation error
                                             k
                                             X              ОҪi     1
                                                                           Y                           ОҪmax     1
                     вҲҘfЛң вҲ’ f вҲҘL2 вүӨ                 Ci (bвҖІi ) 2 R 2 Пө             CjвҖІвҖІ Lip(gj ) = O(b     2    R 2 Пө)
                                             i=1                           j>i

where ОҪmax = maxi ОҪi , the last equality suppresses the dependence on di , dout , ОҪi , k, and Lip(gi )
for i = 1, . . . , k.
In particular, by Lemma 16, if ОҪi вүҘ (di + 3)/2 for any i = 1, . . . , k, we can take gМӮi = gi . If this holds
                                                                                         ОҪmax     1
for all i, then we can have fЛң = f while each layer has a F2 -norm bounded by O(b 2 R 2 ).

F    T ECHNICAL RESULTS
Here we show a number of technical results regarding the covering number.
First, here is a bound for the covering number of Ellipsoids, which is a simple reformulation of
Theorem 2 of (Dumer et al., 2004):
                                                                              вҲҡ
Theorem 18. The d-dimensional ellipsoid E = {x : xT K вҲ’1 x вүӨ 1} with radii О»i for О»i the i-th
eigenvalue of K satisfies log N2 (E, Пө) = MПө (1 + o(1)) for
                                                       вҲҡ
                                              X           О»i
                                      MПө =         log
                                             вҲҡ           Пө
                                                                 i: О»i вүҘПө
                 вҲҡ
                  О»1

                                    MПө2
                                                            вҲҡ
if one has log    Пө =o            kПө log d       for kПө = i : О»i вүҘ Пө
     5
       Since the domain is always bounded here, one can let the bias translate the domain to the first quadrant and
let the weight be the identity matrix, cf. the construction in (Wen & Jacot, 2024, Proposition B.1.3).


                                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For our purpose, we will want to cover a unit ball B = {w : вҲҘwвҲҘ вүӨ 1} w.r.t. to a non-isotropic norm
    2
вҲҘwвҲҘK = wT Kw, but this is equivalent to covering E with an isotropic norm:
                                                                                                                 2
Corollary 19. The covering number of the ball B = {w : вҲҘwвҲҘ вүӨ 1} w.r.t. the norm вҲҘwвҲҘK = wT Kw
satisfies log N (B, вҲҘВ·вҲҘK , Пө) = MПө (1 + o(1)) for the same MПө as in Theorem 18 and under the same
condition.
                                                                           вҲҡ           вҲҡ      вҲ’1
Furthermore, log N (B, вҲҘВ·вҲҘK , Пө) вүӨ TrK2Пө2 (1 + o(1)) as long as log d = o    TrK
                                                                              Пө    log   TrK
                                                                                          Пө       .

                                                                                                       1
                                                                      вҲ’
Proof. If EМғ is an Пө-covering of E w.r.t. to the LвҲҡ
                                                  2 -norm, then BМғ = K 2 EМғ is an Пө-covering of B
w.r.t. the norm вҲҘВ·вҲҘK , because if w вҲҲ B, then Kw вҲҲ E and so there is an xМғ вҲҲ EМғ such that
       вҲҡ                         вҲҡ вҲ’1                                        вҲҡ
 x вҲ’ Kw вүӨ Пө, but then wМғ = K x covers w since вҲҘwМғ вҲ’ wвҲҘK = x вҲ’ Kw                       вүӨ Пө.
                                                                                                                 K

Since О»i вүӨ TrK
            i , we have K вүӨ KМ„ for KМ„ the matrix obtained by replacing the i-th eigenvalue О»i of
      TrK
K by i , and therefore N (B, вҲҘВ·вҲҘK , Пө) вүӨ N (B, вҲҘВ·вҲҘKМ„ , Пө) since вҲҘВ·вҲҘK вүӨ вҲҘВ·вҲҘKМ„ . We now have the
approximation log N (B, вҲҘВ·вҲҘKМ„ , Пө) = MМ„Пө (1 + o(1)) for
                                                            kМ„Пө   вҲҡ
                                                            X        TrK
                                                   MМ„Пө =      log вҲҡ
                                                          i=1
                                                                      iПө

                                                            TrK
                                                    kМ„Пө =          .
                                                             Пө2
We now have the simplification
                kПө   вҲҡ          kМ„Пө              Z 1
                X      TrK   1X         kМ„Пө  kМ„Пө        1            kМ„Пө
        MМ„Пө =     log вҲҡ    =        log     = (      log dx + o(1)) = (1 + o(1))
              i=1
                        iПө   2 i=1
                                         i    2   0     x             2

where the o(1) term vanishes as Пө вҶҳ 0. Furthermore, this allows us to check that as long as
               вҲҡ

                 TrK
log d = o         вҲҡ        , the condition is satisfied
            4Пө log TrK
                    Пө

                                      вҲҡ
                                                                                      MМ„Пө2

                                          TrK                  kМ„Пө
                                log           =o                          =o                       .
                                           Пө                4 log d                kМ„Пө log d



Second we prove how to obtain the covering number of the convex hull of a function set F:
Theorem 20. Let F be a set of B-uniformly bounded functions, then for all ПөK = B2вҲ’K
                                               K
                    p                      вҲҡ X       q
                     log N2 (ConvF, 2ПөK ) вүӨ 18   2KвҲ’k log N2 (F, B2вҲ’k ).
                                                                  k=1


Proof. Define Пөk = B2вҲ’k and the corresponding Пөk -coverings FМғk (w.r.t. some measure ПҖ). For any
f , we write fЛңk [f ] for the function fЛңk [f ] вҲҲ FМғk that covers f . Then for any functions f in ConvF, we
have
              m
              X                m
                               X                             XK X
                                                                m
         f=         ОІi f i =         ОІi            Лң
                                              fi вҲ’ fK [fi ] +     ОІi fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ] + fЛң0 [fi ].
              i=1              i=1                                k=1 i=1

We may assume that fЛң0 [fi ] = 0 since the zero function Пө0 -covers the whole F since Пө0 = B.
                                                                    Pm
We will now use the probabilistic method to show that the sums i=1 ОІi fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ] can
                                                                                               (k)         (k)
be approximated by finite averages. Consider the random functions gМғ1 , . . . , gМғmk sampled iid with


                                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



 h                              i
    (k)                                            (k)  Pm
P gМғj = fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ] = ОІi . We have E[gМғj ] = i=1 ОІi fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ] and
                                                                           2
   K    mk        K Xm                                                             K    mk
     1 X                                                                             1 X            2
              (k)                                                                               (k)
   X              X                                                                X
 E          gМғj вҲ’       ОІi fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ]                             вүӨ      2     E gМғj
     mk j=1         i=1
                                                                                     mk j=1         ПҖ
     k=1                    k=1                                                    k=1
                                                                           ПҖ
                                                                                 K     m                             2
                                                                                 X 1 X
                                                                               =          ОІi fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ]
                                                                                   mk i=1                            ПҖ
                                                                                   k=1
                                                                                   K
                                                                                   X 32 Пө2   k
                                                                               вүӨ                 ,
                                                                                         mk
                                                                                   k=1

where we used the fact that fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ]                вүӨ Пөk + ПөkвҲ’1 = 3Пөk .
                                                               ПҖ
                                                                                        (k)
If we choose mk = a1k ( 3Пөk 2
                                   P
                        ПөK ) with    ak = 1 we know that there must exist a choice of gМғj s such
that
                   K        mk         K Xm
                 X       1 X     (k)
                                      X
                               gМғj вҲ’         ОІi fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ]  вүӨ ПөK .
                        mk j=1           i=1
                      k=1                          k=1
                                                                                                     ПҖ
                                          nP                                                             o
                                            K      (k)     (k) Pmk
This implies that the finite set CЛң =        j=1 gМғj
                                                        1
                                                       : gМғj вҲҲ FМғk вҲ’ FМғkвҲ’1 is an 2ПөK covering
                                                   k=1 mk
                                            Pm                     (k)
of C = ConvF, since we know that for all f = i=1 ОІi fi there are gМғj such that

        K    mk         m                                m
        X 1 X      (k)
                       X                                 X
                 gМғj вҲ’     ОІi fi                   вүӨ           ОІi fi вҲ’ fЛңK [fi ]
          mk j=1       i=1                               i=1
        k=1                                                                              ПҖ
                                               ПҖ
                                                       K            mk              m
                                                       X       1    X   (k)
                                                                                    X
                                                   +                  gМғj вҲ’     ОІi fЛңk [fi ] вҲ’ fЛңkвҲ’1 [fi ]
                                                               mk j=1       i=1
                                                       k=1
                                                                                                               ПҖ
                                                   вүӨ 2ПөK .
          QK                mk            mk
Since CЛң = k=1 FМғk                FМғkвҲ’1        , we have

                                               K
                                               X 1 3Пөk 2
           log Np (Conv(F), 2ПөK ) вүӨ                (   ) (log Np (F, Пөk ) + log Np (F, ПөkвҲ’1 ))
                                                 ak ПөK
                                               k=1
                                                    K
                                                    X 1
                                          вүӨ 18                 22(KвҲ’k) log N2 (F, Пөk ).
                                                          ak
                                                    k=1

This is minimized for the choice
                                                  p
                                            2(KвҲ’k) log N2 (F, Пөk )
                                      ak = P       p                ,
                                             2(KвҲ’k) log N2 (F, Пөk )
which yields the bound
                                                                   K
                         q                                вҲҡ        X            p
                             log Np (C, 2ПөK ) вүӨ               18         2KвҲ’k    log N2 (F, Пөk )
                                                                   k=1


                                                               35
