Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B EYOND C ANONICALIZATION :
H OW T ENSORIAL M ESSAGES I MPROVE E QUIVARIANT
M ESSAGE PASSING
 Peter Lippmann∗, Gerrit Gerhartz∗ , Roman Remme & Fred A. Hamprecht
 Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg University,
 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
 {peter.lippmann,roman.remme,fred.hamprecht}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
 gerrit.gerhartz@proton.me



                                              A BSTRACT
             In numerous applications of geometric deep learning, the studied systems ex-
             hibit spatial symmetries and it is desirable to enforce these. For the symmetry
             of global rotations and reflections, this means that the model should be equivari-
             ant with respect to the transformations that form the group of O(d). While many
             approaches for equivariant message passing require specialized architectures, in-
             cluding non-standard normalization layers or non-linearities, we here present a
             framework based on local reference frames (“local canonicalization”) which can
             be integrated with any architecture without restrictions. We enhance equivariant
             message passing based on local canonicalization by introducing tensorial mes-
             sages to communicate geometric information consistently between different local
             coordinate frames. Our framework applies to message passing on geometric data
             in Euclidean spaces of arbitrary dimension. We explicitly show how our approach
             can be adapted to make a popular existing point cloud architecture equivariant.
             We demonstrate the superiority of tensorial messages and achieve state-of-the-art
             results on normal vector regression and competitive results on other standard 3D
             point cloud tasks.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Data from various domains, such as scans of 3D scenes, molecules or earth science data, consists of
a set of nodes positioned in Euclidean space and equipped with geometric node features. In many
tasks, message passing neural networks are used to extract and combine these node features. In
application domains in which inputs and outputs are governed by known symmetries, it may be de-
sirable or required to enforce these. One such approach is to build equivariant architectures, which
guarantee that the learned function behaves in a well-defined manner under transformations of the
input. Regarding rotations and reflections specifically, equivariance ensures that predictions are
consistent for different orientations of the input. The idea of equivariance is not only conceptually
appealing but also highly relevant in practice: Built-in equivariance is known to enhance perfor-
mance and data efficiency of neural networks in several settings (Weiler et al., 2018; Batzner et al.,
2022). For instance, in deep learning based molecular dynamics simulations, exact equivariance can
be crucial for the simulation stability (Fu et al., 2022). However, exact equivariance is often realized
by restricting the model design to specialized building blocks such as non-standard linear layers, nor-
malization layers and non-linearities. Some of these specialized building blocks are computationally
intensive Passaro & Zitnick (2023). Alternative approaches, which do not require specialized build-
ing blocks, are typically based on reference frames. The reference frames are used to transform
geometric inputs into a canonical orientation before feeding them to the model (“canonicalization”).
In many geometric learning tasks, the model inputs are comprised of geometric substructures, in
which case local reference frames seem most suitable to orient each substructure individually into a
canonical pose (“local canonicalization”). However, communicating geometric information consis-
tently between local patches with different coordinate frames is non-trivial (cf. Fig. 1). In this paper,
    ∗
        equal contribution


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            sent geometric message
                                            received geometric message
           message:                         message passing edge       message with frame-to-frame transition:
                                            nodes

                             local                                                  local
                          transform                                              transform


                      not distinguishable                                     distinguishable

         (a) Scalar message passing, Eq. (11)             (b) Tensorial message passing, Eq. (12)
Figure 1: Limitation of scalar message passing. (a) The upper node j is sending a characteristic
direction in its neighborhood (encoded in a vector) to an adjacent node i. If the local neighborhood
of j is rotated, the vector and the equivariant local frame rotate along. The coordinates of the vector
are invariant and thus, with scalar message passing, node i will receive the same message, despite
the two geometries being different. (b) Tensorial message passing overcomes this limitation so that
directional information can be sent consistently.


we present a novel framework that provides a practical solution to this problem and allows building
more expressive equivariant architectures based on local canonicalization. Concretely, we make the
following contributions:

       • We present a novel message passing formalism that together with local canonicalization
         enables consistent communication of geometric features and can be used to build O(d)-
         equivariant message passing networks.
       • We explicitly show how to adapt our framework to make any existing message passing
         architecture O(d)-equivariant. As a concrete example, we present an O(3)-equivariant
         adaptation of the widely-used PointNet++ architecture (Qi et al., 2017b), which produces
         state-of-the-art results.
       • We demonstrate conceptually and experimentally that tensorial messages are a strict gener-
         alization of vanilla local canonicalization methods and that tensorial messages improve the
         performance.
       • We propose to update the local frames after each layer of message passing so that geometric
         information aggregated from the neighborhood of each node can be used to iteratively refine
         the local frames. This is a strict generalization of static local canonicalization.
       • Our framework allows for a direct comparison between equivariant architectures and non-
         equivariant ones. We find that exact, built-in equivariance via our framework is more data-
         efficient and outperforms our strong baseline models trained via data augmentation.


2   R ELATED WORK
Many popular architectures for message passing on point cloud data are not equivariant per se (Qi
et al., 2017b; Liu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019). In general, the simplest way to achieve (ap-
proximate) equivariance with respect to a set of transformations is to augment the training data,
i.e. present the model with randomly transformed samples during training. Data augmentation is of
course completely independent of the model and does not constrain the architecture. However, the
equivariance must be learned and is thus not guaranteed, meaning that it may not generalize to out-
of-distribution samples; and the learned equivariance is not exact. For a comprehensive overview of
different approaches to equivariant message passing we refer the reader to (Duval et al., 2023).

Equivariance using tensorial internal representations. Invariance is a special case of equivari-
ance where the output stays invariant when the input is transformed. A simple way of achieving
exact invariance is to extract invariant features from the input geometry, such as distances or an-
gles, and only include these in the message passing (Schütt et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021b). While


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


this allows using typical deep learning building blocks (linear layers, activations, norm layers, etc.),
these approaches are not able to communicate non-scalar geometric information (such as directions)
during message passing. Thus, several works have included vectorial and tensorial features into
the message passing formalism to predict equivariant quantities (Deng et al., 2021; Satorras et al.,
2021; Frank et al., 2022; Batatia et al., 2022; Liao et al., 2024; Musaelian et al., 2023; Remme et al.,
2023; Simeon & De Fabritiis, 2024). It has been shown that including non-scalar geometric features
in the message passing can enhance the performance, even when the model outputs are invariant
quantities (Fuchs et al., 2020; Brandstetter et al., 2022) and that higher-order tensor representations
are particularly helpful in tasks where angular information matters, e.g. for predicting forces in
molecules (Zitnick et al., 2022; Batzner et al., 2022). However, these architectures may no longer
treat every internal activation as individual number, for instance, the coordinates of vectors must be
processed jointly to maintain equivariance. In contrast to our framework, these approaches therefore
rely on carefully designed non-linearities, norm layers and special operators to combine scalar and
tensorial features, see e.g. (Thomas et al., 2018) for details.

Equivariance by canonicalization. An alternative approach to achieve invariance is to determine
a canonical global orientation of the input point cloud in the first layers and then canonicalize the
input accordingly before feeding it into the main model. This factors out the global orientation of
the input so that the model output will be invariant. Several methods have been developed to predict
the global orientation, based on subnetworks (Qi et al., 2017a), principal component analysis (Li
et al., 2021a), asymmetric units (Baker et al., 2024), as a combination of local orientations (Zhao
et al., 2020; 2022) or based on anchor points (Lou et al., 2023). Alternatively, Puny et al. (2021)
propose to use several frames and average their predictions to achieve equivariant predictions based
on non-equivariant backbone architectures.
Similar to equivariance by global orientation estimation, one can achieve equivariance using local
canonicalization (Zhang et al., 2020; Wang & Zhang, 2022; Kaba et al., 2023). As in our approach,
one equivariantly predicts a local coordinate frame for each node, into which the geometric input
features are transformed (Luo et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022; 2024). Thereby, the local coordinates of
the node features are independent of the global orientation of the input and are thus invariant. One
advantage of using local reference frames over a single global one is that substructures in the data,
which are geometrically similar, are described by similar local features. During message passing,
most previous works do not leverage the local coordinate frames to transform features between the
frames, which substantially limits the communication between nodes that have different local frames
(cf. Fig. 1). While (Wang & Zhang, 2022) and (Du et al., 2024) try to learn an approximate frame-
to-frame transition, no previous work uses general geometric representations to directly transform
geometric features from one local frame into the other during message passing. For mesh CNNs,
the approach of (Cohen et al., 2019) introduces transformations between local frames via parallel
transport. Their approach uses SO(2) gauge equivariant kernels to obtain predictions which are
independent of the choice of gauge. In contrast to our work, gauge equivariant approaches constrain
the convolution kernels and require specialized non-lineraties. In our framework, computations
explicitly depend on the local coordinate frames and we demonstrate experimentally that, for our
approach, informative local frames can improve model performance.

3   P RELIMINARIES

The set of transformations associated with symmetries of the data typically forms a group in the
mathematical sense. Therefore, we will formally define group representations, which characterize
the well-defined frame-to-frame transformation behavior of node features in our message passing
framework.

Group representation. Given a group G and a vector space V , a group representation ρ is a
mapping from G to the invertible matrices GL(V ) that fulfills
                               ρ(g1 g2 ) = ρ(g1 )ρ(g2 ),   ∀g1 , g2 ∈ G,                            (1)
where g1 g2 is the group product and ρ(g1 )ρ(g2 ) the matrix product. The representation specifies
how elements of the group act on vectors v ∈ V , i.e. in components (ρ(g)v)i = ρ(g)ij vj . We are
consistently using the Einstein summation convention throughout this paper, meaning that indices


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Input graph data   Transform into equiv.   Tensorial Message   Refine local frames   Transform back into
                       local frames            Passing                                   global frame


Figure 2: Expressive O(d)-equivariant message passing based on local canonicalization with
tensorial messages. Based on the input geometry, one predicts an equivariant local frame Ri at
each node i. The geometric input node features Fi are transformed from the global reference frame
into the respective local frames, yielding coordinates fi invariant to the choice of global frame. In
order to communicate geometric information consistently during message passing, node features
are treated as vectors and tensors which are transformed from one local frame into another. After
each message passing layer, the local frames are refined to incorporate newly aggregated geometric
information. Finally, the geometric node features are transformed back from the local into the global
frame to produce an equivariant output.


that appear twice are summed over. The dimension of the representation ρ is defined to be the
dimension of V . Condition (1) implies that ρ(g −1 ) = (ρ(g))−1 .

Equivariance. Let G be a group and V, W two vector spaces equipped with group representations
ρin and ρout respectively. A function φ : V → W is said to be equivariant under the group G if the
following holds:
                           ρout (g)φ(x) = φ(ρin (g)x), ∀g ∈ G, ∀x ∈ V
where the input to φ transforms under the representation ρin : V → GL(V ) and its output under
the representation ρout : W → GL(W ). If ρout (g) = id for all g ∈ G, the function φ is said to be
invariant.

Tensor representation. Let us consider the group of rotations and reflections O(d) that consists
of d × d orthogonal matrices. A d-dimensional vector v transforms under R ∈ O(d) by contraction
of its only index, i.e. (Rv)i = Rij vj , forming a representation according to the above definition.
Higher-order tensor representations are formed according to the following transformation rule:
                                 Ti′1 ...in = Ri1 j1 ... Rin jn Tj1 ...jn .                        (2)
One may easily check that this transformation behavior fulfills condition (1) and defines a represen-
tation (see App. A). A tensor Tj1 ...jn with n indices is said to have order n. All indices run over d
dimensions. Consequently, the vector space on which this representation acts is dn -dimensional.
The fact that the orthogonal matrices also include reflections can be used to distinguish the trans-
formation behavior of geometric objects with respect to orientation-reversing transformations (with
determinant −1). Since the determinant is multiplicative, the following transformation behavior
defines another representation, namely the one for pseudotensors:
                             Pi′1 ...in = det(R)Ri1 ,j1 ... Rin ,jn Pj1 ...jn .                  (3)
For instance, a 3D pseudovector v does not change sign under parity, e.g. ρ(P )v = v for P =
diag(−1, −1, −1) ∈ O(3), see e.g. (Jeevanjee, 2011) for mathematical details.

Local and global frames. The global (reference) frame is the coordinate system in which the co-
ordinates of geometric inputs and outputs are expressed. It agrees across all nodes. Local (reference)
frames are local coordinate systems represented by an O(d) matrix that transforms a d-dimensional
vector from the global frame into the corresponding local frame. We use an individual local frame
for each node.

4     M ETHODS
The central idea behind our framework (Fig. 2) can be summarized as follows: for every node, one
predicts an orthonormal local frame in an equivariant fashion, meaning that it transforms consis-


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               transform


Figure 3: Illustration of tensorial message passing between local frames. Node j sends a vecto-
rial feature fj from its local frame Rj to node i with local frame Ri . Through the change of basis,
the vectorial information can be received in the other coordinate frame without loss of information.
Due to the equivariance of the local frames, the local frame coordinates of geometric objects are
invariant under global transformation.


tently as the input point cloud is flipped or rotated. Then, one expresses the geometric node features
in the respective local frame by a change of basis from the global reference frame to the local one
(known as “local canonicalization”). Crucially, since the local frames are chosen equivariantly, the
node features expressed in the local frames are invariant under O(d)-transformations of the input
(see Fig. 3). Below, we provide a proof that this indeed holds for all geometric objects, irrespec-
tive of their representation. The invariant coordinates can then be processed by arbitrary functions
without breaking the invariance. The key ingredient in our approach is the following: During mes-
sage passing, node features are transformed from one local frame into another. This enables direct
communication of geometric features, like vectors and tensors, resulting in a strictly more expres-
sive message passing formulation. Without the change of basis geometric information may be lost
(cf. Fig. 1). At the final layer, one transforms the invariant numbers back into a geometric object
in the global frame, using the desired output representation. One thereby obtains an equivariant
prediction.

4.1   E QUIVARIANCE BY LOCAL CANONICALIZATION

Let us first describe how to predict the local frames in an equivariant manner, and illustrate how
they are used to construct an equivariant pipeline. For concreteness, we will describe the procedure
in three-dimensional Euclidean space, though all statements generalize straightforwardly to higher
dimensions.
Geometrically informative local frames should be constructed robustly, i.e. small changes in the local
geometry should not change them drastically. Secondly, they should be predicted equivariantly, i.e. if
the input is transformed, the local frames must transform accordingly. We adapt the simple approach
by (Wang & Zhang, 2022) to learn equivariant local frames during training. Given an input graph of
nodes with coordinates xi and input node features Fi , we equivariantly predict two vectors vi,1 and
vi,2 for each node i:
                   "                                                          #
              X                         (s)  (s) (s)                xi − xj
   vi,k =            ω(∥xi − xj ∥) ϕ(Fi , Fj , eij , ∥xi − xj ∥)k               , k ∈ {1, 2}, (4)
                                                                   ∥xi − xj ∥
          j∈N (i)

where ∥·∥ denotes the Euclidean norm and N (i) the neighborhood of node i. For point cloud data
without any edges, the neighborhood is obtained from a radius graph with cutoff radius rc . ϕ is a
standard MLP that receives the even scalars (invariant under rotations and reflections) among the
                 (s)   (s)                    (s)
node features Fi , Fj and edge attributes eij (if available) as inputs. The vectors vi,1 and vi,2
are computed as weighted sums of the normalized edge vectors, with the two outputs of ϕ being
the respective weights. ω is an envelope function adapted from (Gasteiger et al., 2020), which
goes to zero smoothly at the cutoff radius rc (see App. B for details). Using the Gram-Schmidt
procedure, one equivariantly constructs two orthonormal vectors from vi,1 , vi,2 (see App. B). A
third vector is obtained from the vector product between these two, yielding an orthonormal basis
ni,k ∈ R3 , k = 1, 2, 3. However, the vector product ni,3 = ni,1 × ni,2 always results in a right-


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


handed local frame so that the handedness would not change under reflection of the input. Hence,
such local frames would be SO(3)- but not O(3)-equivariant. A simple solution is to flip the third
vector based on the local center of mass r̄:

           ni,1 × ni,2 if (ni,1 × ni,2 ) · r̄ > 0               X
  ni,3 =                                           , with r̄ :=       ω(∥xj − xi ∥)(xj − xi ),
           −ni,1 × ni,2                else
                                                                           j∈N (i)
                                                                                                 (5)
where · denotes the standard dot-product. The computation of r̄ is smoothed using the same enve-
lope ω as in Eq. (4). In App. B we show that our prediction of local frames is indeed equivariant.
In App. D, we experimentally investigate the robustness of the local frame estimation to input noise
and compare learned local frames against PCA-based local frames.

Invariance of node features expressed in local frames. The 3 × 3 orthogonal matrix which
transforms a vector from the global reference frame into the local frame at node i is given by
                                                             ni,1
                                                                      !
                           Ri = (ni,1 , ni,2 , ni,3 )T =     ni,2       .                      (6)
                                                             ni,3
This can be easily seen from Ri ni,1 = (1, 0, 0)T etc., due to the orthonormality. Under any global
transformation R̂ ∈ O(3) the node positions xi and local frame basis vectors ni,k transform like
vectors. The geometric input node features, denoted by Fi , transform according to their representa-
tion denoted by ρin . The representation of the input features is determined by the problem setup and
may be a combination of scalars, vectors and tensorial features. In formulae, we have
             x′i = R̂ xi , n′i,k = R̂ ni,k ∀i, k = 1, 2, 3 and Fi′ = ρin (R̂)Fi ,                                (7)
which implies the following transformation rule for the local frame Ri :
        Ri′ = Ri R̂T = Ri R̂−1 , since                                                                           (8)
   [Ri′ ]mn = [(n′i,1 , n′i,2 , n′i,3 )T ]mn = (n′i,m )n = [R̂]nl (ni,m )l = (ni,m )l [R̂T ]ln = [Ri R̂T ]mn .
In components (ni,m )l denotes the l-th component of the m-th basis vector at node i. Using
Eq. (7) and (8), we can now show that node features expressed in local frames are indeed invari-
ant w.r.t. transformations of the inputs. The coordinates of the global features Fi , expressed in the
corresponding local frame Ri , are given by ρin (Ri )Fi =: fi and the invariance follows as
        fi′ = ρin (Ri′ )Fi′ = ρin (Ri R̂−1 )Fi′ = ρin (Ri )ρin (R̂−1 )ρin (R̂)Fi = ρin (Ri )Fi = fi .            (9)

Equivariance of the output. After transforming the node features into the local frames, the node
features can be processed and combined using arbitrary functions during message passing, such as
standard MLPs, non-linearities and norm layers. Afterwards, the invariant features fi are trans-
formed back into the global frame to obtain an equivariant prediction ρout (Ri−1 )fi =: Yi . The out-
put representation is determined by the problem setup, e.g. when predicting invariant quantities the
output representation is the trivial representation ρout (R) = id, for vectorial output ρout (R) = R,
etc. Indeed, the final prediction transforms equivariantly under any global transformation R̂:
                         −1
        Yi′ = ρout (Ri′ )fi′ = ρout ((Ri R̂−1 )−1 )fi = ρout (R̂)ρout (Ri−1 )fi = ρout (R̂)Yi .    (10)
Crucially, Eq. (10) holds for any representation of the output ρout . This means that, after applying
multiple message passing layers to the invariant node features, it is merely a matter of interpretation
to decide which numbers shall be combined into a common geometric object and which object it
should be. Therefore, our pipeline allows for an equivariant prediction of any geometric object and
the output representation can be chosen as required by the problem at hand.

4.2   T ENSORIAL MESSAGE PASSING

So far, we have seen how to achieve equivariance by transforming into equivariant local frames and
then performing message passing on the invariant node features fi . In a general form, the invariant
message passing in layer k without tensorial messages may be written as

            (k)           (k−1)               (k−1)    (k−1)
                                  M
           fi = ψ (k) fi        ,      ϕ(k) fi      , fj     , ρe (Ri )eij , Ri (xi − xj ) ,    (11)
                                    j∈N (i)



                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ψ (k) and ϕ(k) are arbitrary non-linear functions and j∈N (i) denotes the aggregation over
                                                              L

neighbors of node i. The message passing defined by Eq. (11) differs from vanilla message passing
only by the transformation of the edge vectors xi − xj and the input edge features eij , whose
representation we denote by ρe . Both expressions ρe (Ri )eji and Ri (xi − xj ) are invariant under
global transformations as instances of Eq. (9). Together with the invariance of the node features,
this guarantees the invariance of Eq. (11). Furthermore, translation invariance is realized trivially by
operating only on relative node positions.
The message passing of previous works like (Luo et al., 2022) can be expressed in the form of
Eq. (11). However, it has important implications that the invariant node features are expressed
in different local frames: message passing in the form of Eq. (11) does not allow for the direct
communication of geometric information. In some cases, the network may need to communicate
directional information, which transforms equivariantly (e.g. encoded in a vector). However, using
Eq. (11), the message fj received by node i is expressed in coordinates of the sending node j. Now,
since fj describes an equivariant geometric feature in the neighborhood of node j and since the
coordinate frame Rj also transforms equivariantly, the local coordinates fj are invariant under local
transforms (as in Eq. (9) for global transforms). Consequently, node i receives the same message,
irrespective of local transformations of the geometry around node j and the global direction of the
feature fj is not preserved (as illustrated in Fig. 1). Our framework remedies exactly this weakness
by incorporating proper tensorial messages in the message passing between local frames. Indeed, by
including the change of basis in the message passing (cf. ρf (Ri Rj−1 )fj in Eq. (12)), the messages
do preserve the global direction of the feature.
In the final transformation from the local frames back to the global reference frame, the invariant
features fi are interpreted as coordinates of geometric objects. The key idea of our framework is to
include exactly such transformations already during message passing. As part of the architecture,
one chooses the transformation behavior of fi in every layer as a direct sum of multiple tensor and
pseudotensor representations (see App. A). This combined representation, denoted by ρf , defines
how fi is transformed from one local frame to the other, based on Eq. (2) and (3). During training,
the network learns to communicate vectorial and tensorial information through the respective feature
channels, simply because they transform accordingly. That is, if a node would like to send a direction
in the form of a vector to its neighbor, it will store the three respective coordinates in three channels
of fi which by design transform like a vector (as illustrated in Fig. 3). As our main result, this
yields the following strictly more general form of invariant message passing with tensorial messages
between local frames:

     (k)            (k−1)                 (k−1)                 (k−1)
                            M
   fi = ψ (k) fi          ,       ϕ(k) fi       , ρf (Ri Rj−1 )fj     , ρe (Ri )eji , Ri (xi − xj ) . (12)
                           j∈N (i)


Indeed, the transformation of an invariant node feature fj from the local frame of node j into the
one of node i is also invariant:
                   global R̂
 ρf (Ri Rj−1 )fj −−−−−−→ ρf ((Ri R̂−1 )(Rj R̂−1 )−1 )fj′ = ρf (Ri R̂−1 R̂Rj−1 )fj = ρf (Ri Rj−1 )fj .
                                                                                                 (13)
The formalism in Eq. (12) allows modifying all existing message passing approaches of this form
to be O(d)-equivariant and communicate tensorial messages of arbitrary representations. This high-
lights once more that ρf can be chosen freely at every message passing layer as part of the archi-
tecture. In practice, we opt for the (pseudo-)tensor representations as feature representations in our
networks since they can be implemented efficiently directly using the transformation matrices of the
local frames, e.g. by utilizing highly optimized Einstein summation algorithms (cf. Eq. (2) and (3)).

4.3   R ELATION TO DATA AUGMENTATION

As a direct consequence of condition (1), any group representation maps the identity element to the
identity matrix. Thus, if all local frames were chosen to be the identity, Eq. (12) would simply turn
into the usual non-invariant message passing. Similarly, choosing all local frames to be the same
group element, i.e. Ri = R̃, R̃ ∈ O(d) ∀i, is equivalent to a global transformation of the input data.
In this case, tensorial messages do not transform when sent from one local frame to another, since


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the change of basis Ri Rj−1 is trivial. Therefore, choosing R̃ ∈ O(d) randomly for every training
sample precisely amounts to data augmentation with random global rotations and reflections.
One clear advantage of our framework is that it allows for a direct comparison between equivari-
ant message passing and data augmentation. Essentially all other works that present an equivariant
pipeline do not compare against a non-equivariant baseline trained with data augmentation. Presum-
ably, this is due to the fact that these approaches use equivariant building blocks, which do not have
a straightforward non-equivariant equivalent. In our case, the architecture can be trained in both
ways for a fair comparison using the same hyperparameters in architecture and optimizer.

4.3.1   R EFINING THE LOCAL FRAMES DURING MESSAGE PASSING
Meaningful local frames do facilitate expressive local canonicalization, as we demonstrate exper-
imentally (see Tab. 3). Conceptually, this has the following reason: The choice of local frames
influences the coordinates in which geometric features are expressed and thereby the computations
performed in the non-linear functions (typically MLPs) ϕ(k) (cf. Eq. (12)). These embed the incom-
ing geometric information. When choosing the local frames in a systematic manner, adjacent nodes
tend to have similar local frames so that similar geometric features are represented using similar
coordinates. This facilitates the exchange and processing of information.
The prediction of the local frames, defined by Eq. (4), considers the initial node features and the
local geometry in a fairly simple way and only up to a finite cutoff radius. We therefore propose to
refine the local frames during the message passing procedure as the field of view grows and more
                                                                               (k)
geometric information is aggregated. Using the invariant node features fi at node i and layer
k, we employ a simple MLP to predict 6 numbers. These are interpreted as components of two
          (k)       (k)                                                      (k)
vectors vi,1 and vi,2 . Which are then used to generate an SO(3)-matrix Ui by the Gram-Schmidt
procedure similar to Sec. 4.1. For every node i, the current local frame is then updated according to
                                          (k)      (k)   (k−1)
                                        Ri      = Ui Ri          .                               (14)
The handedness of Ri is preserved, since U ∈ SO(3). Note that the Ri are global (equivariant)
                                                        (k)
objects while U is a local (invariant) object so that Ri has the same transformation behavior
    (k−1)                                      (k)
as Ri     . To ensure that the node features fi still represent the same geometric objects, they
must be transformed from the old local frame into the new one:

                  (k)           (k) (k−1)     (k−1)  −1     (k)       (k)    (k)
                 fi → ρf (Ui Ri           ) Ri            fi = ρf U i       fi .            (15)


5   E XPERIMENTS

Below, we present results for two point cloud experiments using the popular, non-equivariant Point-
Net++ architecture (Qi et al., 2017b), adapted to our equivariant framework. Similar to a U-Net for
images (Ronneberger et al., 2015), the PointNet++ architecture combines an encoder that iteratively
subsamples the point cloud with a decoder that afterwards upsamples the point cloud again. The
message passing in the encoder and decoder both follow the form of Eq. (12). Compared to the
original PointNet++, we make minor architectural changes, e.g. by introducing radial and angular
embeddings (see App. C and E for details of the architecture and training setup).
We have trained different variants of our PointNet++ adaptation on normal vector regression and
classification on the ModelNet40 dataset (Wu et al., 2015) and on segmentation on the ShapeNet
dataset (Yi et al., 2016). ModelNet40 consists of 12,311 3D shapes of 40 different categories. We
use the resampled version of the dataset for which normal vectors at all points are available and
use the default train/test split. The ShapeNet dataset consists of around 17,000 3D point clouds
(including normal vectors) from 16 shape categories, annotated with 50 semantic classes for seg-
mentation. For all tasks, we compare an equivariant model that uses the tensorial message passing
approach (Eq. (12)) against an equivariant model which uses the less general scalar message pass-
ing (Eq (11)). In both models, the local frames are learned via Eq. (4) and we optionally include
iterative refinement of the local frames (cf. Sec. 4.3.1). Further, we compare against a PointNet++
variant trained with data augmentation (as described in Sec. 4.3). For all three models, we use
the same hyperparameters in architecture and optimizer. The main results can be found in Tab. 1


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Normal vector regression on ModelNet40. We report cosine similarities (higher is better)
between predicted and target normal vectors for three scenarios: (z/z) trained and evaluated with
augmentations around the gravitational axis, (z/SO(3)) trained only with rotations around z but
evaluated using all transforms of O(3) or SO(3) and (SO(3)/SO(3)) trained and evaluated using
all transforms. Our equivariant adaptation of PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b) produces state-of-the-art
results. The iterative refinement of the local frames (Sec. 4.3.1) further improves the model. Results
of related works are taken from (Luo et al., 2022).

     Method                                                       z/z     z/SO(3)        SO(3)/SO(3)   equivariant
     RS-CNN (Liu et al., 2019)                                    0.74     0.17             0.50           ✗
     DGCNN (Wang et al., 2019)                                    0.71     0.68             0.78           ✗
     GC-Conv (Zhang et al., 2020)                                 0.58     0.56              0.58          ✓
     Luo et al. (Luo et al., 2022)                                0.80     0.80              0.80          ✓
     Method                                                       z/z     z/O(3)          O(3)/O(3)    equivariant
     Data augmentation                                            0.89     0.79             0.86           ✗
     Learned frames + scalar messages (ours)                      0.82     0.82             0.82           ✓
     Learned frames + refining frames + scalar messages (ours)    0.83     0.83             0.83           ✓
     Learned frames + tensor messages (ours)                      0.87     0.87             0.87           ✓
     Learned frames + refining frames + tensor messages (ours)    0.88     0.88             0.88           ✓


Table 2: Segmentation on ShapeNet. Our equivariant adaptation of PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b)
yields competitive results and significantly outperforms the corresponding model trained with data
augmentation. Both tensorial messages and iterative refinement of the local frames enhance the
performance. Training and evaluation setups as in Tab. 1. Results of related works are based on the
original papers and on (Luo et al., 2022; Lou et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2021).

      Method                                                       z/z    z/SO(3)        SO(3)/SO(3)    invariant
      PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a)                                  76.2     37.8             74.4          ✗
      DGCNN (Wang et al., 2019)                                    78.8     37.4             73.3          ✗
      RI-Conv (Zhang et al., 2019)                                 75.6     75.3             75.5          ✓
      LGR-Net (Zhao et al., 2022)                                  80.0     80.0             80.1          ✓
      Li et al. (w/ TTA) (Li et al., 2021a)                        75.9     75.9             75.9          ✓
      CRIN (Lou et al., 2023)                                      80.5     80.5             80.5          ✓
      Luo et al. (Luo et al., 2022)                                 -       80.9             80.8          ✓
      TFN (Thomas et al., 2018)                                     -       76.8             76.2          ✓
      VN-PointNet (Deng et al., 2021)                               -       72.4             72.8          ✓
      VN-DGCNN (Deng et al., 2021)                                  -       81.4             81.4          ✓
      Method                                                       z/z     z/O(3)         O(3)/O(3)     invariant
      Data augmentation                                            81.9     12.5             78.0          ✗
      Learned frames + scalar messages (ours)                      78.8     78.8             78.8          ✓
      Learned frames + refining frames + scalar messages (ours)    79.0     79.0             79.0          ✓
      Learned frames + tensor messages (ours)                      79.7     79.7             79.7          ✓
      Learned frames + refining frames + tensor messages (ours)    80.2     80.2             80.2          ✓



and 2. For additional experimental results, including experiments on the real-world dataset ScanOb-
jectNN (Uy et al., 2019), see App. D. The model trained with data augmentation has slightly fewer
learnable parameters since the local frames are not learned but chosen randomly for data augmen-
tation (cf. Sec. 4.3). For the normal regression model (with iteratively refined local frames), this
difference amounts to 0.33% (9.1%), for the segmentation model to 0.11% (10.3%) and for classifi-
cation to 0.14% (3.9%).

Table 3: Learned informative local frames and tensorial messages are beneficial. Normal vector
regression on ModelNet40 using adaptations of PointNet++ with learned vs. random local frames
and tensorial vs. scalar messages (without local frame refinement). Tensorial messages significantly
improve the performance. Even with randomly chosen local frames, the model with tensorial mes-
sages outperforms both models with scalar messages.

                           Cosine similarity ↑    tensorial messages      scalar messages
                           learned local frames          0.87                     0.82
                           random local frames           0.84                     0.80


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6    D ISCUSSION
On normal vector regression, our equivariant adaptation
of PointNet++ with tensorial messages achieves state-         2.8 × 10 1
                                                                                          Local canonicalization
of-the-art results. Normal regression is a task in which      2.6 × 10 1
                                                                                          Data augmentation
                                                              2.4 × 10 1


                                                                   cosine similarity error
equivariance is certainly desirable and in which geomet-
                                                              2.2 × 10 1
ric information must be propagated precisely. Thus, ten-        2 × 10 1
sorial message passing proves to be superior over scalar      1.8 × 10 1
messages due to the limitations mentioned in Sec. 4.2         1.6 × 10 1
and Fig. 1. For point cloud segmentation the gain is less
                                                              1.4 × 10 1
significant, indicating that geometric information, e.g. in
the form of characteristic directions, may be less impor-     1.2 × 10 1
tant. In both experiments, the networks that exhibit ex-                 10 2               10 1               100
                                                                              fraction of training data
act equivariance yield substantial improvements over data
augmentation. Moreover, we demonstrate that informa- Figure 4: Data efficiency of built-in
tive local frames are indeed beneficial through an ablation equivariance vs. data augmentation.
study with randomly chosen local frames (see Tab. 3).
We find that the model with tensor messages significantly
outperforms the model with scalar messages (even if the local frames are chosen randomly). This
highlights once more that the tensorial message passing approach enables to communicate geometric
information more reliably.
Since equivariant methods do neither “waste” data nor network capacity to perform well on different
input orientations, they are often said to be more data efficient (Batzner et al., 2022), meaning that
they improve faster as more data becomes available (Hestness et al., 2017). We have trained a series
of networks on normal regression (as in Sec. 5) with the same architecture but different fractions
of the training data. According to (Hestness et al., 2017), the error rate as function of the training
set size typically takes the form of a power-law. Indeed, in the log-log plot (test cosine similarity
error vs. fraction of training data, Fig. 4) the equivariant approach shows a steeper slope, indicating
better data efficiency than the same model trained with data augmentation. However, perhaps sur-
prisingly, the error rate is not necessarily smaller for all dataset sizes, meaning that in some cases,
purely in terms of accuracy, data augmentation may be favorable over built-in equivariance. This
result connects to recent research studying the effects of learning approximate symmetries (Langer
et al., 2024) and the question whether equivariance verifiably improves the scaling of neural net-
works (Brehmer et al., 2024). We see this as an advantage of our framework, which allows parallel
development of an exact equivariant model and an equally well-engineered non-equivariant baseline
trained via data augmentation.

7    C ONCLUSION
This work introduces a novel message passing formalism, which together with local canonicaliza-
tion forms a framework for building O(d)-equivariant message passing architectures. We provide
a well-motivated formalism through which existing non-equivariant networks can be adapted to be
equivariant. The presented approach can be integrated straightforwardly with any existing message
passing architecture. One the one hand, our approach provides a new perspective contrary to most
existing approaches for exact equivariance, which do not use local frames but specialized tenso-
rial operations. On the other hand, our method offers a strict generalization of approaches that do
achieve equivariance based on local canonicalization. We demonstrate that local canonicalization
paired with tensorial messages can significantly improve the performance compared to methods that
use local canonicalization without tensorial messages. Our framework can be used as a drop-in re-
placement for data augmentation to achieve exact, built-in equivariance and allows for a direct and
fair comparison between the two approaches. As such, our approach opens up a new possibility
for evaluating the efficacy of equivariance as a model prior on numerous geometric machine learn-
ing tasks. Based on the broad applicability of our formalism, we hope to inspire researchers and
practitioners alike to utilize this approach in many different architectures in various domains.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the Klaus Tschira Stiftung gGmbH (SIMPLAIX project P4) and by
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy EXC-2181/1 -
390900948 (the Heidelberg STRUCTURES Excellence Cluster) as well as under project number
240245660 - SFB 1129.

R EFERENCES
Justin Baker, Shih-Hsin Wang, Tommaso de Fernex, and Bao Wang. An explicit frame construction
  for normalizing 3D point clouds. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.

Ilyes Batatia, David P Kovacs, Gregor Simm, Christoph Ortner, and Gábor Csányi. MACE: Higher
   order equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields. Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:11423–11436, 2022.

Simon Batzner, Albert Musaelian, Lixin Sun, Mario Geiger, Jonathan P Mailoa, Mordechai Korn-
  bluth, Nicola Molinari, Tess E Smidt, and Boris Kozinsky. E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks
  for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature communications, 13(1):2453, 2022.

Johannes Brandstetter, Rob Hesselink, Elise van der Pol, Erik J Bekkers, and Max Welling. Geomet-
  ric and physical quantities improve E(3) equivariant message passing. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  _xwr8gOBeV1.

Johann Brehmer, Sönke Behrends, Pim de Haan, and Taco Cohen. Does equivariance matter at
  scale? arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.23179, 2024.

Taco Cohen, Maurice Weiler, Berkay Kicanaoglu, and Max Welling. Gauge equivariant convolu-
  tional networks and the icosahedral cnn. In International conference on Machine learning, pp.
  1321–1330. PMLR, 2019.

Congyue Deng, Or Litany, Yueqi Duan, Adrien Poulenard, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Leonidas J
  Guibas. Vector neurons: A general framework for SO(3)-equivariant networks. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 12200–12209, 2021.

Weitao Du, He Zhang, Yuanqi Du, Qi Meng, Wei Chen, Nanning Zheng, Bin Shao, and Tie-Yan Liu.
 SE(3) equivariant graph neural networks with complete local frames. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 5583–5608. PMLR, 2022.

Yuanqi Du, Limei Wang, Dieqiao Feng, Guifeng Wang, Shuiwang Ji, Carla P Gomes, Zhi-Ming
  Ma, et al. A new perspective on building efficient and expressive 3D equivariant graph neural
  networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Alexandre Duval, Simon V Mathis, Chaitanya K Joshi, Victor Schmidt, Santiago Miret,
  Fragkiskos D Malliaros, Taco Cohen, Pietro Lio, Yoshua Bengio, and Michael Bronstein. A
  hitchhiker’s guide to geometric gnns for 3D atomic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07511,
  2023.

Thorben Frank, Oliver Unke, and Klaus-Robert Müller. So3krates: Equivariant attention for interac-
  tions on arbitrary length-scales in molecular systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:29400–29413, 2022.

Xiang Fu, Zhenghao Wu, Wujie Wang, Tian Xie, Sinan Keten, Rafael Gomez-Bombarelli, and
  Tommi Jaakkola. Forces are not enough: Benchmark and critical evaluation for machine learning
  force fields with molecular simulations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07237, 2022.

Fabian Fuchs, Daniel Worrall, Volker Fischer, and Max Welling. SE(3)-transformers: 3D roto-
  translation equivariant attention networks. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:1970–1981, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Johannes Gasteiger, Janek Groß, and Stephan Günnemann. Directional message passing for molec-
  ular graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=B1eWbxStPH.

Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
  Md Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable,
  empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.

Nadir Jeevanjee. An introduction to tensors and group theory for physicists. Springer, 2011.

Sékou-Oumar Kaba, Arnab Kumar Mondal, Yan Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh.
   Equivariance with learned canonicalization functions. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pp. 15546–15566. PMLR, 2023.

Marcel F Langer, Sergey N Pozdnyakov, and Michele Ceriotti. Probing the effects of broken sym-
 metries in machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17747, 2024.

Feiran Li, Kent Fujiwara, Fumio Okura, and Yasuyuki Matsushita. A closer look at rotation-invariant
  deep point cloud analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, pp. 16218–16227, 2021a.

Xianzhi Li, Ruihui Li, Guangyong Chen, Chi-Wing Fu, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Pheng-Ann Heng. A
  rotation-invariant framework for deep point cloud analysis. IEEE transactions on visualization
  and computer graphics, 28(12):4503–4514, 2021b.

Yi-Lun Liao, Brandon M Wood, Abhishek Das, and Tess Smidt. EquiformerV2: Improved equivari-
  ant transformer for scaling to higher-degree representations. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  mCOBKZmrzD.

Yongcheng Liu, Bin Fan, Shiming Xiang, and Chunhong Pan. Relation-shape convolutional neural
  network for point cloud analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 8895–8904, 2019.

Yujing Lou, Zelin Ye, Yang You, Nianjuan Jiang, Jiangbo Lu, Weiming Wang, Lizhuang Ma, and
  Cewu Lu. Crin: rotation-invariant point cloud analysis and rotation estimation via centrifugal
  reference frame. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37,
  pp. 1817–1825, 2023.

Shitong Luo, Jiahan Li, Jiaqi Guan, Yufeng Su, Chaoran Cheng, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. Equiv-
  ariant point cloud analysis via learning orientations for message passing. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18932–18941, 2022.

Albert Musaelian, Simon Batzner, Anders Johansson, Lixin Sun, Cameron J Owen, Mordechai Ko-
  rnbluth, and Boris Kozinsky. Learning local equivariant representations for large-scale atomistic
  dynamics. Nature Communications, 14(1):579, 2023.

Saro Passaro and C Lawrence Zitnick. Reducing SO(3) convolutions to SO(2) for efficient equivari-
  ant gnns. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27420–27438. PMLR, 2023.

Omri Puny, Matan Atzmon, Heli Ben-Hamu, Ishan Misra, Aditya Grover, Edward J Smith, and
 Yaron Lipman. Frame averaging for invariant and equivariant network design. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2110.03336, 2021.

Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017a.

Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical fea-
  ture learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017b.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roman Remme, Tobias Kaczun, Maximilian Scheurer, Andreas Dreuw, and Fred A Hamprecht. Ki-
  neticnet: Deep learning a transferable kinetic energy functional for orbital-free density functional
  theory. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 159(14), 2023.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceed-
  ings, part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural net-
  works. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9323–9332. PMLR, 2021.
Kristof T Schütt, Huziel E Sauceda, P-J Kindermans, Alexandre Tkatchenko, and K-R Müller.
  Schnet–a deep learning architecture for molecules and materials. The Journal of Chemical
  Physics, 148(24), 2018.
Guillem Simeon and Gianni De Fabritiis. Tensornet: Cartesian tensor representations for efficient
  learning of molecular potentials. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Nathaniel Thomas, Tess Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick
  Riley. Tensor field networks: Rotation-and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3d point
  clouds. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08219, 2018.
Mikaela Angelina Uy, Quang-Hieu Pham, Binh-Son Hua, Thanh Nguyen, and Sai-Kit Yeung. Revis-
 iting point cloud classification: A new benchmark dataset and classification model on real-world
 data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 1588–
 1597, 2019.
Xiyuan Wang and Muhan Zhang. Graph neural network with local frame for molecular potential
  energy surface. In Learning on Graphs Conference, pp. 19–1. PMLR, 2022.
Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E Sarma, Michael M Bronstein, and Justin M Solomon.
  Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds. ACM Transactions on Graphics (tog), 38(5):
  1–12, 2019.
Maurice Weiler, Mario Geiger, Max Welling, Wouter Boomsma, and Taco S Cohen. 3D steerable
 cnns: Learning rotationally equivariant features in volumetric data. Advances in Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Linguang Zhang, Xiaoou Tang, and Jianxiong
  Xiao. 3D shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1912–1920, 2015.
Li Yi, Vladimir G Kim, Duygu Ceylan, I-Chao Shen, Mengyan Yan, Hao Su, Cewu Lu, Qixing
  Huang, Alla Sheffer, and Leonidas Guibas. A scalable active framework for region annotation in
  3D shape collections. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 35(6):1–12, 2016.
Zhiyuan Zhang, Binh-Son Hua, David W. Rosen, and Sai-Kit Yeung. Rotation invariant convolutions
  for 3D point clouds deep learning. In 2019 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp.
  204–213, 2019. doi: 10.1109/3DV.2019.00031.
Zhiyuan Zhang, Binh-Son Hua, Wei Chen, Yibin Tian, and Sai-Kit Yeung. Global context aware
  convolutions for 3D point cloud understanding. In 2020 International Conference on 3D Vision
  (3DV), pp. 210–219. IEEE, 2020.
Chen Zhao, Jiaqi Yang, Xin Xiong, Angfan Zhu, Zhiguo Cao, and Xin Li. Rotation invariant point
  cloud analysis: Where local geometry meets global topology. Pattern Recognition, 127:108626,
  2022.
Yongheng Zhao, Tolga Birdal, Jan Eric Lenssen, Emanuele Menegatti, Leonidas Guibas, and Fed-
  erico Tombari. Quaternion equivariant capsule networks for 3D point clouds. In European con-
  ference on computer vision, pp. 1–19. Springer, 2020.
Larry Zitnick, Abhishek Das, Adeesh Kolluru, Janice Lan, Muhammed Shuaibi, Anuroop Sriram,
  Zachary Ulissi, and Brandon Wood. Spherical channels for modeling atomic interactions. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8054–8067, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    T ENSOR REPRESENTATION
The tensor representation is introduced in Eq. 2. The tensor representation is a group representation
of O(d) and is used in this paper to define the transformation behavior of the tensorial objects in the
tensorial message passing.

Proof representation property. The representation property follows from the fact that the 3 × 3
matrices are a representation. For any R1 , R2 ∈ O(d) we have
          [ρ(R1 )ρ(R2 )T ]i1 ...in = R1,i1 k1 ... R1,in kn R2,k1 j1 ... R2,kn jn Tj1 ...jn
                                   = [R1 R2 ]i1 j1 ... [R1 R2 ]in jn Tj1 ...jn = [ρ(R1 R2 )T ]i1 ...in   (16)
The pseudo-vector representation is also a representation, which can be shown similarly by using
that the determinant is multiplicative: det(AB) = det A det B.

Representation hidden features. The input and output representations are determined by the in-
put data and the prediction task. Contrarily, the internal representations are chosen as hyperparam-
eters. In our framework, we choose a direct sum of tensor representations, which again forms a
representation. A feature f will transform under ρf = ρ1 ⊕ ... ⊕ ρk with a block diagonal matrix:
                                                                 
                                             ρ1 (R)
                               ρf (R)f = 
                                                      ..         f
                                                                  
                                                                                                 (17)
                                                          .
                                                            ρk (R)
So that the composition of scalar, vectorial and tensorial features can be chosen freely. The feature
dimension of f will be given by dim(f ) = dim(ρ1 ) + ... + dim(ρk ).

B    L EARNING LOCAL FRAMES
Learning the local frames is an essential part of the proposed architecture, therefore we present some
further considerations for predicting local frames in an O(3) equivariant way.
As described in Sec. 4.1, for each node i one predicts two vectors vi,1 and vi,2 by summing over the
relative positions of adjacent nodes, weighted by the output of an MLP and an envelope function ω.
The envelope function, adapted from (Gasteiger et al., 2020), is given by
               (                   p                   p+1                  p+2
                      (p+1)(p+2) rij                  rij        p(p+1) rij
    w(rij ) =    1 −      2       r c
                                        +  p(p + 2)   r c
                                                              −     2      rc        rij < rc  (18)
                                                 0                                   rij ≥ rc
and ensures a smooth transition at the cutoff radius rc of the local neighborhood. Here, rij =
∥xj − xi ∥ is the relative distance between the nodes. The parameter p is chosen to be 5 for all
experiments presented in this paper. Afterwards, the two vectors vi,1 , vi,2 are used to construct two
orthonormal vectors ni,1 , ni,2 using the Gram-Schmidt procedure:
                                             vi,1
                                    ni,1 =                                                        (19)
                                            ∥vi,1 ∥
                                    n′i,2 = vi,2 − (ni,1 · vi,2 ) ni,1                            (20)
                                                n′i,2
                                      ni,2 =                                                             (21)
                                                n′i,2
The third vector is chosen to point in the same half-space as the local center of mass to ensure an
O(3)-equivariant construction. The estimate of the direction to the local center of mass is smoothed
using the same envelope function ω.

             ni,1 × ni,2 if (ni,1 × ni,2 ) · r̄ ≥ 0                   X
    ni,3 =                                             , with r̄ :=         ω(rij )(xj − xi ), (22)
             −ni,1 × ni,2                else
                                                                             j∈N (i)

The third vector may not be learned. If one constrains the local coordinate frames to be orthonormal,
the third vector is defined up to its sign; and predicting this sign is a non-differentiable operation.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our experiments have shown that orthonormal frames, which are associated with O(3) transforma-
tions, are favorable and that a relaxation of the normalization or orthogonality of the basis vectors
decreases the performance of the models.
It is worth mentioning that despite the smooth envelope function canonical frames can never be
fully continuous, e.g. in highly symmetric cases. In the unlikely case, that v1 and v2 are parallel we
sample the direction of v2 randomly.
Lastly, let us briefly show that our prediction of local frames is indeed equivariant, meaning that they
transform consistently as the input point cloud is flipped or rotated. That is, we need to show that
ni,k → n′i,k = R̂ni,k under any global transformation R̂ ∈ O(3). Clearly, vi,1 and vi,2 transform
                     ′
like vectors, i.e. vi,k  = R̂vi,k for k = 1, 2, since they are constructed as a weighted sum of node
positions (cf. Eq. (4)). The same holds true for r̄ and for the two basis vectors ni,1 and ni,2 . As a
consequence, the third basis vector ni,3 transforms as

                       ′      (Rni,1 ) × (Rni,2 ) if        (Rni,1 ) × (Rni,2 ) · Rr̄ > 0
            ni,3 → ni,3 =                                                                           (23)
                              −(Rni,1 ) × (Rni,2 )                  else

                                det(R)(ni,1 × ni,2 ) if det(R)(ni,1 × ni,2 ) · r̄ > 0
                          =R                                                                        (24)
                                − det(R)(ni,1 × ni,2 )                   else
                       = Rni,3 ,                                                                   (25)
since (Rv) × (Rw) = det(R)R(v × w).

C    E QUIVARIANT P OINT N ET ++ USING OUR FRAMEWORK
PointNet++ is a widely-used architecture for point cloud tasks. It combines an encoder that itera-
tively down samples the point cloud with a decoder with upsampling (Qi et al., 2017b). Each layer
in the encoder consists of the following steps:

      1. Use furthest point sampling to sample a subset of equally spaced nodes N (k) .
      2. For each node i in N (k) generate its neighborhood N (i) by finding all nodes within a
                           (k)
         specified radius rmax .
      3. Send and aggregate messages from all neighbors according to:

                                  (k,enc)             (k−1,enc)
                                 fi       = max ϕ fj            , xj − xi ,                (26)
                                             j∈N (i)

         with the channel-wise maximum as an aggregation function.
      4. Continue with the next layer, but keep only the nodes N (k) .
Since Eq. (26) follows precisely the form of Eq. (12), the message passing formula can easily be
adapted to our formalism by

                    (k,enc)                          (k−1,enc)
                   fi       = max ϕ ρf (Ri Rj−1 )fj            , Ri (xj − xi ) ,            (27)
                                j∈N (i)

where Ri is the local frame of node i and ρf (gi gj−1 ) the representation under which the node features
are transformed from the local frame of node j into the one at node i. We further refine the messages
by splitting the edge vectors Ri (xj − xi ) into a radial and an angular embedding. For the angular
embedding, we simply use the normalized direction. For the norm of the edge vector, we use a
Gaussian embedding, with k Gaussians-like functions, with means µk equidistantly spaced in the
interval [0, rmax ] and standard deviation σk so that adjacent Gaussians intersect at a function value
of 0.5:
                                                   (∥xj − xi ∥ − µk )2

                                (r̃ij )k = exp −                                                    (28)
                                                             2σk2
The complete, invariant message passing step reads

                 (k,enc)                      −1 (k−1,enc)              xj − xi
                fi       = max ϕ ρf (Ri Rj )fj             , r̃ij , Ri              .              (29)
                          j∈N (i)                                      ∥xj − xi ∥


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


If the task requires one output for the entire point cloud, the node features at the nodes, remaining
                       ∗
after the encoder N (k ) , are pooled into one global feature. The node and the local frame to which
one sends all these messages is the one that is closest to the center of mass of the point cloud, i.e.:
                                                                X        . X
                           ı̂ = arg max ∥xi − x̄∥ with x̄ :=          xi           1                (30)
                               i∈N (k∗ )
                                                                       i∈N (k∗ )         i∈N (k∗ )

                                                          (k    ,enc)                  xj − xı̂
                  fglobal = max ϕ          ρf (Rı̂ Rj−1 )fj max       , r̃ı̂j , Rı̂                     (31)
                             j∈Nı̂                                                    ∥xj − xı̂ ∥
Finally, the global features may be passed through an MLP to generate the output of the invariant
message passing part of our architecture.
If the task requires one output per node in the input point cloud, one must upsample the nodes again
after the encoder. To do this, one caches the positions and features of the nodes of the encoder layers
and iteratively applies the following steps in the decoder:

      1. Let the input nodes to that layer be N (k) . The features at these nodes are interpolated
         to the node features of the larger subset N (k−1) (reversing the subsampling of the encoder
         layers): For that, one finds for each node i ∈ N (k−1) its three closest neighbors in N (k) (let
         us denote their set by NN3 (i)) and interpolates their features by inverse distance weighting:
                                                            −1                (k,dec)
                                                               ρf (Ri Rj−1 ) fj
                                    P
                                       j∈NN3 (i) ∥xj − xi ∥
                             hi =              P                      −1              .             (32)
                                                  j∈NN3 (i) ∥xj − xi ∥

      2. The interpolated features hi are then concatenated with the node features at the k − 1-th
         layer of the encoder and embedded in an MLP to obtain the updated and upsampled node
         features:

                                    (k−1,dec)               (k−1,enc)
                                   fi         = MLP hi , fi             ,                     (33)

         which practically implements a skip connection between the activations in the encoder and
         the decoder. Note that the decoder features are counted backward in k.
      3. Continue with the next layer with the set of nodes given by N (k−1) .

Finally, the node features, back at the level of the input nodes, are brought into the desired output
dimension by one last MLP layer, before they are transformed into the global frame of reference to
obtain an equivariant prediction.

D    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
Classification on ModelNet40. As another experiment, we trained a set of models on the clas-
sification task on ModelNet40 (with variants as for normal regression). Classification requires a
global output at the point cloud level so we use only the encoder of PointNet++ architecture (as
described in App. C). The results of this experiment can be found in Tab. 4. Considering full O(3)-
equivariance, we find that the models with tensorial message passing outperform the corresponding
model trained with data augmentation and scalar message passing. As for the other experiments, the
best-performing model is the one with local frames that are learned and iteratively refined. While
our adaptations of the fairly simple PointNet++ architecture do not yield state-of-the-art results in
this task, our approach boosts PointNet++ to still be competitive.

Evaluation runtimes. To compare the impact of our proposed message passing formalism on the
evaluation time, we measured the interference times of the trained models on the normal vector
regression tasks. The results of this ablation can be found in Tab. 5.

Classification on real-world dataset ScanObjectNN. To provide experimental evidence that our
framework similarly prevails on a real-world dataset, we conducted a series of experiments on the
ScanObjectNN dataset (Uy et al., 2019) (model variants and evaluation setup exactly as in the clas-
sification task on ModelNet40). The dataset contains scanned indoor scene data subject to realistic


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Classification accuracies on ModelNet40. Our equivariant adaptation of PointNet++ (Qi
et al., 2017b) produces superior results over the vanilla PointNet++ (with training and evaluation
setups as in Tab. 1). Results of related works are based on the original papers and on (Luo et al.,
2022; Lou et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2021).

      Method                                                      z/z    z/SO(3)     SO(3)/SO(3)    invariant
      PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a)                                 85.9    19.6          74.7           ✗
      RS-CNN (Liu et al., 2019)                                   90.3    48.7          82.6           ✗
      DGCNN (Wang et al., 2019)                                   90.3    33.8          88.6           ✗
      RI-Conv (Zhang et al., 2019)                                86.5    86.4           86.4          ✓
      GC-Conv (Zhang et al., 2020)                                89.0    89.1           89.2          ✓
      Luo et al. DGCNN (Luo et al., 2022)                         88.4    88.4           88.9          ✓
      LGR-Net (Zhao et al., 2022)                                 90.9    90.9           91.1          ✓
      Li et al. (w/ TTA) (Li et al., 2021a)                       91.6    91.6           91.6          ✓
      CRIN (Lou et al., 2023)                                     91.8    91.8           91.8          ✓
      TFN (Thomas et al., 2018)                                   88.5    85.3           87.6          ✓
      VN-PointNet (Deng et al., 2021)                             77.5    77.5           77.2          ✓
      VN-DGCNN (Deng et al., 2021)                                89.5    89.5           90.2          ✓
      Method                                                      z/z    z/O(3)       O(3)/O(3)     invariant
      Data augmentation                                           89.6    16.8          86.6           ✗
      Learned frames + scalar messages (ours)                     86.7    86.7          86.7           ✓
      Learned frames + refining frames + scalar messages (ours)   87.3    87.3          87.3           ✓
      Learned frames + tensor messages (ours)                     88.0    88.0          88.0           ✓
      Learned frames + refining frames + tensor messages (ours)   88.7    88.7          88.7           ✓


Table 5: Evaluation runtimes. Average runtime for a single sample on normal vector regression
(executed on one NVIDIA A100). Standard deviations are based on 10 loops over the test set. The
first model achieves the best accuracy and is exactly equivariant, but the runtime of data augmenta-
tion is 32% faster.

             Method                                                              evaluation runtime
             Learned frames + refining frames + tensor messages                    (0.25 ± 0.07)s
             Learned frames + tensor messages                                      (0.22 ± 0.06)s
             Random frames + tensor messages                                       (0.21 ± 0.06)s
             Learned frames + scalar messages                                      (0.20 ± 0.06)s
             Random frames + scalar messages                                       (0.18 ± 0.06)s
             Data augmentation                                                     (0.17 ± 0.06)s


measurement noise and includes deformable objects (e.g. the bag class) and multi-body objects (e.g.
a shelf with objects in it). The results of these experiment can be found in Tab. 6. While our adap-
tation of the PointNet++ architecture is not state-of-the-art, we find that our proposed framework is
consistently better in the O(3)/O(3) setup than data augmentation. Furthermore, tensorial messages
substantially outperform the networks using scalar message passing.

Robustness to noise. To assess the robustness of our approach to noisy inputs, we evaluated both
the robustness of the overall architecture and the robustness of the local frame estimation (as de-
scribed in Sec. 4.1. We evaluated our best-performing models for normal regression and segmen-
tation tasks (learned frames + refining frames + tensor messages) and added Gaussian noise of
varying scale σ to the node positions (and input point normals for ShapeNet). Furthermore, we have
re-trained the two models with input jitter during training (and otherwise identical settings) to study
how well these models would learn robustness to noise. For ShapeNet, we find that both models
are relatively robust. The segmentation quality (measured by the intersection over union) does not
decrease significantly for noise scales up to the average neighbor distance in the dataset (Fig. 5a).
Unsurprisingly, the model trained with noisy inputs is slightly more robust. Qualitatively, the mod-
els trained on normal regression display the same behavior (Fig. 5b), though in this case the cosine
similarity between predicted and ground truth normals drops faster as one increases the noise level
(especially for the model trained without noise). We suspect the following reason: the targets in
the normal regression dataset are obtained from mesh representations of the CAD models. Without
any noise the model may learn to estimate the these normals most accurately by fitting planes very


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Classification accuracies on ScanObjectNN. Our equivariant adaptation of Point-
Net++ (Qi et al., 2017b) produces superior results over the vanilla PointNet++ (with training and
evaluation setups as in Tab. 1). Results of related works are based on the original papers and on (Lou
et al., 2023).

 Method                                                       no augm.   no augm./SO(3)   SO(3)/SO(3)   invariant
 PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a)                                    79.4          16.7           54.7          ✗
 DGCNN (Wang et al., 2019)                                      87.3          17.7           71.8          ✗
 RI-Conv (Zhang et al., 2019)                                    -           78.4             78.1         ✓
 LGR-Net (Zhao et al., 2022)                                     -           81.2             81.4         ✓
 Li et al. (w/ TTA) (Li et al., 2021a)                          86.7         86.7             86.7         ✓
 CRIN (Lou et al., 2023)                                        84.7         84.7             84.7         ✓
 Method                                                         z/z         z/O(3)         O(3)/O(3)    invariant
 Data augmentation                                              87.0          13.3           70.3          ✗
 Learned frames + scalar messages (ours)                        71.9          71.9           71.9          ✓
 Learned frames + refining frames + scalar messages (ours)      73.7          73.7           73.7          ✓
 Learned frames + tensor messages (ours)                        79.8          79.8           79.8          ✓
 Learned frames + refining frames + tensor messages (ours)      81.0          81.0           81.0          ✓



locally (to estimate normals from a triangular mesh). Such a very local normal estimation is very
much susceptible to noise. The robustness of the local frames is assessed in the following way: for
a given input point cloud, estimate the local frames with and without input noise, denoted by Ri and
R̃i at node i respectively. Then, average the Frobenius norm ∥Ri − R̃i ∥F over all nodes. Further, we
compute the average cosine similarity for the normalized coordinate vectors Ri,k · R̃i,k to investigate
the stability of each coordinate axis under noise. For ShapeNet, the local frame estimation is equally
robust in both cases. The cosine similarity of the individual coordinate axes is very informative. The
first coordinate axis is most robust to noise, indicating that the model learns to (equivariantly) iden-
tify a geometrically important direction and predicts it robustly. It is not a coincidence that this axis
is the coordinate first axis. The model uses this axis from the most prominent direction, since it will
not be changed in the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization (cf. Sec. 4.1). The other coordinate axes are
much more likely to be degenerate due to symmetries (e.g. if points locally form a plane or a perfect
sphere). Still, the second axis seems to be often geometrically informative and is robustly estimated
in these cases. Figure 5f shows that the robustness of the second component can be improved for
normal regression by training with noisy samples. The second and the third component of the local
frame are constrained by the orthogonality. Consequently, the deviations from the first (and second)
component add up during the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization, making component two and three
less robust.

PCA-based local frames. We re-trained our best-performing model on all tasks, replacing the
learned local frames with local frames computed using local Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
(with the same radial cutoff).
Local cutoff PCA computes a local reference frame for each point i in a point cloud by analyzing
the spatial distribution of its neighbors within a defined cutoff radius (N (i) = {j : ∥xi − xj ∥2 }).
        Pnode i the local frame is given by the eigenvectors ei,k , k = 1, 2, 3 of the local covariance
For each,
matrix j∈N (i) (xi − xj )(xi − xj )T . The sign of the eigenvectors is fixed by demanding that
P
   j∈N (i) ei,k · (xi − xj ) > 0. The resulting ei,k , k = 1, 2, 3 are O(3)-equivariant and define an
orthonormal frame (the extension to O(d) is trivial).
For the classification task, we observed that PCA-based local frames provided a slight improvement
in accuracy compared to the learned frames (88.9 vs. 88.7). Regarding segmentation on ShapeNet,
both models achieve the same IOU metric of 80.2. For the normal regression task, the learned
and iteratively refined local frames demonstrate superior performance, achieving a higher cosine
similarity (0.88 vs. 0.87).
We would like to highlight the flexibility in the choice of local frames as a strength of our formalism.
Depending on the task and the structure of the input, different equivariant local frames can be supe-
rior and our framework can be readily applied to all equivariant estimators of rule-based or learned
local frames.


                                                         18
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 85                                   trained without jitter                                            1.0                                   trained without jitter
                                                                                      trained with jitter                                                                                     trained with jitter
                                                 80


                                                                                                                Normal cosine similarity
                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                                                 75
                                                 70                                                                                                     0.6
              IOU


                                                 65
                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                 60
                                                 55                                                                                                     0.2
                                                 50
                                                       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00                                                            0.0   0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0     1.2     1.4
                                                       Noise scale relative to average neighbor distance                                                      Noise scale relative to average neighbor distance
                                                                   (a) Segmentation IoU                                                                                    (b) Normals similarity



                                     2.00                    trained without jitter
Frobenius distance of local frames


                                                                                                                Frobenius distance of local frames
                                                             trained with jitter
                                     1.75                                                                                                               2.0
                                     1.50
                                     1.25                                                                                                               1.5
                                     1.00
                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                                     0.75
                                     0.50                                                                                                               0.5
                                     0.25                                                                                                                                                     trained without jitter
                                     0.00                                                                                                               0.0                                   trained with jitter
                                                       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00                                                            0.0   0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0     1.2     1.4
                                                       Noise scale relative to average neighbor distance                                                      Noise scale relative to average neighbor distance
                                     (c) Segmentation local frames Forbenius distance                                                                     (d) Normals local frames Forbenius distance



                                                 1.0                                                                                                    1.0                                         axis 0 w/o jitter
         Cosine similarity of local frame axes


                                                                                                                Cosine similarity of local frame axes


                                                                                                                                                                                                    axis 1 w/o jitter
                                                                                                                                                                                                    axis 2 w/o jitter
                                                 0.8                                                                                                    0.8                                         axis 0 w/ jitter
                                                                                                                                                                                                    axis 1 w/ jitter
                                                 0.6                                                                                                    0.6                                         axis 2 w/ jitter

                                                 0.4         axis 0 w/o jitter                                                                          0.4
                                                             axis 1 w/o jitter
                                                             axis 2 w/o jitter
                                                 0.2         axis 0 w/ jitter                                                                           0.2
                                                             axis 1 w/ jitter
                                                 0.0         axis 2 w/ jitter                                                                           0.0
                                                       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00                                                            0.0   0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0     1.2     1.4
                                                       Noise scale relative to average neighbor distance                                                      Noise scale relative to average neighbor distance
                               (e) Segmentation local frames component distance                                                                          (f) Normals local frames component distance

     Figure 5: Robustness analysis on model performance and local frame estimation. Best-
     performing models using our framework (learned frames + refining frames + tensor messages)
     trained with and without input jitter and evaluated on data of varying noise scale. Unsurprisingly, the
     models trained with jitter are more robust, showing that, in our framework, robustness to noise can
     be learned from noisy data. The coordinate axes of the local frames are compared against predic-
     tions without noise. The first coordinate axis (preserved by Gram-Schmidt) carries most geometric
     information and is most robust. The second and third coordinate axis may be degenerate in sym-
     metric cases and are consequently less robust. Furthermore, the latter axes also inherit perturbations
     from the first (and second) axis through the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization.



                                                                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
The normal vector regression and the classification experiments are conducted on the
ModelNet40 dataset (Wu et al., 2015).              In particular, we use the resampled version
available at https://shapenet.cs.stanford.edu/media/modelnet40_normal_
resampled.zip, which includes normal vectors for each point in the point cloud. We use the
first 1024 points based on the ordering provided in this version of the dataset and normalize the point
clouds to fit in the unit sphere. The ordering is based on furthest point sampling to evenly cover the
surface of the 3D shapes.
The segmentation experiments are conducted on the ShapeNet dataset (Yi et al., 2016). The dataset
consists of about 17,000 3D shape point clouds (2048 points and normal vectors each) from 16
shape categories. Each category is annotated with 2 to 6 parts. In total, there are 50 different
semantic classes that must be distinguished during the segmentation.

Hyperparameter choices.       The hyperparameters chosen for our two main experiments are listed
in Tab. 7.
Table 7: Hyperparameter choices. The main hyperparameter choices for our models in the clas-
sification and normal vector regression task. Label smoothing only applies to the classification and
segmentation models. For the classification task on ScanObjectNN we only trained for 500 epochs.

                              normal vector regression     classification    segmentation
          optimizer                   AdamW                 AdamW              AdamW
          weight decay                  5e-4                  0.05               1e-3
          learning rate                2.5e-3                 1e-3               0.05
          scheduler                  Cosine-LR             Cosine-LR          Cosine-LR
          epochs                        800                 800 / 500             800
          warm up epochs                 10                    10                  10
          gradient clip                  0.5                   0.5                0.5
          label smoothing               N.A.                   0.3                0.3
          loss                        L1-loss             Cross-Entropy      Cross-Entropy


Architectural design.     The architectures used in our experiment can be summarized using the
following short-hand:
       • Encoding layer: E(in rep., [hidden layers], neighborhood radius, subsampling fraction)
         see Eq. (29)
       • Decoding layer: D(in rep., [hidden layers]) see Eq. (33)
       • MLP: MLP(in rep., [hidden layers], out rep.)
       • Output layer: O(in rep., [hidden layers], out rep., dropout) see Eq. (31)
Furthermore, we define the following notation to specify the feature representation used during
message passing: The feature representations are a direct sum of tensor and pseudotensor repre-
sentations. A representation is characterized by its order (i.e. the number of indices, cf. 3) and its
behavior under parity (n for tensors and p for pseudotensors). Furthermore, we specify the mul-
tiplicities, that is, how often each representation appears in a direct sum representation. To give
an example, the representation denoted as 8x0p+4x1n is the direct sum of 8 pseudoscalars and 4
vectors.
The architecture used for normal vector regression is described in Tab. 8. The number of Gaussian-
like functions in the radial embedding is set to 64. The architecture used for classification is de-
scribed in Tab. 10. The architecture used for the segmentation of the ShapeNet dataset is described
in Tab. 9. For these two experiments, the number of Gaussian-like functions in the radial embedding
is set to 16. The MLP used in the prediction of the local frames (according to Eq. (4)) has two hidden
layers of dimensions (128, 128) for normal regression and (64, 32) for classification and segmenta-
tion. For the iterative refinement of the local frames (Sec. 4.3.1) after each message passing layer
we use for all experiments MLPs with hidden dimensions (64, 32).


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


All fully connected linear layers are followed by batch normalization except the MLP in the output
layer, where we do not use any normalization. As activation function, we use the SiLU function.

                   Table 8: Architecture of the normal vector regression model.

   Layer number      Layer
               1     E(0x0n, [64], 0.2, 1.0)
               2     E(64x0n+16x0p+16x1n+4x1p+4x2n+1x2p, [64], 0.2, 1.0)
               3     E(64x0n+16x0p+16x1n+4x1p+4x2n+1x2p, [128], 0.2, 0.2)
               4     E(128x0n+32x0p+32x1n+8x1p+8x2n+2x2p, [256], 0.5, 0.25)
               5     E(256x0n+64x0p+64x1n+16x1p+16x2n+4x2p, [512], 0.8, 0.35)
               6     E(512x0n+128x0p+128x1n+32x1p+32x2n+8x2p, [512], 1.4, 0.5)
               7     D(512x0n+128x0p+128x1n+32x1p+32x2n+8x2p, [512])
               8     D(512x0n+128x0p+128x1n+32x1p+32x2n+8x2p, [256])
               9     D(256x0n+64x0p+64x1n+16x1p+16x2n+4x2p, [128])
              10     D(128x0n+32x0p+32x1n+8x1p+8x2n+2x2p, [128])
              11     D(64x0n+16x0p+16x1n+4x1p+4x2n+1x2p, [64])
              12     D(64x0n+16x0p+16x1n+4x1p+4x2n+1x2p, [64])
              13     MLP(64x0n+16x0p+16x1n+4x1p+4x2n+1x2p, [128, 64, 32], 1x1n)


                        Table 9: Architecture of the segmentation model.

                Layer number       Layer
                              1    E(1x1n, [64], 0.2, 0.25)
                              2    E(64x0n+16x1n+4x2n, [128], 0.4, 0.25)
                              4    E(128x0n+32x1n+8x2n, [256], 0.8, 0.25)
                              5    E(256x0n+64x1n+16x2n, [512], 1.6, 0.25)
                              6    D(512x0n+128x1n+32x2n, [512])
                              7    D(256x0n+64x1n+16x2n, [256])
                              8    D(128x0n+32x1n+8x2n, [128])
                              9    D(64x0n+16x1n+4x2n, [64])
                             10    MLP(64x0n+16x1n+4x2n, [128, 64], 50x0n)


                        Table 10: Architecture of the classification model.

              Layer number        Layer
                             1    E(0x0, [64, 128], 0.2, 0.33)
                             2    E(96x0n+32x1n, [128, 256], 0.8, 0.33)
                             3    E(192x0n+64x1n, [256, 512], 1.4, 0.33)
                             5    O(384x0n+128x1n, [512, 256, 128], 40x0n, 0.5)


Hardware and train times. The training of the equivariant learned frames + refining frames +
tensor messages model for the normal vector regression task took 46h on a single NVIDIA A100
GPU (CPU: 2 x 32-Core Epyc 7452). The training of the data-augmented model took 19h on the
same machine. The best-performing equivariant classification model (learned frames + refining
frames + tensor messages) was trained for 20h on a single Quadro RTX 6000 (CPU: 2 x 32-Core
Epyc 7452) and the data-augmented version for 15h. The equivariant segmentation model (learned
frames + refining frames + tensor messages) was trained for 39h on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU
(CPU: 2 x 32-Core Epyc 7452) and the data augmented version for 17h.


                                                21
