Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING TO S OLVE D IFFERENTIAL E QUATION
C ONSTRAINED O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEMS
 Vincenzo Di Vito1 , Mostafa Mohammadian 2 , Kyri Baker 2 , Ferdinando Fioretto 1
 1
   Department of Computer Science, University Of Virginia,
 {eda8pc,fioretto}@virginia.edu
 2
   College of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Colorado Boulder,
 {mostafa.mohammadian,kyri}@colorado.edu



                                           A BSTRACT

         Differential equations (DE) constrained optimization plays a critical role in nu-
         merous scientific and engineering fields, including energy systems, aerospace en-
         gineering, ecology, and finance, where optimal configurations or control strategies
         must be determined for systems governed by ordinary or stochastic differential
         equations. Despite its significance, the computational challenges associated with
         these problems have limited their practical use. To address these limitations, this
         paper introduces a learning-based approach to DE-constrained optimization that
         combines techniques from proxy optimization (Kotary et al., 2021) and neural
         differential equations (Chen et al., 2018). The proposed approach uses a dual-
         network architecture, with one approximating the control strategies, focusing on
         steady-state constraints, and another solving the associated DEs. This combina-
         tion enables the approximation of optimal strategies while accounting for dynamic
         constraints in near real-time. Experiments across problems in energy optimiza-
         tion and finance modeling show that this method provides full compliance with
         dynamic constraints and it produces results up to 25 times more precise than other
         methods which do not explicitly model the system’s dynamic equations.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In a wide array of scientific and engineering applications, differential equations (DEs) serve as a
fundamental tool to model dynamic phenomena where precise predictions and optimal control are
crucial. These applications range from energy optimization, where generator dynamics are required
to assess system stability, to aerospace engineering, relying on trajectory optimization, and finance,
where asset price prediction hinges on stochastic processes. Central to these applications is the op-
timization of systems constrained by Ordinary (ODEs) or Stochastic (SDEs) Differential Equations,
referred to as DE-constrained optimization problems. These problems entail not only solving the
DEs but also optimizing decision variables subject to the dynamics dictated by these equations.
This dual requirement, however, poses significant computational challenges. Traditional approaches,
such as shooting methods (Gerdts, 2003), collocation methods (Fairweather & Meade, 2020), and
discretization techniques (Betts & Campbell, 2005), are known to struggle with scalability and pre-
cision, especially on high-dimensional and nonlinear systems, which are of interest in this paper.
To address these challenges, this paper introduces a novel learning-based DE-optimization proxy
that integrates advancements from two key methodologies: proxy optimizers (Kotary et al., 2021)
and neural differential equations (neural-DEs) (Chen et al., 2018; Kidger, 2022). In our approach, a
neural network serves as a proxy optimizer, approximating solutions to the decision problem while
simultaneously leveraging another neural network to solve the underlying DEs. This novel dual-
network architecture exploits a primal-dual method to ensure that both the dynamics dictated by
the DEs and the optimization objectives are concurrently learned and respected. Importantly, this
integration allows for end-to-end differentiation enabling efficient gradient-based optimization.
The proposed method is validated across two domains: energy systems and financial modeling and
optimization. The experimental results show the ability to directly handle DE in the optimization
surrogate, which allows our method to produce solutions that are up to 25 times more precise than


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


standard proxy optimization techniques, while also adhering to system dynamics. This precision
improvement is important and opens new avenues for research and application in fields that demand
high-fidelity dynamic modeling and optimal decision-making at low computational budgets.
Contributions. The paper makes the following contributions: (1) It introduces a novel learning-
based method to efficiently approximate solutions of DE-constrained optimization problems. Our
approach is a unique integration of neural-DE models to capture the system dynamics and proxy
optimizers to approximate the problem decision variables. These components are sinergistically
integrated into model training via a primal-dual method. (2) It empirically demonstrates the impor-
tance of incorporating the system dynamics into an optimization framework, by showing that proxy
optimizers methods who neglect these dynamic behaviors systematically violate the DE require-
ments. (3) It shows that capturing the system dynamics with neural differential surrogate models,
leads up to 25 times higher solution quality compared to other learning-based approaches capturing
the dynamics such as PINN (Raissi et al., 2019) or LSTM (Yu et al., 2019).

2       R ELATED WORKS
Model Predictive Control (MPC) (Mayne et al., 2000) is a key control system technique that pre-
dicts future states over a time horizon to determine optimal control actions while satisfying con-
straints. This involves solving an optimization problem using predicted states. Alternatively, DAE-
constrained optimization (Blajer & Kołodziejczyk, 2004) directly incorporates the system’s differ-
ential and algebraic equations into the optimization problem via discretization, transforming it into
a finite-dimensional form. However, while retaining dependence on independent variables, this in-
creases problem dimensionality. The nonlinearities in both optimization and system dynamics, along
with the need for real-time solutions, make these approaches impractical in our setting.
In recent years, there has been growing interest in leveraging neural network architectures to approx-
imate solutions of challenging constrained optimization problems. Termed proxy optimizers, these
methods create fast surrogate models by learning mappings from optimization problem parame-
ters to optimal solutions (Kotary et al., 2021). Some approaches rely on supervised learning with
precomputed solutions (Fioretto et al., 2020), while others employ self-supervised strategies by ex-
ploiting the problem’s structure (Park & Van Hentenryck, 2023). A major challenge in this setting is
constraint satisfaction, often tackled through penalty-based methods (Fioretto et al., 2020), implicit
layers (Donti et al., 2020), or efficient post-inference projection techniques (Kotary et al., 2024).
Additionally, neural networks have been applied to approximate solutions of differential equations.
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019) integrate physical laws within their
architecture but face challenges in training and generalization (Wang et al., 2020; Kovachki et al.,
2024). Neural differential equations (Kidger, 2022; Chen et al., 2018) provide an alternative by
modeling system dynamics through parameterized hidden state derivatives, which allows to capture
complex dynamics effectively from data observations.
Our work builds on these areas for surrogate modeling and introduces a learning-based approach to
solve, for the first time to our knowledge, DE-constrained optimization problems in near real-time.

3       S ETTINGS AND G OALS
Consider an optimization problem constrained by a system of ordinary differential equations 1 :
                                                            J (u,y(t))
                                            z                 }|                   {
                                                             Z T
                               Minimize L(u, y(T )) +                Φ(u, y(t), t) dt                      (1a)
                                    u                          t=0
                                   s.t. dy(t) = F (u, y(t), t)dt                                           (1b)
                                        y(0) = I(u)                                                        (1c)
                                        g(u, y(t)) ≤ 0; h(u, y(t)) = 0,                                    (1d)
where u = (u1 , . . . , un ) represents the vector of decision variables and y(t) = (y 1 (t), . . . , y m (t))
denotes the state variables, each governed by a differential equation dy i (t) = Fi (y(t), u, t)dt. Here
    1
        to ease notation the paper focuses on ODEs, and refers the reader to Appendix A for an extension to SDE


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


each Fi describes the dynamic behavior of the system through ODEs. The set of all such ODEs
is captured by F , as defined in Constraint (1b). Note that these DEs are parametrized by decision
variables u, rendering the coupling between the control strategy and the system’s dynamic response
highly interdependent. The objective function J (1a) aims to minimize a combination of the running
cost Φ, which varies with the state and decision variables over time, and the terminal cost L, which
depends on the final state y(T ) and the decision variables u. The time horizon T defines the period
over which the optimization takes place. Constraint (1c) sets the initial conditions for the state
variables based on the decision variables u. Additional constraints (1d) enforce sets of inequality
and equality conditions on the state and decision variables, ensuring that-400
                                                                           theMW
                                                                               system constraints are
met throughout the decision process.
                                                                                               -400 MW
Energy system example. For example, in the                             u   1
context of power system optimization, decision                        200 MW                                      140 MW
variables u capture generators’ power outputs,                                                              -400 MW
                                                         y       1
                                                                                      200 MW                            140 MW
and state variables y(t) describe generator ro-
tor angles and speeds, which are key for sys-                                           u
                                                                                        2
                                                                         -400 MW                200 MW                           140 MW
tem stability. The system dynamics in F , cap-                                                   y 2
                                                            time
ture the electro-mechanical interactions in the-340 MW
                                                                                                        time
power network, and their initial conditions, as                  -340 MW
                                                           200 MW                                 140 MW
determined by (1c), are set based on the deci-
sion variables. The objective function J aims Figure 1: Decision     40 MW       variables u represent genera-   360 MW
                                                                                     40 MW
                                                                               -340 MW                                 360 MW
to minimize immediate operational costs like        tors outputs,       which     are   influenced   by  state   vari-
fuel consumption (Φ) and address long-term ables y describing rotor angles and                 40 MW
                                                                                                    speed.
                                                                                                                                 360 MW
costs (L) over a specific time horizon T-340
                                           . MW
                                              Optimizing the generator outputs is finally subject to
engineering operational limits and physics constraints (Constraints (1d) , e.g. Ohm’s and Kirkhoff’s
laws). An illustration is provided in Figure 1 and the problem
                                                          40 MW       description in Appendix    360 MWB.

C HALLENGES

While being fundamental for many applications, Problem (1) presents three key challenges:
1. Finding optimal solutions to Problem (1) is computationally intractable. Even without the differ-
   ential equation constraints, the decision version of the problem alone is NP-hard in general.
2. Achieving high-quality approximations of the system dynamics (Equations 1b) and (1c) in near
   real-time, poses the second significant challenge. The high dimensionality and non-linearity of
   these dynamics further complicate the task.
3. Finally, the integration of the system dynamics into the decision-making process for solving Prob-
   lem (1) poses another challenge. Indeed, including differential equations (1b) in the optimization
   framework renders traditional numerical methods impractical for real-time applications.
The next section focuses on providing a solution to each of these challenges.

4    DE-O PTIMIZATION P ROXY
To address the challenges outlined above, the paper introduces DE-Optimization Proxy (DE-OP): a
fully differentiable DE-optimization surrogate. In a nutshell, DE-OP defines a dual-network archi-
tecture, where one neural network, named Fω , approximates the optimal decision variables u∗ , and
another, denoted as Nθ , approximates the associated state variables y(t), based on the concept of
neural differential equations. Here ω and θ represents the models’ Fω and Nθ trainable parame-
ters, respectively. An illustration of the overall framework and the resulting interaction of the dual
network is provided in Figure 2. The subsequent discussion first describes these two components
individually and then shows their integration by exploiting a primal-dual learning framework.
Optimizing over distribution of instances. To enable a learnable mechanism for addressing DE-
constrained optimization, DE-OP operates over a distribution Π of problem instances induced by
problem parameters ζ, and aims to train a model across this distribution. The learning framework
takes problem parameters ζ as inputs and generates outputs û, representing an approximation of the
optimal decision variables while adhering to the constraint functions (1b)–(1d). With reference to


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Estimated
                                          decision variables          DE-OP Loss
               Optimization
                 problem    ζ
                parameters


                                                                              Estimated
                                                                                state
                                                                              variables
                                            Estimated initial
                                            state variables

Figure 2: DE-OP uses a dual network architecture consisting of a proxy optimization model Fω to
estimate the decision variables û and a neural-DE model Nθ to estimate the state-variables ŷ(t),
with the objective function J (Fω (ζ), Nθ (Fω (ζ), t) ; ζ) capturing the overall loss.


(1a), the formal learning objective is:
                           Minimize Eζ∼Π [J (Fω (ζ), Nθ (Fω (ζ), t); ζ)]                           (2a)
                                ω,θ

                                                            s.t. (1b)–(1d),                        (2b)
where û = Fω (ζ) and the state variables estimate is denoted as ŷ(t) = Nθ (Fω (ζ), t). Here, ζ pa-
rameterizes each problem instance, representing constants such as customer demands in the power
system example. Although the problem structure remains consistent across instances, each one
involves a distinct decision problem, leading to unique state variable trajectories. Given the com-
plexity of solving Problem (2), the goal is to develop a fast and accurate neural DE optimization
surrogate. This approach uses the concept of proxy optimizers, which is detailed next.

4.1   N EURAL O PTIMIZATION S URROGATE

The first objective is to establish a neural network-based mapping F : Π → U that transforms pa-
rameters ζ ∼ Π from a DE-constrained optimization problem (1) into optimal decisions u⋆ (ζ) ∈ U,
operating under the restriction that T = 0, (i.e. the dynamics of the system are absent). Practically,
this mapping is modeled as a neural network Fω which learns to predict the optimal decision vari-
ables from the problem parameters. The model training uses a dataset D = {(ζi , u⋆i )}N    i=1 , of N
samples, with each sample (ζi , u⋆i ) including the observed problem parameters ζi and the corre-
sponding (steady-state) optimal decision variables u⋆i . The training objective is to refine Fω in a
way that it closely approximates the ideal mapping F . Several approaches have been proposed to
build such surrogate optimization solvers, many of which leverage mathematical optimization prin-
ciples (Fioretto et al., 2020; Park & Van Hentenryck, 2023) and implicit layers (Donti et al., 2020),
to encourage or ensure constraint satisfaction (see Appendix C.1 for an in-depth discussion of such
methods). Once trained, the model Fω can be used to generate near-optimal solutions at low in-
ference times. We leverage this idea to learn the mapping F . As shown in Figure 2, the estimated
optimal decisions û = Fω (ζ) are then fed to a neural-DE model, which will be discussed next.

4.2   N EURAL E STIMATION OF THE S TATE VARIABLES

The second objective of DE-OP involves to efficiently capture the system dynamics of DE-
constrained optimization problems. This is achieved by developing neural DE models Nθ to learn
solutions of a parametric family of differential equations (Kidger, 2022). Since these DE-surrogates
are fully differentiable, they are particularly suitable for integration with the optimization surrogate
introduced in the previous section, aligning with our goal defined in Equation (2).
The optimization proxy estimated solutions û determine the initial state variables y(0) through
the function I: ŷ(0) = I(û). As shown in Figure 2, given a solution û, a neural-DE model Nθ
generates an estimate ŷ of the state variables that satisfies:
                                          dŷ(t) = Nθ (û, t)dt                                    (3a)
                                           ŷ(0) = I(û).                                          (3b)


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The remainder of this section details the methods by which the state variables are precisely estimated
using a Neural Differential Equation model.
Model initialization and training. Given that the neural-DE model Nθ takes as input the estimated
decision variables û provided by the DE-OP’s optimization proxy Fω , where û = Fω (ζ), it is
practical to initialize (or hot-start) the neural-DE model effectively. To achieve this, we construct a
dataset D = {(u′i , yi⋆ (t))}N                   ′
                             i=1 , where each ui is a near-optimal decision sampled within the bounds
specified by constraints g (e.g., u′j ∼ U(aj , bj ) if uj ’s bound is defined by aj and bj ). The corre-
sponding state trajectories yi⋆ (t) are obtained by numerically solving the differential equations with
initial condition y(0) = I(u′i ). The neural-DE model is trained by minimizing the loss:
                                                    h                      i
                                                                         2
                              Minimize E(x,y)∼D ∥Nθ (x, t) − y(t)∥ ,                                 (4)
                                   θ
              ′
where x = u and ŷ(t) = Nθ (x, t).
Since Fω approximates u⋆ , it may introduce errors. To mitigate this, the dataset D is constructed
using near-optimal decisions u′ sampled from the feasible bounds g, ensuring that Nθ is trained on
a distribution Πu′ ≈ Πû . This approach does not require exact optimal decisions and assumes only
small estimation errors from Fω , which is typically valid in practice.
Once trained, the neural-DE model Nθ can accurately estimate state variables ŷ(t) for decisions û
produced by Fω . This integration enables end-to-end training of the DE-OP framework, ensuring
that both decision and state variables are optimized cohesively. While other learning-based methods,
such as Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINN) (Raissi et al., 2019) and Long Short-Term Mem-
ory (LSTM) models (Yu et al., 2019), can be used to efficiently estimate the state variables, due to
a generalization bias (PINN), and lack of dynamic equations modeling (LSTM), they produce sub-
stantially less precise predictions than the neural-DE models. For a comparison of neural-DE models
with these alternative approaches across the experimental tasks described in Section 5, please refer
to Appendices D.1 and E.1.

4.3   H ANDLING S TATIC AND DYNAMICS C ONSTRAINTS J OINTLY

To integrate the neural-DE models within the decision process, this paper proposes a Lagrangian
Dual (LD) learning approach, which is inspired by the generalized augmented Lagrangian relax-
ation technique (Hestenes, 1969) adopted in classic optimization. In Lagrangian relaxation, some
or all the problem constraints are relaxed into the objective function using Lagrangian multipliers
to capture the penalty induced by violating them. The proposed formulation leverages Lagrangian
duality to integrate trainable and weighted regularization terms that encapsulate both the static and
dynamic constraints violations. When all the constraints are relaxed, the violation-based Lagrangian
relaxation of problem (1) defines as
                  Minimize J (u, y(t)) + λ⊤    ′              ⊤
                                          h′ |h (u, y(t))| + λg max(0, g(u, y(t))),
                      u
where J , g are defined in (1a), and (1d), respectively, and h′ is defined as follows,
                                                  dy(t) − F (u, y(t), t)dt
                                                 "                           #
                                   ′
                                 h (u, y(t)) =          y(0) − I(u)                                       (5)
                                                         h(u, y(t)).
It denotes the set of all equality constraints of problem (1), thus extending the constraints h in (1d),
with the system dynamics (1b) and the initial conditions equations (1c) written in an implicit form as
above. Therein, λh′ and λg are the vectors of Lagrange multipliers associated with functions h′ and
g, e.g. λih′ , λjg are associated with the i-th equality h′i in h′ and j-th inequality gj in g, respectively.
The key advantage of expressing the system dynamics (1b) and initial conditions (1c) in the same
implicit form as the equality constraints h, (as shown in (5)), is that the system dynamics can be
treated in the same manner as the constraint functions h. This enables us to satisfy the system
dynamics and the static set of constraints ensuring that they are incorporated seamlessly into the
optimization process.
The proposed primal-dual learning method uses an iterative approach to find good values of the
primal ω, θ and dual λh′ , λg variables; it uses an augmented modified Lagrangian as a loss function
to train the prediction û, ŷ(t) as employed
         LDE-OP (û, u⋆ , ŷ(t)) = ∥û − u⋆ ∥2 + λ⊤    ′                ⊤
                                                  h′ |h (û, ŷ(t))| + λg max(0, g(û, ŷ(t))),          (6)


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Primal Dual Learning for DE-Constrained Optimization
 1: Input: Dataset D = {(ζi , u⋆i )}N i=1 ; optimizer method, learning rate η and Lagrange step size ρ.
 2: Initialize Lagrange multipliers λ0h′ = 0, λ0g = 0.
 3: For each epoch k = 0, 1, 2, . . .
 4:     For each (ζi , u⋆i ) ∈ D
 5:        ûi ← Fωk (ζi ), ŷi (t) ← Nθk (Fωk (ζi ), t)
 6:        Compute loss function: LDE-OP (ûi , u⋆i , ŷi (t)) using (6)
 7:        Update DE-OP model parameters:
                                                  k                 k
                                                                        k
                        ω k+1 ← ω k − η∇ω LDE-OP Fωλk (ζ), u⋆ , Nθλk Fωλk (ζ), t
                                                  k                k
                                                                        k
                        θk+1 ← θk − η∇θ LDE-OP Fωλk (ζ), u⋆ , Nθλk Fωλk (ζ), t
 8:    Update Lagrange multipliers:
                λk+1
                 h′  ← λkh′ + ρ|h′ (û, ŷ(t))|,       λk+1
                                                        g   ← λkg + ρ max(0, g(û, ŷ(t))).



where ∥û − u⋆ ∥2 represents the decision error, with respect to steady-state optimal decision u⋆ ,
while λ⊤     ′                  ⊤
        h′ |h (û, ŷ(t))| and λg max(0, g(û, ŷ(t))) measures the constraint violations incurred by
prediction û = Fω (ζ) and ŷ(t) = Nθ (Fω (ζ), t). This accounts for the contribution of both net-
works F, N during training, which is balanced via iterative updates of the Lagrange multipliers
in (6) based on the amount of violation of the associated constraint function. To ease notation, in
Equation (6) the dependency from parameters ζ is omitted. At iteration k + 1, finding the optimal
parameters ω, θ requires solving
                                             h           k              k
                                                                            k            i
          ω k+1 , θk+1 = arg min E(ζ,u⋆ )∼D LDE-OP Fωλ (ζ), u⋆ , Nθλ Fωλ (ζ), t            ,
                               ω,θ
          k         k
where Fωλ and Nθλ denote the DE-OP’s optimization and predictor models Fω and Nθ , at iteration
k, with λk = [λkh′ λkg ]⊤ . This step is approximated using a stochastic gradient descent method
                                                  k                k
                                                                       k
                   ω k+1 = ω k − η∇ω LDE-OP Fωλk (ζ), u⋆ , Nθλk Fωλk (ζ), t
                                                 k               k
                                                                      k
                   θk+1 = θk − η∇θ LDE-OP Fωλk (ζ), u⋆ , Nθλk Fωλk (ζ), t ,
where η denotes the learning rate and ∇ω L and ∇θ L represent the gradients of the loss function L
with respect to the parameters ω and θ, respectively, at the current iteration k. Importantly, this step
does not recomputes the training parameters from scratch, but updates the weights ω, θ based on
their value at the previous iteration. Finally, the Lagrange multipliers are updated as
                                         λk+1
                                          h′  = λkh′ + ρ|h′ (û, ŷ(t))|
                                 λk+1
                                  g   = λkg + ρ max (0, g(û, ŷ(t))) ,
where ρ denotes the Lagrange step size. The overall training scheme is presented in Algorithm 1. It
takes as input the training dataset D = {(ζi , u⋆i )}N
                                                     i=1 , the learning rate η > 0, and the Lagrange step
size ρ > 0. The Lagrange multipliers are initialized in line 2. As shown in Figure 2, for each sample
in the dataset (line 4), the DE-OP’s optimization model Fωk computes the predicted decisions ûi ,
while Nθ computes an estimate of the state variables ŷi (t) (line 5). The loss function LDE-OP is
computed (line 6) incorporating both the objective and the constraints and using the predicted values
û, ŷ(t) and the Lagrange multipliers λkh′ and λkg .The weights ω, θ of the DE-OP models Fω , Nθ are
then updated using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (line 7). Finally, at the end of the epoch, the
Lagrange multipliers are updated based on the respective constraints violations (line 8).
While the DE-OP model training algorithm is described extending the Lagrangian Dual Learning
approach (Fioretto et al., 2020), the flexibility of DE-OP allows to leverage other proxy optimizer
methods, such as the self-supervised Primal-Dual Learning (Park & Van Hentenryck, 2023), which
could similarly be extended to integrate the system dynamics via neural-DE modeling within the DE-
OP framework, as the experiments will show. When near-optimal solutions u⋆ are not available, the
term ∥û − u⋆ ∥2 in Equation 6 can be replaced with J (u, y(t)) to facilitate self-supervised learning,
which has shown promising results (Donti et al., 2020) in a variety of tasks.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5     E XPERIMENTAL SETTING
This section evaluates the DE-OP model on a financial modeling and energy optimization tasks.
Given the absence of other methods capable of meeting the stringent time requirements for solving
DE-constrained optimization problems, we compare several proxy optimizer methods as baselines.
However, these baselines focus on the “steady-state” aspects of the problem by omitting the system
dynamic components, such as the objective term Φ and the system dynamic constraints (1b) and
(1c) from Problem (1). They aim to approximate the optimal decision variables û to u∗ that could
be obtained if the system was at a steady-state. We evaluate the Lagrangian Dual approach (LD) of
Fioretto et al. (2020), which uses a penalty-based method for constraint satisfaction, Deep Constraint
Completion and Correction (DC3) from Donti et al. (2020) that enforces constraint satisfaction
through a completion-correction technique, self-supervised learning (PDL) of Park & Van Henten-
ryck (2023) using an augmented Lagrangian loss function, and a method (MSE) that minimizes the
mean squared error between the predicted solutions û and the pre-computed (steady-state) solutions
u∗ . A comprehensive description of these methods is provided in Appendix C.1.
Furthermore, the comparison includes various learning-based DE-surrogate solvers in place of the
network Nθ in our framework, including neural-differential equations Kidger (2022), PINNs Raissi
et al. (2019), and LSTM networks. The experiments focus on two main aspects: (1) comparing
DE-OP with proxy optimizers that capture only the steady-state problems, focusing on the system
dynamics violations, and (2) assessing the effectiveness of the various surrogate DE-solver methods.

5.1   DYNAMIC P ORTFOLIO O PTIMIZATION

The classical Markowitz Portfolio Optimization (Rubinstein, 2002), described by (9a)-(9c), consists
of determining the investment allocations within a portfolio to maximize a balance of return and risk.
The paper extends this task by incorporating the stochastic dynamic (9d) of the asset prices, based
on a simplified Black-Scholes model (Capiński & Kopp, 2012). This model represents a real-world
scenario where asset prices fluctuates, and investment decisions are made in advance, such as at the
market’s opening, based on the final asset prices forecast. The task defines as:
                     Minimize E −y(T )⊤ u + u⊤ Σu

                                                                                                 (9a)
                         u
                             s.t.   1⊤ u = 1                                                     (9b)
                                    ui ≥ 0 ∀i ∈ [n]                                              (9c)
                                    dyi (t) = µi yi (t)dt + σi yi (t)dWi (t) ∀i ∈ [n]            (9d)
                                    yi (0) = ζi ∀i ∈ [n],                                        (9e)
where y(t) ∈ Rn represents the asset prices trend and y(T ) denotes the asset prices at time hori-
zon T in (9a). The asset price dynamics described by (9d) follow a stochastic differential equation
with drift µi , volatility σi , and Wiener process Wi (t) (Rudzis, 2017). Decisions u ∈ Rn rep-
resent fractional portfolio allocations. The objective minimizes J(u, y(t)) = L(u, y(T )) with
Φ(u, y(t), t) = 0, balancing risk via covariance matrix Σ and expected return y(T )⊤ u.
Datasets and methods. The drift and volatility factors µi ∼ U(0.5, 1) and σi ∼ U(0.05, 0.1) in
(9d) are sampled from uniform distributions. Following (Sambharya et al., 2022), initial asset prices
{ζi }ni=1 are obtained from the Nasdaq database (Nasdaq, 2022) to form initial vectors {ζ j }10,000
                                                                                              j=1 ,
split into 80% training, 10% validation, and 10% test sets. Asset price trends y(t) are generated
using an SDE solver with Itô integration (Kloeden & Platen, 2023). Given y(T ), the convex solver
cvxpy (Diamond & Boyd, 2016) computes the optimal decision u⋆ for supervision during training.
We evaluate the role of asset price predictors using three models: a neural-SDE model, an LSTM,
and a 2-layer Feed Forward ReLU network, each compared to a numerical SDE solver, which is
discussed in Appendix E, Figure 8. Each model estimates final asset prices ŷ(T ), which inform
the DE-OP model Fω to estimate optimal decision allocations û = Fω (ŷ(T )). A “static” baseline
method uses only proxy optimizers (Lagrangian Dual, DC3, or PDL) to approximate decisions based
on initial prices y(0) = ζi . Detailed comparisons of these approaches are provided in Appendix E.2.

Results. A comparison between the DE-OP and the baseline methods is provided in Figure 3.
The figure reports experiments for n = 50 variable, while additional experiments are relegated to


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the Appendix E.2. The x-axis categorizes the methods based on the type of asset price predictor
used, or the lack of thereof, and reports the average optimality gap (in percentage) on the test set,
                ⋆
defined as |L(u (y(T|L(u
                     )),y(T ))−L(û(ŷ(T )),y(T ))|
                         ⋆ (y(T )),y(T ))|          × 100. It measures the sub-optimality of the predicted
solutions û with respect to ground truth final asset price y(T ), across different methods.
The figure highlights the substantial perfor-                       130
mance difference between the dynamic DE-


                                                     Opt. gap (%)
                                                                                DE-OP
OP models and the static-only proxy optimizer                                   Static-only (DC3)
methods, marked in the last column, denoted by                       50         Static-only (LD)
Nθ = ∅. These static methods (DC3, LD, and                                      Static-only (PDL)
PDL) fail to incorporate asset price dynamics,
resulting in notably higher optimality gaps (ex-                     20
ceeding 100%). Notably, their predictions can                        10
                                                                      5
be over twice as suboptimal as the optimal so-                            Nµ =n-SDE Nµ =LSTM Nµ =FFrwrd   Nµ = ;
lutions derived from dynamic modeling.
                                                  Figure 3: Average Opt. gap with n = 50 asset prices.
In contrast, DE-OP models that incorporate
SDE models significantly outperform static methods. In particular, using neural-SDE predictors
to model asset price dynamics results in much higher decision quality compared to both LSTM and
Feed Forward models. Specifically, DE-OP with neural-SDE achieves the lowest optimality gap at
9.11%, successfully capturing the dynamics through an explicit modeling of the asset prices’ gov-
erning equations. In contrast, the LSTM model results in a notably higher optimality gap of 21.17%,
approximately 2.5 times greater than that of DE-OP with neural-SDE, attributable to its lack of dy-
namic modeling. The Feed Forward model performs significantly worse with an optimality gap of
102.45% for LD, indicating its inability to capture the time-dependent nature of asset pricing data.
The dynamic forecasting results in Appendix E.1 display different levels of precision of the final
asset prices predictions among the dynamic predictors considered, which ultimately led to different
decision quality. In particular, DE-OP with a neural-SDE model performs consistently better than
the LSTM model and produces up to 25× better decisions (measured in terms of optimality gap)
than any static-only proxy optimizer method. This stark contrast underscores the effectiveness of
DE-OP models in leveraging dynamic asset price predictors to improve decision quality.

5.2   S TABILITY-C ONSTRAINED AC-O PTIMAL P OWER F LOW

We now turn on studying a real-world problem in power systems, which arises from integration of
Synchronous Generator Dynamics with the Alternating Current Optimal Power Flow (AC OPF)
problem. The AC OPF, detailed in Appendix Model (1), is foundational in power systems for
finding cost-effective generator dispatches that meet demand while complying with physical and
engineering constraints. Traditionally addressed as a steady-state snapshot, the AC OPF problem
requires frequent resolution (e.g., every 10-15 minutes) due to fluctuating loads, posing challenges
in maintaining operational continuity and system stability (Hatziargyriou et al., 2021). Given the
non-convexity, high dimensionality, and computational demands of this problem, proxy optimizers
have emerged as a viable alternative to traditional numerical solvers. However, as shown later in this
section, existing approaches such as those in Donti et al. (2020) and Fioretto et al. (2020), which
focus on the steady-state aspect, fail to address the dynamic system requirements adequately.
The integration of the generator dynamics and related stability constraints into the steady-state AC-
OPF formulation leads to the stability-constrained AC-OPF problem, which is detailed in Appendix
B.3. Here, the decision variables u, comprising generator power outputs and bus voltages, influence
the state variables y(t), representing generator rotor angles and speeds. This coupling renders the
problem particularly challenging. The objective is to optimize power dispatch costs, while satisfying
demand, network constraints, and ensuring system stability as described by (1d). DE-OP enables,
for the first time to our knowledge, the integration of generator dynamics within the optimization
process. This integration is key for system stability. Our implementation uses neural-ODE (Chen
et al., 2018) models Nθ , assigned individually to each generator. A comparative analysis of neural-
ODEs, PINNs and a numerical solver for capturing these dynamics is available in Appendix D.1.
Datasets. DE-OP is evaluated on two key power networks, the WSCC 9 and IEEE 57 bus-systems
(Babaeinejadsarookolaee et al., 2021), under various operating system conditions, as studied in


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Unstable dynamics (%)


                                                                                      Unstable dynamics (%)
                         14                                             DE-OP                                 14                                                 DE-OP
                         12                                             DC3                                   12                                                 DC3
                         10                                             LD                                    10                                                 LD
                                                                        MSE                                                                                      MSE
                          8                                                                                    8
                          6                                                                                    6
                          4                                                                                    4
                          2                                                                                    2
                          0                                                                                    0
                              0        10        20      30      40      50                                        0        10        20        30       40       50
                                                      Epoch                                                                                  Epoch


Figure 4: WSCC 9-bus system - Percentage of                                         Figure 5: IEEE 57-bus system - Percentage of
unstable dynamics at training time for different                                    unstable dynamics at training time for different
methods based on 40 trials.                                                         methods based on 40 trials.

                                       Models                                                    Metrics
                                                                          Flow Vio.                                Boundary Vio.            Optimality gap∗
                                  Fω        Nθ         Stability Vio.
                                                                           ×10−3                                      ×10−4                (at steady-state) %
                                  DE-OP (ours)                  0.00     9.15 ± 0.442                                  0.25 ± 0.172              0.22 ± 0.02
                                  MSE ∅                23.30 ± 0.206    12.65 ± 2.281                                  6.44 ± 1.434              0.17 ± 0.02
                                  LD    ∅              23.10 ± 0.219     6.23 ± 0.125                                          0.00              0.17 ± 0.01
                                  DC3 ∅                28.60 ± 0.232             0.00                                          0.00              0.16 ± 0.01

Table 1: Average and standard deviation of constraint violations and (steady-state) optimality gap
on the IEEE 57-bus system for different approaches based on 40 independent runs.


(Fioretto et al., 2020). This assessment benchmarks our proposed method, DE-OP, against three
leading proxy optimizer methods for AC-OPF, which operate under a “steady-state” assumption,
and thus cannot cope with constraints (1b) and (1c) of the DE-constrained problem. These meth-
ods are LD (Fioretto et al., 2020), DC3 (Donti et al., 2020), and MSE Zamzam & Baker (2020),
introduced in details in Appendix C.1.
Furthermore, discretizing the DE system through methods like direct collocation (Betts, 2010), or
iteratively optimizing over the time horizon adopting Model Predictive Control-based techniques,
becomes highly impractical for real-time applications due to the high number of variables and non-
linear system dynamics associated with each generator in the system. In contrast, all methods used
for comparison (including our DE-OP) produce estimates of the optimal decision variables within
milliseconds, as shown in Appendix, Table 6. Additionally, we note that only fast inference times
are of interest in the area of proxy optimizers, as once trained, these methods can be applied to
various related but distinct problem instances. Crucially, as the generator dynamics are captured by
separate neural-DE models, their computation is fully parallelized and suggests potential for DE-OP
in large-scale networks, where proxy optimizers have shown promising results (Mak et al., 2023).
For both the benchmark systems, DE-OP and each proxy optimizer model are trained on a dataset
D = {(ζi , u⋆i )}10,000                                               ⋆
                 i=1 , where ζi representing a load demand and ui the corresponding optimal,
                                                          j
steady-state decision. The j th load of the i-th sample ζi is generated by applying a uniform ran-
dom perturbation of ±20% to the corresponding nominal load. The (steady-state) AC-OPF models
are implemented in Julia and solved using IPOPT (Wächter & Biegler, 2006). The dataset uses
an 80/10/10 split. By leveraging the knowledge of the decision variables’ bounds (see Appendix,
Model 2, Constraints (11b)-(11c)), each neural-ODE model Nθ is trained to learn the corresponding
generator dynamics on a dataset of near-optimal decisions Πu′ as described in Section 4.2. We refer
the reader to Appendix B.3 for further details on the neural-ODE models training.

Results. Figures 4 and 5 show the percentage of estimated decisions violating the stability con-
straints during the first 50 epochs of training, across all methods and test cases. On the WSCC
9-bus system (Figure 4) DE-OP learns rapidly to meet the dynamic constraints, which violations
approaches zero level after epoch 10 of training, whereas, all the baseline methods lacking dynamic
modeling, consistently produce unstable dynamics. Notably, all the baseline methods tested, e.g.,
DC3, LD, and MSE, systematically fail to satisfy stability requirements. In contrast, by integrating


                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


generator dynamics within its training model, DE-OP begins to satisfy these requirements early in
training, as depicted in both figures (blue curves). DE-OP shows a rapid adjustment on both systems
within the first few epochs, and bringing the violations to near zero. In contrast, all baseline meth-
ods continue to exhibit 4% to 8% unstable dynamics throughout the training, even for a much higher
number of training epochs. As we will show later, these will reflect also in large stability constraints
violations, when evaluated on the test set.
Table 1 displays the test-set results for DE-OP and the baseline methods on the IEEE 57-bus system.
For a detailed discussion on the results of each method on the WSCC-9 bus system, please see
Appendix D and Table 5. These tables reports the following metrics:
• Static and Stability Constraint Violations: These are quantified for each        Pntest     instance. The j-
  th static equality and the k-th inequality violation are calculated as n1test i=1    test
                                                                                            |h′j (ûi , ŷ i (t))| and
    1
        Pntest             i    i
  ntest   i=1 max(0, gk (û , ŷ (t))) respectively, where ntest is the test-set size. Detailed descriptions
  of the problem constraints can be found in Appendices B.1 and B.3.
                                                                       ⋆      ⋆
• Optimality gap (at steady-state): This metric is defined as |L(u (ζ),y        (T ))−L(û(ζ),ŷ(T ))|
                                                                          |L(u⋆ (ζ),y ⋆ (T ))|              × 100. It
  measures the gap incurred by the predictions û, ŷ(t) against the decisions u⋆ which are computed
  under the assumption that the generators are in a steady-state condition. This assumption is crucial
  for evaluating how closely each solution approximates the AC-OPF optimal results, though it
  does not necessarily reflect the results relative to the stability-constrained AC-OPF problem, our
  main focus, but which is highly intractable. Given the non-linearity of both the dynamics and
  optimization in the stability-constrained AC-OPF, computing exact optimal decisions u⋆ with
  traditional methods is not feasible. Consequently, while our method may show slightly higher
  steady-state optimality gaps, these should not be interpreted in the context of the dynamic problem.
Firstly, note that all methods report comparable static constraint violations and steady-state opti-
mality gaps, with errors within the 10−3 to 10−4 range. Although DE-OP exhibits slightly higher
steady-state optimality gaps, approximately 0.05% higher than the best performing baseline, it’s im-
portant to recall that this metric does not reflect the stability-constrained AC-OPF optimality gap,
but rather that of the problem addressed by the baselines, placing DE-OP at a seeming disadvantage.
The higher objective costs observed with DE-OP is intuitively attributed to a restricted feasible space
resulting from the integration of generator stability constraints within the AC OPF problem.
Crucially, all baseline methods systematically fail to meet the stability requirements, often by mar-
gins exceeding those observed during training. This illustrates a typical scenario where predic-
tion errors on decisions parametrizing system dynamics have cascading effects on the associated
constraint violations. In stark contrast, DE-OP achieves full compliance with stability constraints,
reporting zero violations in each instance analyzed.
These findings are important. They highlight the critical role of dynamic requirements in AC-OPF
problems for achieving accurate and stable solutions. The results underscore DE-OP’s effectiveness
in adjusting potentially unstable set points, as further detailed in Appendix D.2 and demonstrates
DE-OP’s effectiveness in ensuring system stability compared to traditional methods that focus on
optimality under steady-state assumptions.

6    C ONCLUSION
This work was motivated by the efficiency requirements associated with solving differential equa-
tions (DE)-constrained optimization problems. It introduced a novel learning-based framework,
DE-OP, which incorporate differential equation constraints into optimization tasks for near real-
time application. The approach uses a dual-network architecture, with one approximating the con-
trol strategies, focusing on steady-state constraints, and another solving the associated DEs. This
architecture exploits a primal-dual method to ensure that both the dynamics dictated by the DEs
and the optimization objectives are concurrently learned and respected. This integration allows for
end-to-end differentiation enabling efficient gradient-based optimization, and, for the first time to
our knowledge, solving DE-constrained optimization problems in near real-time. Empirical eval-
uations across financial modeling and energy optimization tasks, illustrated DE-OP’s capability to
adeptly address these complex challenges. The results demonstrate not only the effectiveness of our
approach but also its broad potential applicability across various scientific and engineering domains
where system dynamics are crucial to optimization or control processes.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by NSF grants EPCN-2242931 and NSF CAREER-2143706. The
view and conclusions are those of the authors only.

R EFERENCES
Sogol Babaeinejadsarookolaee, Adam Birchfield, Richard D. Christie, Carleton Coffrin, Christopher
  DeMarco, Ruisheng Diao, Michael Ferris, Stephane Fliscounakis, Scott Greene, Renke Huang,
  Cedric Josz, Roman Korab, Bernard Lesieutre, Jean Maeght, Terrence W. K. Mak, Daniel K.
  Molzahn, Thomas J. Overbye, Patrick Panciatici, Byungkwon Park, Jonathan Snodgrass, Ahmad
  Tbaileh, Pascal Van Hentenryck, and Ray Zimmerman. The power grid library for benchmarking
  ac optimal power flow algorithms, 2021.
John T Betts. Practical methods for optimal control and estimation using nonlinear programming.
  SIAM, 2010.
John T Betts and Stephen L Campbell. Discretize then optimize. Mathematics for industry: chal-
  lenges and frontiers, pp. 140–157, 2005.
Wojciech Blajer and Krzysztof Kołodziejczyk. A geometric approach to solving problems of control
 constraints: theory and a dae framework. Multibody System Dynamics, 11(4):343–364, 2004.
Stephen Boyd, Neal Parikh, Eric Chu, Borja Peleato, and Jonathan Eckstein. Distributed optimiza-
  tion and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations and
  Trends in Machine Learning, 3(1):1–122, 2011.
Marek Capiński and Ekkehard Kopp. The Black–Scholes Model. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary dif-
  ferential equations. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, NIPS’18, pp. 6572–6583. Curran Associates Inc., 2018.
Steven Diamond and Stephen Boyd. Cvxpy: A python-embedded modeling language for convex
  optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):2909–2913, 2016.
Priya L Donti, David Rolnick, and J Zico Kolter. Dc3: A learning method for optimization with
  hard constraints. In ICLR, 2020.
Graeme Fairweather and Daniel Meade. A survey of spline collocation methods for the numerical
  solution of differential equations. In Mathematics for large scale computing, pp. 297–341. CRC
  Press, 2020.
Ferdinando Fioretto, Pascal Van Hentenryck, Terrence WK Mak, Cuong Tran, Federico Baldo, and
  Michele Lombardi. Lagrangian duality for constrained deep learning. In Joint European Con-
  ference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 118–135. Springer,
  2020.
Matthias Gerdts. Direct shooting method for the numerical solution of higher-index dae optimal
 control problems. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 117:267–294, 2003.
Nikos Hatziargyriou, Jovica Milanovic, Claudia Rahmann, Venkataramana Ajjarapu, Claudio
  Canizares, Istvan Erlich, David Hill, Ian Hiskens, Innocent Kamwa, Bikash Pal, Pouyan Pourbeik,
  Juan Sanchez-Gasca, Aleksandar Stankovic, Thierry Van Cutsem, Vijay Vittal, and Costas Vour-
  nas. Definition and classification of power system stability – revisited & extended. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Power Systems, 36(4):3271–3281, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2020.3041774.
Magnus R. Hestenes. Multiplier and gradient methods. Journal of Optimization Theory and Appli-
 cations, 4:303–320, 1969.
Liangjian Hu, Xiaoyue Li, and Xuerong Mao. Convergence rate and stability of the truncated euler–
  maruyama method for stochastic differential equations. Journal of Computational and Applied
  Mathematics, 337:274–289, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Patrick Kidger. On neural differential equations, 2022.
Patrick Kidger, James Foster, Xuechen Li, Harald Oberhauser, and Terry Lyons. Neural sdes as
  infinite-dimensional gans, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03657.
Peter E. Kloeden and Eckhard Platen. Numerical Solution of Stochastic Differential Equations.
  Springer, 2023. ISBN 978-3-662-12616-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-12616-5.
James Kotary, Ferdinando Fioretto, Pascal Van Hentenryck, and Bryan Wilder. End-to-end con-
  strained optimization learning: A survey. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21, pp. 4475–4482, 2021. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2021/610.
  URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2021/610.
James Kotary, Vincenzo Di Vito, Jacob Cristopher, Pascal Van Hentenryck, and Ferdinando Fioretto.
  Learning joint models of prediction and optimization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2409.04898.
Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Burigede Liu, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08481.
Peijie Li, Junjian Qi, Jianhui Wang, Hua Wei, Xiaoqing Bai, and Feng Qiu. An SQP Method Com-
  bined with Gradient Sampling for Small-Signal Stability Constrained OPF. IEEE Transactions
  on Power Systems, 32, 07 2016. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2016.2598266.
Terrence W. K. Mak, Minas Chatzos, Mathieu Tanneau, and Pascal Van Hentenryck. Learning
  regionally decentralized ac optimal power flows with admm, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2205.03787.
David Q Mayne, James B Rawlings, CV Rao, and PO Scokaert. Constrained model predictive
  control: Stability and optimality. Automatica, 36(6):789–814, 2000.
George S. Misyris, Andreas Venzke, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. Physics-informed neural net-
  works for power systems. 2020 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp.
  1–5, 2019.
Nasdaq. Nasdaq end of day us stock prices. https://data.nasdaq.com/databases/
  EOD/documentation, 2022. Accessed: 2023-08-15.
Seonho Park and Pascal Van Hentenryck. Self-supervised primal-dual learning for constrained op-
  timization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp.
  4052–4060, 2023.
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learn-
 ing framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential
 equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 378:686–707, Feb 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2018.
 10.045.
Mark Rubinstein. Markowitz’s” portfolio selection”: A fifty-year retrospective. The Journal of
 finance, 57(3):1041–1045, 2002.
Peter Rudzis. Brownian motion, 2017.
Rajiv Sambharya, Georgina Hall, Brandon Amos, and Bartolomeo Stellato. End-to-end learning to
  warm-start for real-time quadratic optimization, 2022.
Peter W. Sauer and M. A. Pai. Power System Dynamics and Stability. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
  River, N.J., 1998.
Andreas Wächter and Lorenz T. Biegler. On the implementation of an interior-point filter line-search
  algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical Programming, 106:25–57, 2006.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14183894.
Sifan Wang, Yujun Teng, and Paris Perdikaris. Understanding and mitigating gradient pathologies in
   physics-informed neural networks, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.04536.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yong Yu, Xiaosheng Si, Changhua Hu, and Jianxun Zhang. A review of recurrent neural networks:
  Lstm cells and network architectures. Neural computation, 31(7):1235–1270, 2019.
Ahmed Zamzam and Kyri Baker. Learning optimal solutions for extremely fast AC optimal power
  flow. In IEEE SmartGridComm, Dec. 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     S TOCHASTIC D IFFERENTIAL E QUATION C ONSTRAINED O PTIMIZATION
This section extends the problem description (1) presented in Section 3 of the main paper to a
stochastic setting. In presence of stochastic dynamics, the optimization problem constrained by
differential equations (1) becomes
                                 "               Z T                 #
                     Minimize E L(u, y(T )) +        Φ(u, y(t), t) dt                     (10a)
                          u                               t=0

                          s.t. dy(t) = F (u, y(t), t)dt + G(u, y(t), t)dW (t)                          (10b)
                               y(0) = I(u)                                                             (10c)
                               g(u, y(t)) ≤ 0                                                          (10d)
                               h(u, y(t)) = 0.                                                         (10e)
The SDE constrained optimization problem (10) involves determining the optimal decision variables
u = (u1 , . . . , un ) in a system where the state variables y(t) = (y1 (t), . . . , ym (t)) evolve according
to stochastic dynamics (10a) and initial conditions dictated by (10b). Each state variable yi (t) is
governed by a stochastic differential equation dyi (t) = Fi (y(t), u, t)dt + Gi (y(t), u, t)dWi (t),
where Fi represents the deterministic part of the dynamics, and Gi captures the stochastic compo-
nent, where Wi (t) is a Wiener process. The set of all such equations is described by F and G,
as defined by (10b). The initial condition for the state variables is set by constraints (10c), where
y(0) = I(u) defines the starting state based on the control variables u. Constraints (10d) and (10e)
enforce inequality and equality constraints, respectively, on the state and control variables, ensuring
that the system behaves within specified bounds throughout the decision process.
The objective (10a) is to minimize the expected value of a combination of the running cost
Φ(u, y(t), t), which varies with the state and decision variables over time, and the terminal cost
L(u, y(T )), which depends on the final state y(T ) and the decision variables u. The optimization
is performed over a time horizon T , which defines the period during which the decision-making
process occurs.

B     S TABILITY C ONSTRAINED AC-O PTIMAL P OWER F LOW
This section describes the stability constrained AC-Optimal Power Flow problem; it first introduces
the AC-Optimal Power Flow problem and the synchronous generator dynamics, to eventually inte-
grate these two components to form the stability constrained AC-Optimal Power Flow problem.

B.1    AC-O PTIMAL P OWER F LOW PROBLEM

The AC-Optimal Power Flow (OPF) problem determines the most cost-effective generator dispatch
that satisfies demand within a power network subject to various physical and engineering power
systems constraints. Typically, the OPF problem involves capturing a snapshot of the power network
parameters and determine the bus voltages and generator set-points based on that fixed state. A
power network can be represented as a graph (N , L) with the node set N consisting of n buses,
and the edge set L comprises l lines. The set L is defined as a collection of directed arcs, with LR
indicating the arcs in L but in the opposite direction. G ⊂ N represents the set of all synchronous
generators in the system. The power generation and demand at a bus i ∈ N are represented by
complex variables Sir = pri + jqir and Sid = pdi + jqid , respectively. The power flow across line ij
is denoted by Sij , and θi symbolizes the phase angles at bus i ∈ N .
The AC power flow equations use complex numbers for current I, voltage V , admittance Y , and
power S, interconnected   through various constraints. Kirchhoff’s Current Law (KCL) is represented
by Iir − Iid = (i,j)∈L∪LR Iij , Ohm’s Law by Iij = Yij (Vi − Vj ), and AC power flow is denoted
                P
              ∗
as Sij = Vi Iij . These principles form the AC Power Flow equations, described by (11f) and (11g),
which formulation is described by Model 1. The goal is to minimize a function (11a) representing
dispatch costs for each generator. Constraints (11b)-(11c) represents voltage operational limits to
bound voltage magnitudes and phase angle differences, while (11d)-(11e) set boundaries for gen-
erator output and line flow. Constraint (11h) sets the reference phase angle. Finally, constraints
(11f) and (11g) enforce KCL and Ohm’s Law, respectively. The classical, steady-state problem,


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Model 1 The AC Optimal Power Flow Problem (AC-OPF)
                            Parameters : ζ = (S d )
                     decision variables : u = (Sir , Vi ) ∀i ∈ N , Sij ∀(i, j) ∈ L
                                         X
                             Minimize      c2i (ℜ(Sir ))2 + c1i ℜ(Sir ) + c0i                       (11a)
                                             i∈G

                                     s. t.
                                         vil ≤ |Vi | ≤ viu ∀i ∈ N                                   (11b)
                                                ∆
                                             − θij ≤ ∠(Vi Vj∗ ) ≤ θij
                                                                   ∆
                                                                         ∀(i, j) ∈ L                (11c)
                                         Sirl ≤ Sir ≤ Siru ∀i ∈ N                                   (11d)
                                         |Sij | ≤ suij ∀(i, j) ∈ L                                  (11e)
                                         Sir − Sid =
                                                        P
                                                           (i,j)∈L Sij     ∀i ∈ N                    (11f)
                                         Sij = Yij∗ |Vi |2 − Yij∗ Vi Vj∗    ∀(i, j) ∈ L             (11g)
                                         θref = 0                                                   (11h)



described by Model 1, does not incorporate systems dynamics capturing the behavior of the syn-
chronous generators, and as such, does not guarantee stable operations for a power system. This
paper extends this problem by introducing the Stability-Constrained AC-Optimal Power Flow Prob-
lem, which integrates the generator dynamics and related stability constraints within the AC-OPF
problem (1).

B.2   G ENERATOR DYNAMICS

The generator dynamics are modeled using the ”Classical machine model” (12), which is typically
adopted to describe the dynamic behavior of synchronous generators (Sauer & Pai, 1998)

                         "                ωs (ω g (t) − ωs )
                                                                            #
             d δ g (t)                                   g
                        = 1                                                                          (12)
                                                        Eq,0 vg

                 g              g    g  g                       g
             dt ω (t)      M g Pm − D (ω (t) − ωs ) − Xdg sin(δ (t) − θg )

, where δ g (t) and ω g (t) represents the rotor angle and angular speed over time t of generator g ∈ G,
ωs the synchronous angular frequency, M g the machine’s inertia constant, Dg the damping coef-
ficient, Pmg
              the mechanical power, Xdg the transient reactance and Eq,0       g
                                                                                  electromotive force. The
                                   g                                g
initial value of the rotor angle δ0 , and electromotive force Eq,0 for each generator g ∈ G are derived
from the active and reactive power equations, assuming the generator dynamical system (12) being
                                                     d                   T          T
in a steady state condition at time instant t = 0, dt   [δ g (t) ω g (t)]t=0 = [0 0] :
                                  g
                                 Eq,0 vg sin(δ0g − θg )
                                                        − prg = 0,                                   (13)
                                          Xdg
                                  g
                                 Eq,0 vg cos(δ0g − θg ) − vg2
                                                              − qgr = 0.                             (14)
                                             Xdg
Following the same assumptions, the initial rotor angular speed is set as
                                                   ω0g = ωs .                                        (15)



Stability limit To guarantee stability of a synchronous generator g ∈ G, the rotor angle δ g (t) is
required to remain below an instability threshold δ max , as defined by SIngle Machine Equivalent
(SIME) model:
                                        δ g (t) ≤ δ max     ∀t ≥ 0.                                  (17)
Unstable conditions arise when violating the inequality constraint (17), which is the principal bind-
ing constraint that necessitates re-dispatching.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Model 2 The Stability Constrained AC-OPF Problem
                          Parameters : ζ = (S d )
                   decision variables : u = (Sir , Vi ) ∀i ∈ N , Sij ∀(i, j) ∈ L
                      State variables : y(t) = (δ g (t), ω g (t)) ∀g ∈ G
                                       X
                           Minimize      c2i (ℜ(Sir ))2 + c1i ℜ(Sir ) + c0i                             (16a)
                                        i∈G

                                    s. t.
                                  (11b) – (11h)                                                         (16b)
                                  dδ g (t)
                                           = ωs (ω g (t) − ωs ) ∀g ∈ G                                  (16c)
                                    dt
                                  dω g (t)     1
                                           = g (pgm − dg (ω g (t) − ωs ))
                                    dt        m
                                           e′g
                                            q (0)|Vg |
                                         −              sin(δ g (t) − θg ) ∀g ∈ G                       (16d)
                                             x′g
                                               d m
                                                   g

                                  e′g               g
                                   q (0)|Vg | sin(δ (0) − θg )
                                                 ′g            − prg = 0 ∀g ∈ G                         (16e)
                                               xd
                                  e′g              g
                                   q (0)|Vg | cos(δ (0) − θg ) − |Vg |
                                                                       2

                                                     ′g                  − qgr = 0 ∀g ∈ G                (16f)
                                                   xd
                                  ω g (0) = ωs ∀g ∈ G                                                   (16g)
                                  δ g (t) ≤ δ max ∀g ∈ G.                                               (16h)
                                                                                                         (16i)



B.3    S TABILITY-C ONSTRAINED AC-O PTIMAL P OWER F LOW P ROBLEM

The generator dynamics (12) and its initial conditions equations (13)-(15), together with the associ-
ated stability constraints (17), are thus integrated within the steady-state AC-OPF Problem 1, giving
rise to the Stability-Constrained AC-OPF problem, which is detailed in Model 2. In this problem,
parameters ζ = S d represent customer demand, while decision variables x = (S r , V ) are the gen-
erator settings and bus voltages; the state variables y(t) = (δ g (t), ω g (t)) ∀g ∈ G represent the rotor
angle and angular speed of the generators.

Training setting of Neural Ordinary Differential Equation Models As the generator dynamics
are described by a system of ODEs, neural-ODE (Chen et al., 2018) models, one for each syn-
chronous generator g ∈ G, are used to capture their dynamics. Each neural-DE model Nθg is trained
in a supervised fashion, as described in Section 4.2, to obtain dynamic predictors that are capable
of providing accurate estimate of the state variables y g (t) across a family of instances of the gen-
erator model (12). Specifically, for each generator g ∈ G, the datasets Dg used for training the
generator dynamic predictor Nθg , consists of pairs (xi , yi (t)) ∼ Dg , where xi = (δ0g , ω0g , |Vg′ |, θg′ )
is the input of the neural-ODE model, and yi (t) = (δ g (t), ω g (t), |Vg′ |(t), θg′ (t)) the corresponding
solution of (12) with initial conditions yi (0) = I(xi ), represented by (16e)-(16g) and computed
using Dopri5, a numerical algorithm implementing an adaptive Runge-Kutta method. For each in-
put x, the OPF decision variables |Vg′ |, θg′ are sampled from a uniform distribution U(a, b), where a
and b are given by the corresponding operational limits specified by Constraints (11b)-(11c). Note
that each of these variables influences the initial condition of the state variables (δ g (0), ω g (0)) via
Equation (13)-(15), as well as the governing equations of the generator. As |Vg′ |, θg′ extend the ac-
tual generator state variables (δ g (t), ω g (t)), we are implicitly augmenting the generator model with
                                                                        d|V ′ |(t)
                                                                        g            dθ (t)
                                                                                     g
these two additional state variables that have no dynamics (e.g. dt          = 0, dt      = 0) and initial
             ′           ′   ′          ′
condition |Vg |(0) = |Vg |, θg (0) = θg . This trick allows us to explicitly inform the neural ODE
model of the role played by the voltage magnitude |Vg | and angle θg on the dynamics of each gen-
erator. The generator characteristics parameters of model (12), such as the damping coefficient Dg ,
inertia constant M g , and mechanical power Pm   g
                                                    are adopted from Li et al. (2016). Each dataset
  g
D contains approximately 50% of unstable trajectories and 50% of stable trajectories, generated as
described in Section 4.2. At training time, given a pair (xi , yi (t)) ∼ Dg , the target is constructed as


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


yig (t) = yig (0), yig (∆t ), . . . , yig (n∆t ), with ∆t = 0.001 and the number of points n, is set to 200
at the beginning of the training, and gradually increases up to 1000. This trick allows to avoid local
minima during training (Kidger, 2022). At test time, we set n = 1000.

B.4   DYNAMIC P ORTFOLIO O PTIMIZATION

DE-OP uses a neural-SDE (Kidger et al., 2021) model Nθ to capture the asset price dynamics
y(t). The neural-SDE model consists of 2 separate neural network, Nθ = (Nθf , Nθg ) where
Nθf aims to capture the deterministic component of (9d), µi ζ(t)dt and Nθg the stochastic com-
ponent σi ζ(t)dWi (t). Nθf is a simple linear layer, while Nθg is a 2-layer ReLU neural network.
Given the initial asset price vector y(0) = ζ, the neural-SDE model Nθ generates an estimate
ŷ(t) = Nθ (y(0), t) of the asset prices trend, from which the final asset price ŷ(T ) is obtained.
The LSTM and the Feed Forward model used to estimate the final asset price ŷ(T ) as the dynamic
component of the corresponding baseline method are both a 2-layer ReLU neural network. The final
time instant T = 28, 800 seconds which corresponds to 8 hours. Given initial condition y j (0) = ζ j ,
the asset price trend y j (t) is obtained by Ito numerical integration of (9d). The neural-SDE model is
trained on a dataset {(ζ j , y j (t))}N                                                    j     j     N
                                        j=1 ; the LSTM model is trained on a dataset {(y (t), y (T ))}j=1 ,
where y j (t) = y j (0), y j (∆t ), . . . , y j (∆t K) is a time series, ∆t = 100 seconds and ∆t K = T −1.
The Feed Forward network is trained on a dataset {(y j (0), y j (T ))}N       j=1 .


C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
C.1   P ROXY OPTIMIZER METHODS

This subsection describes in brief the proxy optimizer methods adopted in the experiments to esti-
mate the optimal decision variables u⋆ , within the operational setting described by (1) or (10). Each
description below assumes a DNN model Fω parameterized by ω, which acts on problem parame-
ters ζ to produce an estimate of the decision variables û := Fω (ζ), so that û ≈ u⋆ (ζ). To ease
notation, the dependency from problem parameters ζ is omitted.

Lagrangian Dual Learning (LD). Fioretto et al. (2020) constructs the following modified La-
grangian as a loss function:
               LLD (û, y(t)) = ∥û − u⋆ (ζ)∥2 + λT [g(û, y(t))]+ + µT h(û, y(t)).

At each iteration of LD training, the model Fω is trained to minimize a balance of constraint vi-
olations and proximity to the precomputed target optima u⋆ (ζ). Updates to the multiplier vectors
λ and µ are calculated based on the average constraint violations incurred by the predictions û,
mimicking a dual ascent method (Boyd et al., 2011).

Deep Constraint Completion and Correction (DC3). Donti et al. (2020) uses the loss function
               LDC3 (û, ŷ(t)) = J (û, ŷ(t)) + λ∥ [g(û, ŷ(t))]+ ∥2 + µ∥h(û, ŷ(t))∥2
which relies on a completion-correction technique to enforce constraint satisfaction, while maximiz-
ing the empirical objective J in self-supervised training.

Self-Supervised Primal-Dual Learning (PDL).              Park & Van Hentenryck (2023) uses an aug-
mented Lagrangian loss function


                  LPDL (û, ŷ(t)) = J (û, y(t)) + λ̂T g(û, ŷ(t)) + µ̂T h(û, ŷ(t))+
                                                                                      
                                       ρ X                        X
                                               [gj (û, ŷ(t))]+ +     |hi (û, ŷ(t))| ,
                                       2     j                       i

which consists of a primal network to approximate the decision variables, and a dual network to learn
the Lagrangian multipliers update. The method is self-supervised, requiring no precomputation of
target solutions for training.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


MSE. Zamzam & Baker (2020) uses the loss function:
                                     LMSE (û, u⋆ ) = ∥û − u⋆ ∥2
which minimizes the MSE between the predicted solution û and the corresponding precomputed
solution u⋆ .

C.2   S TABILITY C ONSTRAINED AC-O PTIMAL P OWER F LOW EXPERIMENT

Hyperparameters of the neural-ODE models Each neural-ODE model is a fully connected feed-
forward ReLU neural network with 2 hidden layers, each with 200 units. Each model is trained using
Adam optimizer, with default learning rate η = 10−3 and default hyperparameters.

Hyperparameters of the DE-OP’s optimization model and the proxy optimizer methods The
DE-OP optimization component Fω and each baseline proxy optimizer model is trained with Adam
optimizer and default learning rate η = 10−3 . Each proxy optimizer model is a fully connected
FeedFoward ReLU neural network with 5 hidden layers, each with 200 units. The DE-OP’s op-
timization model Fω and Lagrangian Dual proxy model are trained with a Lagrangian step size
ρ = 10−1 , while the Lagrangian multipliers λh′ and λg are updated at each epoch. DC3’s proxy
optimizer model is trained with the same set of hyperparameters for OPF, as reported in the original
paper.

C.3   DYNAMIC P ORTFOLIO E XPERIMENT

Hyperparameters of the asset prices predictor models The stochastic component of the neural-
SDE, the LSTM and Feed Forward model are each 2-layers ReLU networks, each with 100 units.
The neural-SDE, LSTM and Feed Forward models are all trained using Adam optimizer, with default
learning rate η = 10−3 and hyperparameters.

Hyperparameters of the DE-OP’s optimization model and the proxy optimizer methods The
DE-OP optimization component Fω and each baseline proxy optimizer model is trained with Adam
optimizer and default learning rate η = 10−3 . Each proxy optimizer model is a fully connected Feed
Foward ReLU neural network with 2 hidden layers, each with 50 units. The DE-OP’s optimization
model Fω and Lagrangian Dual proxy model are trained with a Lagrangian step size ρ = 10−1 ,
while the Lagrangian multipliers λh′ and λg are updated each 10 epoch. PDL’s and DC3’s proxy
optimizer model uses the same hyperparameters for the Convex Quadratic task, as reported in the
respective original paper.

D     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS : S TABILITY C ONSTRAINED AC
      O PTIMAL P OWER F LOW
This section reports additional experimental results of DE-OP model and the baseline methods on
the WSCC 9-bus system and the IEEE 57-bus system. Specifically, we report:

       • The inference time (measured in seconds) of neural-ODE which we compare to the com-
         putational time of a traditional numerical ODE solver and the precision of state variables’
         estimate ŷ(t) (measured as the percentage ℓ2 error) of NODEs and PINNs Raissi et al.
         (2019), a different learning-based approach for learning the system dynamics.
       • The (steady-state) decision error (MSE) of the OPF variables of DE-OP and each proxy
         optimizer method, incurred by the respective approximation û, computed assuming that
         the generators are in steady-state.
       • The (steady-state) optimality gaps incurred by DE-OP and the baselines proxy optimizers
                                              ⋆      ⋆
         predictions’ û, and measured as |L(u (ζ),y   (T ))−L(û(ζ),ŷ(T ))|
                                                 |L(u⋆ (ζ),y ⋆ (T ))|         × 100, where L is objective
         function (equation 16a).
       • The inference time (measured in seconds) of DE-OP and each proxy optimizer model to
         generate û.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Average and standard deviation of computational times for numerical solvers vs. neural-
ODE inference time by method

                    Method                              Numerical Solver                        neural-ODE
                    Dopri5 (default)                   0.135 ± 0.015 (sec)                   0.008 ± 0 (sec)
                    Bosh3                              0.446 ± 0.039 (sec)                   0.017 ± 0 (sec)

                    800
                                      δ(t)
                                      ω(t)                          Numerical solver computational time
                                                         8          NODE inference time
                                      δN ODE (t)
                    600               ωN ODE (t)
                                      π/2                4

                    400
                                                         0

                                                          0.0                0.2                0.4
                    200



                      0
                            0.0              0.5         1.0           1.5             2.0             2.5             3.0
                                                                    Time (s)

Figure 6: True and neural-ODE (NODE) solutions of the generator state variables in unstable con-
ditions.

                                                                                                             δ(t)
                      1.0
                                                                                                             ω(t)
                      0.8                                                                                    δN ODE (t)
                                                                                                             ωN ODE (t)
                      0.6                                                                                    δP IN N (t)
                                                                                                             ωP IN N (t)
                      0.4

                      0.2

                      0.0

                    −0.2

                    −0.4
                                  0                2            4                  6               8                 10
                                                                     Time (s)

Figure 7: True, neural-ODE (NODE) and PINN estimate of the generator state variables in stable
conditions.


D.1   L EARNING THE GENERATOR DYNAMICS

Runtime comparison between neural-ODEs and a traditional ODE solver. Here the goal is to
evaluate the neural-ODE’ inference time to produce the generators’ state variables estimates and to
compare it with the computational time of a traditional ODE solver. Given the synchronous gener-
ator model described by (12), a numerical ODE solver could be adopted to determine the evolution
in time of the state variables δ g (t) and ω g (t). However, in case of unstable conditions, the system
response can be as rapid as, or even exceed, the time required for computing the ODE solution with
a numerical solver. This situation is depicted in Figure 6 where unstable conditions arise before a
numerical solution to the system of differential equations (12) is computed. Conversely, the neural
ODE model Nϕg is capable of detecting unstable conditions before the system transitions into an un-
stable state, while also providing a good approximation of the solution. This speed advantage arises


                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Average (steady-state) decision errors for the WSCC 9-bus system across different ap-
proaches based on 40 trials.

            Models                         MSE (Mean Squared Error) ×10−4
          Fω       Nθ           pr                qr               |V |               θ
         DE-OP (ours)     2.45 ± 0.253       3.26 ± 0.127      2.55 ± 0.354    3.82 ± 0.924
         MSE     ∅        1.90 ± 0.272       1.63 ± 0.580      0.32 ± 0.153    0.43 ± 0.149
          LD     ∅        1.77 ± 0.163       1.72 ± 0.284      0.16 ± 0.099    0.55 ± 0.051
         DC3     ∅        1.86 ± 0.217       1.65 ± 0.262      0.26 ± 0.195    0.48 ± 0.343

Table 4: Average (steady-state) decision errors for the IEEE 57-bus system across different ap-
proaches based on 40 trials.

            Models                         MSE (Mean Squared Error) ×10−3
          Fω       Nθ           pr                qr               |V |               θ
         DE-OP (ours)     5.05 ± 0.175       7.42 ± 1.482      2.99 ± 0.214    4.43 ± 0.673
         MSE     ∅        3.48 ± 0.321       3.86 ± 1.512      0.77 ± 0.148    1.42 ± 0.237
          LD     ∅        3.97 ± 0.279       3.52 ± 2.427      0.34 ± 0.012    0.95 ± 0.054
         DC3     ∅        3.31 ± 0.579       6.74 ± 0.580      0.51 ± 0.078    0.64 ± 0.081

Table 5: Average and standard deviation of constraint violations and (steady-state) optimality gap
on the WSCC 9-bus system for different approaches based on 40 independent runs.

               Models                                    Metrics
                                             Flow Vio.      Boundary Vio.   Optimality Gap*
            Fω     Nθ     Stability Vio.
                                              ×10−3            ×10−4        (at steady-state)
           DE-OP (ours)       0.00         8.32 ± 0.596     0.41 ± 0.243      0.13 ± 0.02
           MSE     ∅      2.26 ± 0.189     10.45 ± 2.183    9.72 ± 4.930      0.13 ± 0.02
            LD     ∅      2.13 ± 0.175      7.19 ± 0.425        0.00          0.11 ± 0.01
           DC3     ∅      2.45 ± 0.205          0.00            0.00          0.11 ± 0.01


from the neural-ODE’ vector field approximation of (12), which enables quicker computation of the
forward pass of a numerical ODE solver (Kidger, 2022). Table 2 reports the average and standard
deviation of computational time, for numerical solvers, and inference time, for neural-ODEs, given
2 different numerical algorithms. Neural-ODE models are, on average, about 20 times faster than a
numerical solver which uses the dynamic equations of (12). This aspect makes neural-ODE models
natural candidates as dynamic predictors for the generator model in real-time applications.

Comparison between neural-ODEs and PINNs. Here the goal is to asses the precision of the
neural-ODEs’ estimate of the generator state variables and to compare them with PINNs Misyris
et al. (2019). PINNs are ML-based models that incorporates known physical laws into the learning
process. Instead of relying solely on data, PINNs use physics-based constraints to guide the train-
ing, ensuring that the model’s predictions are consistent with the underlying scientific principles.
Figure 7 shows the neural-ODE and PINNs’ state variables estimates in case of stable conditions.
While a neural-ODEs model produces highly accurate state variables’ predictions, a PINN model
trained on the same dataset Dg but affected by a generalization bias, is incapable of capturing the
generator dynamics across different instances of the generator model (12) and produces poor state
variables estimates. Specifically, the percentage ℓ2 error between the numerical ODE solver solu-
tions δ(t), ω(t) and the neural-ODE (NODE) predictions δNODE (t), ωNODE (t) is 5.17%, while for the
PINN predictions δPINN (t), ωPINN (t) is significantly higher at 69.45%.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2   C ONSTRAINT VIOLATIONS AND ( STEADY- STATE ) DECISION ERRORS

Tables 3 and 4 report the (steady-state) decision error (MSE) at test time of DE-OP and the baseline
PO methods on the WSCC 9-bus and IEEE 57-bus system, respectively. Specifically, the tables re-
ports the MSE of estimated solutions with respect to the ground-truth solutions, with the assumption
that the synchronous generators are in steady-state. The same considerations reported in Section 5.2
regarding the steady-state optimality gaps apply also for the following discussion. In other words,
the ground truth variables used to compute the decision errosr, are obtained from solving the steady-
state ACOPF problem, and as such, the decision errors here reported do not necessarily reflect that
of each method for solving the Stability-Constrained AC OPF problem. Nonetheless, this metric
provides valuable insights on the impact of the decision variables on the dynamics requirements of
Problem 2.
Firstly, note that, for each test case, all the methods achieve similar decision error. Despite that,
as shown in Table 1 of the main paper and Table 5, and Figures 4, 5 of the main paper, DE-OP is
the only method that satisfy exactly the dynamic requirements (17), while all the baseline methods
systematically violate the stability constraint. These results suggest that DE-OP modifies potentially
unstable set points, at a cost of a only slightly higher MSE than the baseline approaches. Note in
particular the MSE error of the OPF variables |V | and θ; these variables directly affect the generator
dynamics in (12), and thus their modification is necessary to satisfy the stability constraint. This
trade-off is crucial for practical applications, where the dynamic requirements must be addressed.
Table 5 shows the violation of the static (flow and boundaries), along with the optimality gap with
the assumption that the generators are in steady-state, for each method on the WSCC-9 bus system.
Similarly to the IEEE 57 test-case discussed in Section 5.2, DC3 is the only method which achieves
steady-state constraint satisfactions. All methods except DC3 generate comparable violations of the
flow balance constraints, which is the most difficult constraint to satisfy due to its non-linear nature
defined by Constraint (11f) and (11g). LD satisfy the boundary constraint by projecting its output
û within the feasible set defined by Constraints (11b)-(11c). Empirically, we found that removing
this projection operation within the DE-OP model Fω , in some cases allows to satisfy the dynamic
requirements. We did not thoroughly investigate this result, but our intuition is that in some cases
the decision variables |V |, θ involved in the stability analysis must assume values close to their
boundaries to satisfy stability constraints. This comes at a cost of minimal boundary constraint vio-
lations from DE-OP. MSE, lacking of a mechanism to encourage constraint satisfactions, produces
solutions violating each constraint function.

D.3   S TEADY- STATE OPTIMALITY GAPS

This subsection discusses the sub-optimality of the estimated solution û with respect to the ground
truth u⋆ , with the assumption that the generators are in steady-state conditions, given parameters
ζ and measured in terms of objective value (16a), of DE-OP and each baseline method. The same
considerations reported in Section 5.2 regarding the steady-state optimality gaps and how this metric
should be interpreted, apply also for the subsequent discussion. Table 1 in the main paper and Table
5 report the optimality gaps on the WSCC-9 and IEEE-57 bus system, respectively. The tables
report that all the methods achieve comparable gaps on each test case. This is intuitive, since the
optimality gap depends solely on the power generated pr (see objective function (16a)), and all
methods produce similar pr ’s prediction error, as displayed in Tables 3 and 4. For the WSCC bus
system, DE-OP produces average optimality gap of 0.13% while preserving system stability, that are
comparable with the best optimality gap - LD with 0.11 and DC3 with 0.11 - which often violates
stability constraints.

D.4   I NFERENCE TIME

Finally, we evaluate the average inference time of DE-OP and each baseline proxy optimizer method.
Table 6 shows the inference time of each proxy optimizer method on each test case. On average, DE-
OP produces near-optimal and stable solutions in 1 (ms) and 9 (ms) for the WSCC-9 bus and IEEE
57-bus, respectively, which is slightly higher but comparable with the MSE and LD approaches,
and about 15× faster than the DC3 method. DC3 achieves the highest inference time, due to its
correction and completion procedure, which requires solving a nonlinear system of equations and
the Jacobian matrix computation. While DE-OP can be already used for near real-time applications,


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Average and standard deviation of inference times for different OPF learning approaches
in the test cases.

                                  Models             WSCC 9-bus              IEEE 57-bus
                                 Fω             Nθ          Inference Time (sec)
                             DE-OP (ours)            0.001 ± 0.00            0.009 ± 0.00
                             MSE     ∅               0.000 ± 0.00            0.001 ± 0.00
                              LD     ∅               0.000 ± 0.00            0.001 ± 0.00
                             DC3     ∅               0.025 ± 0.00            0.089 ± 0.00

its efficiency could be improved by computing the state variables in parallel, since each dynamic
predictor is independent. This aspect makes DE-OP’ inference time independent from the size of
number of state variables and dynamical systems, suggesting potential for large-scale and complex
systems.

E     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS : DYNAMIC P ORTFOLIO
      O PTIMIZATION

                     0.6          y 0(t)
                                    0
                                  ŷLST M (t)
                                    0
                                  ŷN SDE (t)
                     0.5

                     0.4

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                     0.0
                           0.0             0.2        0.4              0.6        0.8       1.0
                                                            Time (d)

         Figure 8: Asset prices (blue), LSTM (red) and neural-SDE asset prices estimates.


E.1   L EARNING THE ASSET PRICE DYNAMICS

Comparison between neural-SDE and LSTM. Fig. 8 illustrates the asset price trends given
different initial asset prices ζ 0 , with estimates ŷ 0 (t) provided by both a neural-SDE model and an
LSTM model, alongside the true asset prices y 0 (t) computed with a numerical SDE solver imple-
menting Euler-Maruyama method (Hu et al., 2018). It is evident that, given different initial asset
price ζ 0 , the neural-SDE model produces more accurate predictions than the LSTM model, by ex-
plicitly capturing the asset pricing dynamic equations. These accurate predictions lead to more
informed and higher quality decision making, as discussed in Section 5.1.

E.2   O PTIMALITY GAPS

This section report additional results of DE-OP and the baseline methods across different proxy
optimizer methods and asset price predictors on the Dynamic Portfolio Optimization task with n =
20 and n = 50. Figures 9 and 10 display the average, percentage optimality gap on the test set,
across different methods, for n = 20 and n = 50, respectively. In both figures, it is evident that
for a given proxy optimizer method (e.g., Lagrangian Dual), by using neural-SDE predictors to
capture the asset prices dynamics, DE-OP yields superior decision quality compared to the baseline
methods. For n = 20, DE-OP achieves the lowest optimality gaps - 12.92% for DC3, 5.23% for


                                                             22
                                                                                                50


                                                                                 Opt. ga
                                                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025                                                    10
                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                     Nµ =n-SDE       Nµ =LSTM   Nµ =FFrwrd   Nµ = ;


                  130                                                                          130
                           DE-OP                                                                        DE-OP
                           Static-only (DC3)                                                            Static-only (DC3)


                                                                                Opt. gap (%)
   Opt. gap (%)
                           Static-only (LD)                                                             Static-only (LD)
                           Static-only (PDL)                                                            Static-only (PDL)
                   50                                                                           50



                   20                                                                           20
                   10                                                                           10
                    5                                                                            5
                        Nµ =n-SDE       Nµ =LSTM   Nµ =FFrwrd   Nµ = ;                               Nµ =n-SDE       Nµ =LSTM   Nµ =FFrwrd   Nµ = ;


Figure 9: Average percentage optimality gap                                   Figure 10: Average percentage optimality gap
      n = 20DE-OP
with 130       asset prices for each method across                            with n = 50 asset prices for each method across
different proxy       optimizer methods.
            Static-only (DC3)                                                 different proxy optimizer methods.
  Opt. gap (%)


            Static-only (LD)
                           Static-only (PDL)
                  50

LD, and 13.45% for PDL - by capturing the asset prices dynamics via explicit modeling of the asset
      20 dynamics. Predicting the final asset price with LSTM leads to optimality gaps of 8.67%
prices’
      10 and 19.00% for PDL for PDL, performing consistently worse than DE-OP, due to its lack
for LD,5
         Nµ =n-SDE Nµ =LSTM Nµ =FFrwrd Nµ = ;
of explicit  dynamic modeling. The Feed      Forward model performs significantly worse, leading to
significantly higher gaps - 121.56% for DC3, 100.45% for LD, and 110.33% for PDL - highlighting
its limitations in capturing the time-dependent nature of the data, similarly to the proxy optimizer
methods which ignore the system dynamics, which achieve 103.98% for DC3, 111.63% for LD,
and 115.11% for PDL. Overall, these results follow the trend reported in Figure 3 and discussed
in Section 5.1 of the main paper, concerning the optimization task with n = 50. Among the proxy
optimizer methods considered, Lagrangian Dual consistently outperforms DC3 and PDL, suggesting
that precomputed solutions can enhance the accuracy and robustness of optimization proxies. The
optimality gaps achieved by each method when n = 50, increase with respect to the optimality
gaps achieved by the corresponding method when n = 20, likely due to a higher complexity of the
optimization task. These results highlight the importance of accurate dynamic predictions, which in
turn enable, in a subsequent stage, generating high quality investment allocations.


                                                                         23
