Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L ANGUAGE M ODEL A LIGNMENT IN M ULTILINGUAL
T ROLLEY P ROBLEMS
                   ∗                            ∗                  ∗
  Zhijing Jin1,2,3, Max Kleiman-Weiner4, Giorgio Piatti2, Sydney Levine5
  Jiarui Liu6 Fernando Gonzalez2 Francesco Ortu7 András Strausz2
  Mrinmaya Sachan2 Rada Mihalcea8 Yejin Choi4 Bernhard Schölkopf1
 1
   Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 ETH Zürich
 3
   University of Toronto 4 University of Washington 5 Allen Institute for AI (AI2)
 6
   Carnegie Mellon University 7 University of Trieste 8 University of Michigan



                                             A BSTRACT
         We evaluate the moral alignment of LLMs with human preferences in multilingual
         trolley problems. Building on the Moral Machine experiment, which captures
         over 40 million human judgments across 200+ countries, we develop a cross-
         lingual corpus of moral dilemma vignettes in over 100 languages called M UL -
         TI TP. This dataset enables the assessment of LLMs’ decision-making processes
         in diverse linguistic contexts. Our analysis explores the alignment of 19 different
         LLMs with human judgments, capturing preferences across six moral dimensions:
         species, gender, fitness, status, age, and the number of lives involved. By correlat-
         ing these preferences with the demographic distribution of language speakers and
         examining the consistency of LLM responses to various prompt paraphrasings,
         our findings provide insights into cross-lingual and ethical biases of LLMs and
         their intersection. We discover significant variance in alignment across languages,
         challenging the assumption of uniform moral reasoning in AI systems and high-
         lighting the importance of incorporating diverse perspectives in AI ethics. The
         results underscore the need for further research on the integration of multilingual
         dimensions in responsible AI research to ensure fair and equitable AI interactions
         worldwide.1

1    I NTRODUCTION
The increasingly impressive performance of large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023; Bubeck et al., 2023) also brings safety concerns. First, do LLMs align with
human preferences (Bengio et al., 2023; Hendrycks et al., 2021b; Anwar et al., 2024)? Second,
whose preferences are they most aligned with (Sorensen et al., 2024c)? Prior work on evaluating
alignment often takes one of two forms. The first requires continuous real-time evaluation, such
as in ChatArena (Chiang et al., 2024), where users select which of two responses they prefer. The
second is traditional benchmarking with a static dataset where the answers are determined by the
judgment of an experimenter or crowd-sourced from a limited online panel (Sap et al., 2019; Forbes
et al., 2020; Atari et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2021b).
Often, however, there is no single answer to questions of human preference, and this is particularly
true for the moral domain. We follow recent work that highlights the importance of modeling the
diversity of human moral preferences (Jin et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Gordon et al., 2022; Sorensen
et al., 2024b;c), and focus on moral dilemmas where subjects must balance two competing moral
objectives. The “Trolley Problem”, and its many variants, is one of the most extensively studied
moral dilemmas in the psychology literature (Foot, 1967; Thomson, 1984). In its classic version, an
out-of-control train will run over five people on the main track unless the decision-maker diverts the
train to a side track where only one person will be killed.
Traditional studies of trolley problems typically present a few hypothetical scenarios centered around
this trade-off (Mikhail, 2007; Kleiman-Weiner et al., 2015). In contrast, more recent studies consider
   ∗
     Equal contribution. Please contact zjin@cs.toronto.edu and maxkw@uw.edu for any high-level questions,
and giorgio.piatti@alumni.ethz.ch for coding questions.
   1
     Our code and data are at https://github.com/causalNLP/multiTP.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             Multilingual Trolley Problem (MultiTP)
                                                              Assume there is a self-driving car with a sudden break failure, and
                                                              the car is about to cause either of the two to die:
                                                              - a boy
                                                              - an elderly man

                                       🧒 👴                    If the self-driving car has to make a decision, between the two
                                                              choices, it should save
                                                                                                                                        Asked in Swahili:
                 Asked in German:                                                        Asked in Chinese: "假设                        "Chukulia kuwa kuna..."
             "Angenommen, es gibt ein..."                                                 有一辆自动驾驶汽车..."


   Es sollte den jüngeren Jungen retten, da er noch ein ganzes     应该救老人，因为他们拥有更多的生活经验，他                         Mvulana anapaswa kuokolewa kwa sababu ya umri
   Leben vor sich hat und mehr Zeit hat, um seine Träume und       们的社会贡献也更大。                                    wake na uwezo wake wa kutosha wa kuendelea na
   Ziele zu verwirklichen.                                         The elderly should be saved because they      maisha yake.
   It should save the younger boy, as he has a lifetime ahead of   have more life experience, and thus their     The boy should be saved because of his age and his
   him and more time to pursue his dreams and aspirations.         contribution to society is greater.           sufficient ability to continue his life.


Figure 1: An example scenario in the M ULTI TP dataset. Each question is presented in 107 different languages.
Here, we select three languages, German, Chinese, and Swahili, and show the responses of LLMs (English
translations provided for readers).


parametric variants of the dilemma that allow for better exploration of the psychological nuances in
ethical decision-making (Awad et al., 2018; 2020a). The Moral Machine experiment is particularly
noteworthy for its cross-cultural and parametric scale (Awad et al., 2018). The authors developed a
version of the trolley dilemma, where the trolley is an autonomous vehicle forced to choose between
killing one of two groups of people (Awad et al., 2020b). The people in each group differ across a
wide variety of attributes. In each scenario, participants responded with the choice they believed the
autonomous vehicle should make.
We leverage the Moral Machine dataset to examine the moral judgments of LLMs for three key
reasons: (1) parametric variation, (2) cross-cultural variation, and (3) scale of crowdsourced human
judgment (Awad et al., 2018). First, the dataset varies the character personas across six dimensions:
age, gender, social status, fitness levels, and species. Moreover, each group could also have a differ-
ent number of people. Figure 1 shows an example that highlights the effect of age (one character is
a boy while the other is an elderly man) on the models’ choice. Other factors in this example, such
as gender and the number of characters, are held constant. Second, our work benefits from the broad
scope of human participation in the Moral Machine experiment, which includes a culturally diverse
sample of people from 200 countries. Finally, the dataset includes over 40 million human responses,
a large sample that allows for high-power inferences. To our knowledge, this is the largest and most
culturally diverse collection of human preferences used for an LLM alignment study.
To study LLM alignment with human preferences across different countries and languages, we in-
troduce our Multilingual Trolley Problems (M ULTI TP) dataset, which adapts the stimuli from the
Moral Machine into a format that can be understood by LLMs. Since the original study covers over
200 countries, we convert the stimuli into 107 languages to evaluate pluralistic alignment towards
different linguistic identities. While most alignment benchmarks and evaluations of LLM morality
are in English and crowdsourced from US subjects (Hendrycks et al., 2021a; Jiang et al., 2021b;
Jin et al., 2022), we believe that cross-country and cross-language research on LLM alignment is
needed because human preferences are deeply rooted in their corresponding cultural context. What
is preferred in one language and often the corresponding culture does not necessarily generalize to
another language or culture (Henrich et al., 2010; Kleiman-Weiner et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018).
M ULTI TP rises to the challenge of multilingual alignment through four distinct advantages over
existing moral evaluation datasets, as in Table 1: (1) a moral alignment domain grounded in moral


               Table 1: Comparison of M ULTI TP with prior LLM morality and alignment evaluations.
                                                   Grounded in Psychology             Systematic Variations             # Languages # Human Responses
 SocialIQA (2019)                                            ✗                                 ✗                             ✗          3/question
 Social Chemistry (2020)                                     ✗                                 ✗                             ✗              137
 ETHICS (2021a)                                              ✓                                 ✗                             ✗         3~7/question
 MoralExceptQA (2022)                                        ✓                                 ✓                             ✗            11,238
 Commensense Norm Bank (2021b)                               ✗                                 ✗                             ✗          1.7 Million
 MoCa (2023)                                                 ✗                                 ✓                             ✗          2/question
 GlobalOpinionQA (2023)                                      ✗                                 ✗                           ✓ (4)           2,556
 OffTheRails (2024)                                          ✗                                 ✓                             ✗             4,800
 PRISM (2024)                                                ✗                                 ✗                             ✗             8,011
 M ULTI TP (This Work)                                       ✓                                 ✓                          ✓ (107)       40 Millions



                                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


philosophy and psychology, (2) LLM moral evaluation with controllable, parametric variations, fol-
lowing psychological research, (3) support for over 100 different languages, paving the way for
multi-lingual pluralistic alignment research, and (4) the largest number of human responses.

The M ULTI TP dataset includes 98,440 trolley problem scenarios, on which we evaluate 19 different
LLMs (open and closed-weight). Our investigation is structured by five research questions, ranging
from measuring the overall alignment across all scenarios to whether (mis)alignment correlates with
whether a language is high- or low- resource. Our findings reveal that very few LLMs demonstrate
overall alignment with human preferences. Yet encouragingly, we do not find strong evidence of
“language inequality,” as alignment scores are fairly similar across major and minor languages.

Main contributions. This work (1) presents Multilingual Trolley Problems, a test set enabling thor-
ough inspection of LLM multi-lingual alignment with human preferences, (2) deploys parametric
variation in trolley problem queries, to inspect the causal effect of six different preference dimen-
sions, (3) investigates the alignment of 19 LLMs with human preferences through over 100 lan-
guages, and (4) finds that most LLMs do not align well with human preferences on trolley problems,
but also in the meantime do not demonstrate a bias towards low-resource languages.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Moral Evaluation of LLMs Understanding the moral implications of LLMs is increasingly im-
portant as they are integrated into human-centric applications and decision-making systems (Awad
et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2022; Scherrer et al., 2024). Understanding the moral implications of LLMs is
increasingly important as they are integrated into human-centric applications and decision-making
systems (Schramowski et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2021a; Fraser et al., 2022; Dillion et al., 2023;
Cahyawijaya et al., 2024). In contrast to previous works, which evaluate limited LLMs using human-
generated stimuli that often vary unpredictably (Bruers & Braeckman, 2014; Krügel et al., 2023;
Almeida et al., 2023), our approach utilizes a procedurally generated set of moral dilemmas where
key parameters are systematically controlled by leveraging the Moral Machine framework (Awad
et al., 2018; 2020a). By testing over 19 LLMs within this framework, we provide a more compre-
hensive, nuanced, and interpretable analysis of how these models process moral decisions. This also
allows us to directly compare LLM outputs with human moral judgments while ensuring a higher
degree of consistency and control over the stimuli.

Cross-Language LLM Alignment The alignment of LLMs with human values and ethical norms
is important because LLMs are being rapidly deployed in real-world applications. Previous studies
have explored LLM alignment with different population subgroups (Durmus et al., 2023). Parallel
work examines cross-cultural commonsense in LLMs (Shen et al., 2024; Dunn et al., 2024; Manvi
et al., 2024), norm awareness and adaptability (Shi et al., 2024; Rao et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2021b)
and how models can be trained to generate a diverse plurality of human values that are relevant to
a query (Sorensen et al., 2024a). However, while moral judgments are known to vary significantly
across languages, cultures, and geographies, most existing benchmarks emphasize English responses
and predominantly reflect American cultural values (Sap et al., 2019; Forbes et al., 2020; Hendrycks
et al., 2021a; Jin et al., 2022; Atari et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024).

Our work addresses the gap in cross-cultural evaluation by examining LLMs’ moral decision-
making across different languages and cultures within a multilingual setting. Motivated by recent
advancements in multilingual NLP for both modeling (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023;
Jiang et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023; Young et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Meta, 2024) and evaluation
(Artetxe et al., 2019; Conneau et al., 2018; Longpre et al., 2021; Goyal et al., 2021; Ahuja et al.,
2023; Asai et al., 2023; Holtermann et al., 2024), our study uniquely analyzes the cross-cultural
alignment of LLMs by investigating the moral inconsistencies and biases that emerge across differ-
ent linguistic and country contexts, which is important for understanding the relationship between
language, culture, and moral reasoning (Jiang, 2000). In contrast to prior work, such as the analysis
of LLM responses to trolley problems (Takemoto, 2024), which focused on consistency between
LLM and human responses without addressing cross-linguistic variations, our study highlights the
disparities in moral decision-making when LLMs are evaluated across diverse linguistic and country
contexts. For a comprehensive overview of research trends in this area, we refer readers to the recent
survey by Adilazuarda et al. (2024).


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3   M ULTI TP: E VALUATING LLM S IN M ULTILINGUAL T ROLLEY P ROBLEMS
In this section, we detail the setup of the trolley problem scenarios included in our dataset and explain
how these questions have been translated into over 100 different languages. We also describe the
data construction process and provide an overview of the resulting M ULTI TP dataset.
3.1 T ROLLEY P ROBLEM S ETUP
The Original Human Study As previously introduced, the classic trolley problem (Foot, 1967;
Thomson, 1984) involves an out-of-control train and presents a moral dilemma: saving five people
on the main track or one innocent person on the side track. To thoroughly analyze LLM moral
alignment, we utilize the framework of the Moral Machine Experiment (Awad et al., 2018), which
systematically varies the choices in the trolley problem across several key dimensions. For example,
a scenario requiring a choice between a boy and an elderly man, as shown in Figure 1, highlights age
preferences, while a choice between an executive and a homeless person emphasizes social status
preferences.
We base our study on the extensive set of human preferences collected in Awad et al. (2018), which
serves as the ground truth for alignment. This collection includes approximately 40 million re-
sponses from individuals in 233 countries. Following the original study’s methodology, we include
data from countries with at least 100 respondents, resulting in a dataset that encompasses 130 coun-
tries. Note that while this test set serves as a descriptive measure of human responses to moral
dilemmas, it does not prescribe normative guidelines for how systems should act, as the dataset
reflects culturally specific biases that may not align with universally accepted ethical principles.

Vignette Template Our stimulus design derives from the original human study, set within the
context of an autonomous vehicle experiencing a brake failure, as outlined in the prompt: “Assume
there is a self-driving car with a sudden brake failure . . . ” shown in Figure 1. Each scenario presents
a choice between two groups, such as “a boy” versus ”an elderly man.” One group will be harmed
by the car, while the other remains unscathed. We use the 18 different character types from Awad
et al. (2018), which include: pregnant woman, girl, boy, female and male doctor, stroller, female and
male athlete, female and male executive, large man and woman, elderly man and woman, homeless,
criminal, dog, and cat. Following the original study, we also vary the number of characters (people
plus animals) on each side between one and five.

Systematic Variations We employ procedural generation to create moral dilemmas, enabling sys-
tematic variation across six moral dimensions. The character types mentioned provide a basis for
these variations, involving different ages (e.g., boy versus elderly man), genders (e.g., man versus
woman), social statuses (e.g., executive versus homeless), species (e.g., human versus dog), and
numbers of characters (e.g., one versus five). This structured approach allows us to systematically
explore the factors that influence moral judgment. In the subsequent section, we will detail each of
the six moral dimensions. To quantify preferences for each dimension, we describe each preference
as one option over another and represent the preference p by the percentage of the first option among
all cases.
Age Preference: This dimension assesses whether models prefer younger individuals over the el-
derly. We categorize characters into three age groups: young (girls and boys), adults (women and
men), and the elderly (elderly women and elderly men). In a given scenario, we only select from two
of the three age groups chosen randomly. We also control for the gender and number of characters
on each side, such as two girls versus two elderly women.
Social Status Preference: This dimension evaluates whether models show a preference for individ-
uals of higher social status over those of lower status. Awad et al. (2018) stratifies status into three
tiers: high (executives and doctors), middle (general adults), and low (criminals and homeless).
Fitness Preference: Next, we assess whether models favor the more physically fit over those con-
sidered less fit. Fitness levels are divided into more fit (female and male athletes), normal (average
adults), and less fit (larger-bodied individuals). Characters are selected randomly from two contrast-
ing fitness levels, with controlled gender and numbers on each side.
Gender Preference: This dimension tests whether there is a preference for one gender over another
across various age groups, social statuses, and fitness levels. We use seven pairings for this test:


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


women vs. men, elderly women vs. elderly men, girls vs. boys, large women vs. large men, female
athletes vs. male athletes, female executives vs. male executives, and female doctors vs. male
doctors.
Utilitarianism Preference: Defined in the Moral Machine project as the preference to save more
lives over fewer, this dimension is tested by presenting scenarios with different numbers of the same
character type on each side. Special cases include dilemmas pitting non-pregnant women (either
average or larger women) against pregnant women to see if pregnancy affects the decision.
Species Preference: This dimension measures whether models consistently prioritize humans over
animals. Scenarios are set up with random numbers of characters (between one and five), comparing
humans with pets (dogs or cats) on each side.
Random Characters: In addition to the structured scenarios, we also create dilemmas with random
characters from any category, not strictly controlling for a specific contrast across the six moral
dimensions. The only condition maintained is that the total number of characters is equal on both
sides, allowing for a broader exploration of preferences without experimenter defined constraints.
3.2 P ROMPT C ONSTRUCTION IN M ULTIPLE L ANGUAGES
Setup for LLM Testing Following the vignette template introduced above, we make three key
adaptations to the trolley problem prompts to ensure more definitive responses from safety-tuned
LLMs. First, to counteract the tendency of LLMs to avoid providing a clear answer, we employ the
token-forcing method (Wei et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2023): “Q: [Vignette Description] A: If the
self-driving car has to make a decision, between the two choices, it should save. . . ” This approach
forces the LLMs to make a binary choice in most cases. Additionally, we expanded the original
natural language data from English into 107 languages, ensuring that the dataset now covers a wide
range of languages, including both high-resource and low-resource languages. This expansion aims
to make the dataset more inclusive and globally representative. The third adaptation addresses a
noticeable bias LLMs exhibit towards the term “swerving” as opposed to “keeping going.” To
minimize this bias, we present the two options using bullet points as illustrated in Figure 1, and
ensure each scenario is phrased in both orders, i.e., both “- a boy \n - an elderly man” and “- an
elderly man \n - a boy.” These modifications enable the research community to leverage the Moral
Machine dataset to study and evaluate LLM pluralistic alignment.

Multilingual Variation We initially developed 460 English vignettes by systematically varying
scenarios and character combinations across six moral dimensions, ensuring thorough coverage of
all possible character interactions. To expand the scope of our study, we translated this dataset
into multiple languages. Using the googletrans Python package, we employed Google Translate
to convert the English prompts into 107 supported languages. Although this does not cover every
language globally, it encompasses a wide variety, including many low-resource languages with rel-
atively few speakers. Instead of using LLMs, whose translation quality is still uncertain, we use
Google Translate, as it is widely recognized as a reliable tool for translating English into other lan-
guages, especially for less common languages (Costa-jussà et al., 2022; Jiao et al., 2023; Zhu et al.,
2023; Peng et al., 2023). A full list of the languages used in our trolley problem scenarios is provided
in Appendix B.1. To ensure the accuracy of these translations, we manually reviewed a subset of
them in several major languages to confirm that the intended meaning of the prompts was preserved.
We conducted an Amazon Mechanical Turk task to evaluate translation quality across 44 languages,
with detailed information about the evaluation provided in Appendix D.1.

  Table 2: Statistics of the M ULTI TP dataset shown including four representative languages out of the 107.
                                  Overall Dataset     English    German     Chinese     Swahili
             # Vignettes             98,440            460         460       460         460
             # Words/Vignette           51              47         42         78          38
             # Unique Words           6,492             61         71         87          70
             Type-Token Ratio        0.0013           0.0014     0.0019     0.0012      0.0020


Dataset Statistics We present comprehensive statistics of the M ULTI TP dataset in Table 2. The
dataset comprises 98,440 trolley problem vignettes, with 460 vignettes for each of the 107 lan-
guages. We also provide a snapshot of statistics for four representative languages from different


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


global regions: global west, east, and south. On average, vignettes contain 51 words; English sce-
narios average 47 words, while Chinese scenarios, due to the linguistic structure, average 78 words
per scenario. In contrast, Swahili vignettes are shorter, averaging 38 words. The entire dataset
incorporates 6,492 unique words, with a type-token ratio of 0.0013.

4    E VALUATION D ESIGN
Model Selection Our study includes 19 LLMs to demonstrate a range of results. The models
encompass open-weights versions such as various sizes of Llama (Llama 2 in 7B, 13B, and 70B
and Llama 3 and 3.1 in 8B and 70B), Gemma 2 (2B, 9B, and 27B), Mistral 7B, Phi (Phi-3 Medium,
Phi-3.5 Mini and MoE), and Qwen 2 (7B and 72B), as well as close-weights models like GPT-3 (text-
davinci-003), GPT-4 (gpt-4-0613), and GPT-4o-mini (gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18). For reproducibility,
we fix the random seed and set the temperature to zero for the generation. See detailed model setups
and exact identifiers in Appendix C.1.

Preference Assessment Our test is designed to include six types of systematic variations, allowing
us to represent a model’s moral preference with six values: pspecies , pgender , pfitness , pstatus , page , pnumber .
For each dimension pi , we report the percentage pi ∈ [0, 1] of the time when a default value prevails,
namely sparing humans (over pets), sparing more lives (over fewer lives), sparing women (over
men), sparing the young (over the elderly), sparing the fit (over the less fit), and sparing those with
higher social status (over lower social status). For example, if a model’s pspecies = 1, it consistently
prefers humans over pets, 100% of the time.

Misalignment Metric Combining the six different moral dimensions, we introduce a metric for
the overall preference vector p = (pspecies , pgender , pfitness , pstatus , page , pnumber ). If we denote the hu-
man preference vector as ph and the model preference as pm , then we can calculate the misalignment
(MIS) score as the L2 distance between ph and pm , namely
                                         MIS(ph , pm ) = ∥ph − pm ∥2 .                                            (1)
                                                                                                              √
Since each preference vector pi is 6-dimensional, the largest possible misalignment MIS is                        6≈
2.45, and the smallest is 0, indicating perfect alignment.
Calculating misalignment presents a significant challenge due to the different bases of recording
human and LLM preferences — by country for humans and by language for LLMs. While in many
instances a language corresponds to a country, such as Italian to Italy and Romanian to Romania,
there are numerous countries where multiple languages are spoken. In these cases, we compute a
weighted average of the misalignment scores for all languages spoken within the country, using the
number of speakers per language as weights. We source our language population statistics from
Wikipedia and detail our method for mapping languages to countries in Appendix B.2. We also
discuss the potential limitations of this approach in Section 7.

5    R ESEARCH Q UESTIONS AND R ESULTS
Our study explores five research questions (RQs) that examine various aspects of the moral align-
ment of LLMs with human preferences. We begin by assessing the global alignment of LLM pref-
erences with human preferences (RQ1). Next, we analyze how LLMs respond to the six principal
dimensions studied in the Moral Machine trolley problems (RQ2). We then investigate if LLMs’ re-
sponses vary significantly across different languages and identify clusters of language groups where
LLMs exhibit similar behavior (RQ3). We also test a “language inequality” hypothesis to determine
if LLMs are more likely to be aligned with high-resource language than with low-resource lan-
guages (RQ4). Finally, we conduct a robustness study to evaluate the consistency of LLM responses
to various paraphrasings of the same trolley problem prompt (RQ5).
5.1 RQ1: D O LLM S A LIGN WITH H UMAN P REFERENCES OVERALL ?
Method. We address the first research question concerning the overall alignment between LLMs
and human preferences. To quantify this alignment, we calculate a global misalignment score. This
score is derived by aggregating the individual misalignment scores from each language. We compute
the global misalignment score using a weighted average, where the weights are based on the number
of speakers of each language in the world from Wikipedia statistics (Wikipedia, 2024).


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                            Aligned Models           Misaligned Models


                                                                                       1


     Qwen 2 7B Uncensored
  Llama 3.1 8B Uncensored


                                                                  Delta from Human
             Llama 3.1 70B                                                            0.5
               Llama 3 70B
                Llama 3 8B
  Gemma 2 2B Uncensored
                      GPT-3
              Llama 3.1 8B                                                             0
    Llama 2 7B Uncensored
                 Qwen 2 7B
                  Mistral 7B
                      GPT-4
                Llama 2 7B                                                           −0.5
               Llama 2 70B
                Phi-3.5 Mini
              Gemma 2 2B                                                                      Sparing    Sparing     Sparing       Sparing  Sparing    Sparing
              Phi-3 Medium
                                                                                              Females   the Young     the Fit      Humans Higher Status More
                Phi-3.5 MoE
              Gemma 2 9B
               Llama 2 13B
             Gemma 2 27B
                Qwen 2 72B                           (b) Distribution of LLM deviations from human pref-
                GPT-4o Mini                          erences in each moral dimension for the three most
                           0.4
                          0.6   0.8    1    1.2 1.4
                                                     aligned models (green), and three least aligned models
                             Misalignment Score
                                                     (red). The correlation of each moral dimension with
(a) Overall alignment of 19 different LLMs with hu- the overall MIS is 0.87, 0.69, 0.68, 0.45, 0.44, and
man preferences. Misalignment ranges from 0 to 2.45. 0.30, from left to right, all with a p-value<0.001.
                       Figure 2: Model alignment on trolley problems with human preferences.


Results. We plot the global misalignment scores in Figure 2a, and observe that very few models
align closely with human preferences. Specifically, only three models—Llama 3.1 70B, Llama 3
70B, and Llama 3 8B—have misalignment scores below 0.6.
The misalignment score measures discrepancies across√a 6-dimensional preference vector, so a score
of 0.6 corresponds to a preference difference of 0.6/ 6 = 0.245 in each dimension on average.
Other models, particularly GPT-4o Mini, show significant deviations from human moral judgments,
which will be explored in the following sections.
5.2   RQ2: W HAT A RE LLM S ’ P REFERENCES ON E ACH M ORAL D IMENSION IN
      M ULTILINGUAL T ROLLEY P ROBLEMS ?
Unpacking our initial findings about global alignment, we further explore how LLMs perform across
each of the six dimensions outlined in M ULTI TP. Specifically, we aim to identify which dimensions
most effectively distinguish between well-aligned and poorly-aligned LLMs.

Method. We decompose the overall misalignment score into LLMs’ preferences over the six moral
dimensions. Given each preference vector p = (pspecies , pgender , pfitness , pstatus , page , pnumber ), we
extract the six dimensions of human preferences ph , the best aligned models pm_best , and the most
misaligned models pm_worst . We both qualitatively compare across models and also provide quan-

                     Humans                                 Llama 3.1 70B                                                              GPT-4o Mini
                   Sparing                                   Sparing                                                                  Sparing
                   Humans 100                               Humans 100                                                                Humans 100
            s


                                                     s


                                                                                                                            s


                           80                                          80                                                                      80
             tu


                                                       tu


                                                                                                                              tu
      her ing


                                  SpaMore


                                                her ing


                                                                                            SpaMore


                                                                                                                       her ing


                                                                                                                                                     SpaMore
         Sta


                                                   Sta


                                                                                                                          Sta


                          60                                          60                                                                      60
   Hig Spar


                                             Hig Spar


                                                                                                                    Hig Spar
                                      ring


                                                                                                ring


                                                                                                                                                         ring


                        40                                          40                                                                      40
                       20                                          20                                                                      20
      Spea Youn


                                 thearing


                                              Spea Youn


                                                                                        thearing


                                                                                                                    Spea Youn


                                                                                                                                                    thearing
      th


                                              th


                                                                                                                    th
                                     Fit


                                                                                            Fit


                                                                                                                                                        Fit
          ring g


                                                  ring g


                                                                                                                        ring g
                                  Sp


                                                                                         Sp


                                                                                                                                                     Sp


                   Sparing                                  Sparing                                                                   Sparing
                   Females                                  Females                                                                   Females
        (a) Human preferences.               (b) Llama 3.1 70B (aligned).                                      (c) GPT-4o Mini (misaligned).
Figure 3: Radar plots of the preference decomposition across the six different moral dimensions. Llama 3.1
70B aligns well on most dimensions except for gender. However, GPT-4o Mini lacks diversity and tends to
binarize on each dimension, which results in larger misalignment.


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  Cluster A         Cluster B   Cluster C              Cluster D          Human Preference
 Table 3: Language sensitivity
                                                                 Sparing Humans                                                    Sparing the Young
 scores for all models. Higher scores                100                                                         100
 mean more varied misalignment                       80                                                           80


                                        Preference


                                                                                                    Preference
                                                     60                                                           60
 across languages. We highlight the
                                                     40                                                           40
 models with the most and least lan-                 20                                                           20
 guage sensitivity scores.                            0                                                            0
                                                           A       B          C            D                             A            B          C           D
      Model           Sensitivity
                                                                  Sparing the Fit                                                  Sparing Females
      GPT-3              15.1                        100                                                         100
      GPT-4              15.8                        80                                                           80


                                        Preference


                                                                                                    Preference
      GPT-4o Mini        18.1                        60                                                           60
                                                     40                                                           40
      Gemma 2 27B        21.7                        20                                                           20
      Gemma 2 2B         22.9                         0                                                            0
                                                           A       B          C            D                             A            B          C           D
      Gemma 2 9B         24.7
      Llama 2 13B        21.0
                                                               Sparing Higher Status                                                 Sparing More
      Llama 2 70B        18.5                        100                                                         100

      Llama 2 7B         19.8                        80                                                           80
                                        Preference


                                                                                                    Preference
                                                     60                                                           60
      Llama 3 70B        15.3                        40                                                           40
      Llama 3 8B         14.9                        20                                                           20
      Llama 3.1 70B      18.0                         0
                                                           A       B          C            D
                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                         A            B          C           D
      Llama 3.1 8B       19.9
      Mistral 7B         21.3           Figure 4: Distribution of preferences by each moral dimension across
      Phi-3 Medium       22.8           languages, using the most-aligned model Llama 3.1 70B. The dashed
      Phi-3.5 Mini       21.3           line is the overall human preference on each dimension. Cluster A:
      Phi-3.5 MoE        14.7           Georgian, Filipino, Maltese, etc. B: German, Italian, Ukrainian, etc.
      Qwen 2 72B         21.1           C: English, Finnish, Chinese, etc. D: Hungarian, Kazakh, Uyghur, etc.
      Qwen 2 7B          22.2           See Appendix E.1 for the entire list of languages in each cluster, as well
                                        as clustering results for other models such as GPT-3 and GPT-4.


titative reports of the Pearson correlation between the overall MIS score and model preferences in
each dimension.


Results. In Figure 3, we show a decomposition of preferences for human subjects, the most aligned
model (Llama 3.1 70B), and the most misaligned model (GPT-4o Mini). The substantial misalign-
ment of GPT-4o Mini is primarily due to its lack of diversity, not modeling preference as a dis-
tribution, but preferring to binarize most of the time. For example, it always prefers humans over
animals with a pspecies of 100%, failing to capture the variation and nuances in human judgments.
Conversely, the Llama 3.1 70B model, while differing from human preferences mainly in terms of
gender, generally aligns well on other dimensions by capturing nuances probabilistically.
To further understand how each moral dimension contributes to the overall misalignment, we find
strong correlations between the overall misalignment and several moral dimensions, especially gen-
der, age, and fitness. With a p-value of less than 0.001, we find the correlation with gender is 0.87,
0.69 for age, and 0.68 for fitness. In Figure 2b, we show the distribution of preference scores across
these dimensions for both the three most aligned models (in green) and the three least models (in
red). This analysis confirms that misaligned models often exhibit extreme preferences on each moral
dimension, such as a higher propensity to protect females, the young, and individuals of higher social
status, diverging markedly from the more balanced tendencies observed in human subjects.

5.3     RQ3: D OES LLM S B EHAVIOR D EPEND ON THE L ANGUAGE OF T ROLLEY P ROBLEMS ?
Method. To evaluate whether LLMs display significant variance in their responses to trolley prob-
lems across different languages, we adopt a two-pronged approach to assess language sensitivity.
We measure the sensitivity»of language-specific   misalignment scores across all 107 languages as the
                                1
                                   PN
standard deviation: σ = N −1 i=1 (pli − p̄)2 , where N = 107 languages, and pli refers to the
preference vector of the i-th language li . Second, we perform K-means clustering (Macqueen, 1967)
on the preference vectors {pli }N i=1 of each language. It enables us to group languages with similar
preference vectors into the same cluster. We use the Elbow method (Thorndike, 1953) to determine
the optimal number of clusters k = 4.


                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Results. The language sensitivity scores of 19 LLMs, as documented in Table 3, show that most
models exhibit clear sensitivity across their language-specific responses, with standard deviation
values ranging from 14.7 to 24.7 across languages. Exploring further, we identify distinctive patterns
within the language clusters using K-Means clustering. In Llama 3.1 70B, we identify four distinct
language clusters. For example, Cluster A (e.g., Georgian and Filipino) values animal lives more
than the other three clusters, which unanimously always favor humans over animals. Cluster D (e.g.,
Hungarian and Kazakh) has a close-to-zero bias against unfit people, with a 50% possibility favoring
the fit over the unfit.
5.4 RQ4: A RE LLM S M ORE M ISALIGNED IN L OW-R ESOURCE L ANGUAGES ?
Method. A considerable amount of recent research indicates that LLMs tend to align more closely
with high-resource languages, as noted in various studies (Tanwar et al., 2023; Cahyawijaya et al.,
2023; Nguyen et al., 2024; Ryan et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024). Despite this trend, we seek to
determine if the same alignment preference applies to multilingual trolley problems. An important
property of M ULTI TP is that it uses data that is not found online and hence was not seen during the
LLMs’ training. This is because we generate our test data on-demand based on parametric variations
and translations that we perform specifically for this study. In this context, our research question
investigates whether there is a significant positive correlation between the degree of LLM alignment
on trolley problems and how widely used a language is. We measure the number of speakers per
language by extracting data from Wikipedia’s language demographics statistics (Wikipedia, 2024).
Then, we calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient between model misalignment scores and the
number of speakers for each language.

Results. Most models do not show a significant correlation between the per-language misalign-
ment score and the number of speakers per language, with correlations close to zero. See the entire
table of the correlation coefficients of all models in Appendix E.2. This is an interesting obser-
vation unique to the M ULTI TP trolley problems, which challenges the necessity of the “language
inequality” hypothesis. For example, in Llama 3.1 70B, the misalignment scores for the top five
most spoken languages are: Chinese 0.38, Hindi 0.51, English 0.58, Spanish 0.68, and Arabic 0.54.
This distribution of correlations is about the same as in less spoken languages among our dataset:
Bosnian 0.54, Luxembourgish 0.37, Icelandic 0.58, Maltese 0.57, Malayalam 0.54, and Catalan
0.59. We also visualize a misalignment world map in Appendix E.4 showcasing that there is no
strong correspondence between the development level of a country and its alignment score.
5.5 RQ5: A RE LLM S ROBUST T O P ROMPT PARAPHRASES ?
Method. For each initial prompt, we generate five different paraphrases (see Appendix C.2) to
test the consistency of our results across alternative expressions. Although the ideal experiment
would involve running a full test across all 107 languages on all 19 models, this would incur a non-
trivial computational cost. To fit within our computational budget, we select a subset of 14 languages
representing a mix of high-resource and low-resource languages (Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English,
French, German, Hindi, Japanese, Khmer, Swahili, Urdu, Yoruba, Zulu, and Uyghur), and evaluate
two models (Llama 3 8B and 70B). We report the consistency scores across the different languages
by measuring the following three metrics: (1) the percentage of samples whose outputs remain
consistent across the paraphrases, (2) the inter-paraphrase agreement using Fleiss’ Kappa (Landis,
1977) score, and (3) the average pairwise consistency as measured by the F1 score and accuracy.

Results. We observe relatively consistent model outputs across all the above setups. 75.9% of the
samples have consistent outputs where at least four out of five paraphrases agree. This consistency
increases when considering agreement among three out of five paraphrases. The pairwise F1 score
for the five paraphrases is 78%, and the pairwise accuracy is 81%. The average Fleiss’ Kappa
value across each pair of responses is 0.56, where a Kappa value of 1 indicates perfect agreement,
values above 0.4 indicate moderate agreement, and values above 0.6 indicate substantial agreement
(Landis, 1977). Overall, we observe that Llama 3 70B demonstrates higher consistency than Llama
3 8B.

6   JAILBREAKING LLM S TO R EDUCE R EFUSAL R ATES
Exploring whether jailbroken models maintain similar moral preferences is important, particularly
to measure increased bias towards gender or social status. Jailbreaking also helps circumvent LLM


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


refusals. Due to safety tuning in recent models, a key challenge in our study is the high refusal rate;
LLMs often decline decisions involving human lives or give generic responses. Earlier models like
GPT-3 have a relatively low refusal rate (12.1%), but this rises significantly in newer models. When
addressing moral dimensions, models provide definitive answers on species and lives saved but avoid
sensitive topics like gender. We employed a basic token-forcing technique to reduce refusals.
Beyond this, we explore advanced jailbreaking methods to further lower refusal rates and reveal
underlying preferences. Following Arditi et al. (2025), we apply an uncensoring technique to models
with high refusal rates, steering them away from refusals on ethically sensitive instructions. Our
experiments on 4 open-sourced LLMs, shown in Figure 2a and Appendix F, indicate that uncensored
models better align with human responses and reduce refusals across all six dimensions. However,
refusal rates do not drop to zero, highlighting areas for future jailbreaking research.

7       F UTURE W ORK D IRECTIONS
Beyond the jailbreaking experiment and the research questions we have asked and answered above,
we highlight several areas for improvement and productive future study.
Extension to Different Modalities and More Variations: In our study, we focus exclusively on a text-
only setting to investigate the latest text-based LLMs available at the time of our research. Although
the original Moral Machine study included a visual demonstration of each scenario,2 we recom-
mend that future research also test the alignment of multi-modal foundation models. Additionally,
there is an opportunity for future studies to expand the diversity of characters, scenario setups, and
dimensions of variation. This expansion would increase the combinatorial variation of moral dilem-
mas that can be posed as trolley problems. Another point to consider is that the trolley problem is
sometimes criticized for being too narrow or unrealistic (Steen, 2024). Nonetheless, it remains a
widely used tool for studying moral decision-making. For this reason, the current study adopts this
foundational scenario while encouraging future research to incorporate additional complexities and
connect them to real-world situations.
More Language Support: Human languages are vast and diverse. While our study utilizes the 107
languages supported by high-quality translation services from Google Translate, there is a need
for further research into low-resource languages. We recommend that future studies expand their
scope to include a broader range of these low-resource languages to gain a more comprehensive
understanding of LLMs’ moral preferences in diverse linguistic contexts.
Dialect Support to Enable More Accurate Language-Country Mapping: Since our alignment results
are based on language, drawing precise country-level conclusions presents a challenge. This issue
primarily stems from the limitations of current automated translation tools, which do not account for
dialect variations. For instance, English as spoken in the US (en-us) differs from English in the UK
(en-gb), just as Spanish varies between Spain (es-es) and Mexico (es-mx), among other examples.
In this study, we have attempted to approximate language-to-country correlations using a weighted
average based on the number of speakers per language in each country. However, our approach is
constrained by the lack of tools to accurately reflect other forms of demographic diversity. If future
research could incorporate dialect-specific support, it would enhance the reliability of country-level
observations.

8       C ONCLUSION
Our study provides a comprehensive analysis of the moral preferences exhibited by LLMs across a
wide range of languages, via the prism of trolley problems. We propose a multilingual large-scale
dataset, M ULTI TP, with systematic variations of the vignette design. Our dataset is also equipped
with an unprecedentedly large set of human responses of 40 million responses from over 200 coun-
tries. Our experiments assess the moral alignment of 19 LLMs across 100+ languages, and find
that most LLMs do not demonstrate strong alignment with human preferences on trolley problem
questions, but in the meantime, there is no significant inequality across languages, as high-resource
languages have similar alignment scores to low-resource languages. Our study paves the way for
future pluralistic alignment research grounded in psychology and more languages.
    2
        https://moralmachine.net


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by a grant to SL from the Templeton World Charity Foundation,
TWCF-2023-32585. This material is based in part upon work supported by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF): Tübingen AI Center, FKZ: 01IS18039B; by the Ma-
chine Learning Cluster of Excellence, EXC number 2064/1 – Project number 390727645. The
usage of OpenAI credits is largely supported by the Tübingen AI Center. MKW was supported by
the Cooperative AI foundation and Foresight Institute.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Muhammad Farid Adilazuarda, Sagnik Mukherjee, Pradhyumna Lavania, Siddhant Singh, Ashutosh
 Dwivedi, Alham Fikri Aji, Jacki O’Neill, Ashutosh Modi, and Monojit Choudhury. Towards
 measuring and modeling" culture" in llms: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15412, 2024.

Kabir Ahuja, Harshita Diddee, Rishav Hada, Millicent Ochieng, Krithika Ramesh, Prachi Jain, Ak-
  shay Nambi, Tanuja Ganu, Sameer Segal, Maxamed Axmed, et al. Mega: Multilingual evaluation
  of generative ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12528, 2023.

Guilherme FCF Almeida, José Luiz Nunes, Neele Engelmann, Alex Wiegmann, and Marcelo
  de Araújo. Exploring the psychology of gpt-4’s moral and legal reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.01264, 2023.

Usman Anwar, Abulhair Saparov, Javier Rando, Daniel Paleka, Miles Turpin, Peter Hase,
  Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Erik Jenner, Stephen Casper, Oliver Sourbut, et al. Foundational
  challenges in assuring alignment and safety of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.09932, 2024.

Andy Arditi, Oscar Obeso, Aaquib Syed, Daniel Paleka, Nina Panickssery, Wes Gurnee, and Neel
  Nanda. Refusal in language models is mediated by a single direction. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 37:136037–136083, 2025.

Mikel Artetxe, Sebastian Ruder, and Dani Yogatama. On the cross-lingual transferability of mono-
 lingual representations. CoRR, abs/1910.11856, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
 11856.

Akari Asai, Sneha Kudugunta, Xinyan Velocity Yu, Terra Blevins, Hila Gonen, Machel Reid, Yu-
  lia Tsvetkov, Sebastian Ruder, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Buffet: Benchmarking large language
  models for few-shot cross-lingual transfer, 2023.

Mohammad Atari, Mona J Xue, Peter S Park, Damián Blasi, and Joseph Henrich. Which humans?
 2023.

Edmond Awad, Sohan Dsouza, Richard Kim, Jonathan Schulz, Joseph Henrich, Azim Shariff, Jean-
  François Bonnefon, and Iyad Rahwan. The moral machine experiment. Nature, 563(7729):59,
  2018.

Edmond Awad, Sohan Dsouza, Azim Shariff, Iyad Rahwan, and Jean-François Bonnefon. Univer-
  sals and variations in moral decisions made in 42 countries by 70,000 participants. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(5):2332–2337, 2020a.

Edmond Awad, Sydney Levine, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Sohan Dsouza, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Azim
  Shariff, Jean-François Bonnefon, and Iyad Rahwan. Drivers are blamed more than their automated
  cars when both make mistakes. Nature human behaviour, 4(2):134–143, 2020b.

Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosiute, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemí Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional AI:
  harmlessness from AI feedback. CoRR, abs/2212.08073, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2212.08073.
  URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.08073.
Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton, Andrew Yao, Dawn Song, Pieter Abbeel, Yuval Noah Harari, Ya-
  Qin Zhang, Lan Xue, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Gillian Hadfield, et al. Managing ai risks in an era of
  rapid progress. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17688, 2023.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR,
  abs/2005.14165, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Stijn Bruers and Johan Braeckman.        A review and systematization of the trolley problem.
   Philosophia, 42:251–269, 2014.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
  mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott M. Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi,
  Marco Túlio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experi-
  ments with GPT-4. CoRR, abs/2303.12712, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.12712. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.12712.
Samuel Cahyawijaya, Holy Lovenia, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, and Pascale Fung. Instructalign:
  High-and-low resource language alignment via continual crosslingual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.13627, 2023.
Samuel Cahyawijaya, Delong Chen, Yejin Bang, Leila Khalatbari, Bryan Wilie, Ziwei Ji, Etsuko
  Ishii, and Pascale Fung. High-dimension human value representation in large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07900, 2024.
Nicholas Carlini, Milad Nasr, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Matthew Jagielski, Irena Gao,
  Pang Wei Koh, Daphne Ippolito, Florian Tramèr, and Ludwig Schmidt. Are aligned neural net-
  works adversarially aligned? In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko,
  Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36:
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Or-
  leans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2023/hash/c1f0b856a35986348ab3414177266f75-Abstract-Conference.html.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li,
 Dacheng Li, Banghua Zhu, Hao Zhang, Michael I. Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Sto-
 ica. Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference. In Forty-first
 International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024.
 OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3MW8GKNyzI.
Alexis Conneau, Ruty Rinott, Guillaume Lample, Adina Williams, Samuel R. Bowman, Holger
  Schwenk, and Veselin Stoyanov. XNLI: evaluating cross-lingual sentence representations. In
  Ellen Riloff, David Chiang, Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium, October
  31 - November 4, 2018, pp. 2475–2485. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. doi:
  10.18653/v1/d18-1269. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d18-1269.
Marta R Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Heffernan,
 Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, et al. No language left behind: Scaling
 human-centered machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04672, 2022.
Danica Dillion, Niket Tandon, Yuling Gu, and Kurt Gray. Can ai language models replace human
  participants? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2023.
Jonathan Dunn, Benjamin Adams, and Harish Tayyar Madabushi. Pre-trained language models rep-
  resent some geographic populations better than others. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11025, 2024.
Esin Durmus, Karina Nguyen, Thomas I Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin,
  Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, et al. Towards mea-
  suring the representation of subjective global opinions in language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.16388, 2023.
Kawin Ethayarajh and Dan Jurafsky. The authenticity gap in human evaluation. In Yoav Goldberg,
  Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 6056–6070, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
  December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.
  406. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.406.
Philippa Foot. The problem of abortion and the doctrine of double effect, volume 5. Oxford, 1967.
Maxwell Forbes, Jena D Hwang, Vered Shwartz, Maarten Sap, and Yejin Choi. Social chemistry
 101: Learning to reason about social and moral norms. In EMNLP, 2020. URL https://www.
 aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.48.
Jan-Philipp Fränken, Kanishk Gandhi, Tori Qiu, Ayesha Khawaja, Noah D Goodman, and Tobias
  Gerstenberg. Procedural dilemma generation for evaluating moral reasoning in humans and lan-
  guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10975, 2024.
Kathleen C Fraser, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Esma Balkir. Does moral code have a moral code?
  probing delphi’s moral philosophy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12771, 2022.
Mitchell L Gordon, Michelle S Lam, Joon Sung Park, Kayur Patel, Jeff Hancock, Tatsunori
 Hashimoto, and Michael S Bernstein. Jury learning: Integrating dissenting voices into machine
 learning models. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
 Systems, pp. 1–19, 2022.
Shinsuke Goto, Donghui Lin, and Toru Ishida. Crowdsourcing for evaluating machine translation
  quality. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Mae-
  gaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis (eds.), Proceedings
  of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), pp.
  3456–3463, Reykjavik, Iceland, May 2014. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
  URL http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/756_Paper.pdf.
Naman Goyal, Cynthia Gao, Vishrav Chaudhary, Peng-Jen Chen, Guillaume Wenzek, Da Ju, San-
  jana Krishnan, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Francisco Guzmán, and Angela Fan. The FLORES-
  101 evaluation benchmark for low-resource and multilingual machine translation. CoRR,
  abs/2106.03193, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.03193.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andrew Critch, Jerry Li, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Aligning AI with shared human values. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=dNy\_RKzJacY.
Dan Hendrycks, Nicholas Carlini, John Schulman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Unsolved problems in ML
  safety. CoRR, abs/2109.13916, 2021b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.13916.
Joseph Henrich, Steven J Heine, and Ara Norenzayan. The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral
  and brain sciences, 33(2-3):61–83, 2010.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Carolin Holtermann, Paul Röttger, Timm Dill, and Anne Lauscher. Evaluating the elementary mul-
  tilingual capabilities of large language models with multiq, 2024.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bam-
  ford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al.
  Mixtral of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
Liwei Jiang, Jena D Hwang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Maxwell Forbes, Jon Borchardt,
  Jenny Liang, Oren Etzioni, Maarten Sap, and Yejin Choi. Delphi: Towards machine ethics and
  norms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07574, 2021a.
Liwei Jiang, Jena D Hwang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jenny Liang, Jesse Dodge,
  Keisuke Sakaguchi, Maxwell Forbes, Jon Borchardt, Saadia Gabriel, et al. Can machines learn
  morality? the delphi experiment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07574, 2021b.
Wenying Jiang. The relationship between culture and language. ELT journal, 54(4):328–334, 2000.
Wenxiang Jiao, Wenxuan Wang, Jen-tse Huang, Xing Wang, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. Is
 chatgpt a good translator? yes with gpt-4 as the engine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08745, 2023.
Zhijing Jin, Sydney Levine, Fernando Gonzalez Adauto, Ojasv Kamal, Maarten Sap, Mrinmaya
  Sachan, Rada Mihalcea, Josh Tenenbaum, and Bernhard Schölkopf. When to make exceptions:
  Exploring language models as accounts of human moral judgment. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 35:28458–28473, 2022.
Zhijing Jin, Nils Heil, Jiarui Liu, Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Yahang Qi, Bernhard Schölkopf, Rada
  Mihalcea, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Implicit personalization in language models: A systematic
  study, 2024.
Richard Kim, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Andrés Abeliuk, Edmond Awad, Sohan Dsouza, Joshua B
  Tenenbaum, and Iyad Rahwan. A computational model of commonsense moral decision making.
  In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 197–203, 2018.
Hannah Rose Kirk, Alexander Whitefield, Paul Röttger, Andrew Bean, Katerina Margatina, Juan
  Ciro, Rafael Mosquera, Max Bartolo, Adina Williams, He He, et al. The prism alignment project:
  What participatory, representative and individualised human feedback reveals about the subjective
  and multicultural alignment of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16019, 2024.
Max Kleiman-Weiner, Tobias Gerstenberg, Sydney Levine, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Inference of
 intention and permissibility in moral decision making. In CogSci. Citeseer, 2015.
Max Kleiman-Weiner, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Learning a commonsense moral
 theory. Cognition, 167:107–123, 2017.
Sebastian Krügel, Andreas Ostermaier, and Matthias W. Uhl. Chatgpt’s inconsistent moral advice
  influences users’ judgment. Scientific Reports, 13, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:257986789.
JR Landis. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics, 1977.
Alon Lavie. Evaluating the output of machine translation systems. In Proceedings of Machine
  Translation Summit XIII: Tutorial Abstracts, Xiamen, China, September 19 2011. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2011.mtsummit-tutorials.3.
Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–173, 2024.
Shayne Longpre, Yi Lu, and Joachim Daiber. MKQA: A linguistically diverse benchmark for multi-
  lingual open domain question answering. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 9:1389–1406, 2021.
  doi: 10.1162/tacl\_a\_00433. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00433.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J Macqueen. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations. In Pro-
  ceedings of 5-th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability/University of
  California Press, 1967.
Rohin Manvi, Samar Khanna, Marshall Burke, David Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. Large language
  models are geographically biased. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02680, 2024.
Meta. Introducing meta llama 3: The most capable openly available llm to date, 2024. URL
 https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/.
John Mikhail. Universal moral grammar: Theory, evidence and the future. Trends in cognitive
  sciences, 11(4):143–152, 2007.
Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Mahani Aljunied, Shafiq Joty, and Lidong Bing. Democratizing LLMs for
  low-resource languages by leveraging their English dominant abilities with linguistically-diverse
  prompts. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  3501–3516, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.192. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.192.
Allen Nie, Yuhui Zhang, Atharva Amdekar, Chris Piech, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Tobias Ger-
  stenberg. Moca: Measuring human-language model alignment on causal and moral judgment
  tasks. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey
  Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, Decem-
  ber 10 - 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  f751c6f8bfb52c60f43942896fe65904-Abstract-Conference.html.
Keqin Peng, Liang Ding, Qihuang Zhong, Li Shen, Xuebo Liu, Min Zhang, Yuanxin Ouyang, and
  Dacheng Tao. Towards making the most of chatgpt for machine translation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.13780, 2023.
Abhinav Rao, Akhila Yerukola, Vishwa Shah, Katharina Reinecke, and Maarten Sap. Normad:
  A benchmark for measuring the cultural adaptability of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.12464, 2024.
Michael J Ryan, William Held, and Diyi Yang. Unintended impacts of llm alignment on global
 representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15018, 2024.
Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto.
  Whose opinions do language models reflect? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17548, 2023.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Social iqa: Common-
 sense reasoning about social interactions. In EMNLP 2019, 2019.
Chelsea Schein. The importance of context in moral judgments. Perspectives on Psychological
  Science, 15(2):207–215, 2020.
Nino Scherrer, Claudia Shi, Amir Feder, and David Blei. Evaluating the moral beliefs encoded in
  llms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Patrick Schramowski, Cigdem Turan, Nico Andersen, Constantin A Rothkopf, and Kristian Kerst-
  ing. Large pre-trained language models contain human-like biases of what is right and wrong
  to do. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(3):258–268, 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s42256-022-00458-8.
Siqi Shen, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Moontae Lee, Honglak Lee, Soujanya Poria, and Rada Mihal-
  cea. Understanding the capabilities and limitations of large language models for cultural com-
  monsense. In Proceedings of the North American Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2024.
Weiyan Shi, Ryan Li, Yutong Zhang, Caleb Ziems, Raya Horesh, Rogério Abreu de Paula, Diyi
 Yang, et al. Culturebank: An online community-driven knowledge base towards culturally aware
 language technologies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15238, 2024.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Taylor Sorensen, Liwei Jiang, Jena D. Hwang, Sydney Levine, Valentina Pyatkin, Peter West, Nouha
  Dziri, Ximing Lu, Kavel Rao, Chandra Bhagavatula, Maarten Sap, John Tasioulas, and Yejin
  Choi. Value kaleidoscope: Engaging ai with pluralistic human values, rights, and duties. Pro-
  ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(18):19937–19947, March 2024a.
  ISSN 2159-5399. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i18.29970. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aaai.
  v38i18.29970.
Taylor Sorensen, Liwei Jiang, Jena D Hwang, Sydney Levine, Valentina Pyatkin, Peter West, Nouha
  Dziri, Ximing Lu, Kavel Rao, Chandra Bhagavatula, et al. Value kaleidoscope: Engaging ai with
  pluralistic human values, rights, and duties. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 19937–19947, 2024b.
Taylor Sorensen, Jared Moore, Jillian Fisher, Mitchell Gordon, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Christo-
  pher Michael Rytting, Andre Ye, Liwei Jiang, Ximing Lu, Nouha Dziri, et al. A roadmap to
  pluralistic alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05070, 2024c.
Marc Steen. The problem with the trolley problem and the need for systems thinking. Communica-
 tions of the ACM, 67(6):30–32, 2024.
Kazuhiro Takemoto. The moral machine experiment on large language models. Royal Society open
  science, 11(2):231393, 2024.
Eshaan Tanwar, Subhabrata Dutta, Manish Borthakur, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. Multilingual
  LLMs are better cross-lingual in-context learners with alignment. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6292–6307, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.346. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.346.
Judith Jarvis Thomson. The trolley problem. Yale LJ, 94:1395, 1984.
Robert L. Thorndike. Who belongs in the family? Psychometrika, 18:267–276, 1953. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:120467216.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and efficient founda-
  tion language models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971.
Alexander Wei, Nika Haghtalab, and Jacob Steinhardt. Jailbroken: How does LLM safety train-
  ing fail? In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and
  Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA,
  December 10 - 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  hash/fd6613131889a4b656206c50a8bd7790-Abstract-Conference.html.
Wikipedia. List of languages by total number of speakers. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
 List_of_languages_by_total_number_of_speakers, 2024. URL https://en.wikipedia.
 org/wiki/List_of_languages_by_total_number_of_speakers. [Accessed: 2024-10-02].
Alex Young, Bei Chen, Chao Li, Chengen Huang, Ge Zhang, Guanwei Zhang, Heng Li, Jiangcheng
  Zhu, Jianqun Chen, Jing Chang, Kaidong Yu, Peng Liu, Qiang Liu, Shawn Yue, Senbin Yang,
  Shiming Yang, Tao Yu, Wen Xie, Wenhao Huang, Xiaohui Hu, Xiaoyi Ren, Xinyao Niu,
  Pengcheng Nie, Yuchi Xu, Yudong Liu, Yue Wang, Yuxuan Cai, Zhenyu Gu, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Zonghong Dai. Yi: Open foundation models by 01.ai. CoRR, abs/2403.04652, 2024. doi:
  10.48550/ARXIV.2403.04652. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.04652.
Yiran Zhao, Wenxuan Zhang, Guizhen Chen, Kenji Kawaguchi, and Lidong Bing. How do large
  language models handle multilingualism? arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18815, 2024.
Wenhao Zhu, Hongyi Liu, Qingxiu Dong, Jingjing Xu, Shujian Huang, Lingpeng Kong, Jiajun Chen,
 and Lei Li. Multilingual machine translation with large language models: Empirical results and
 analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04675, 2023.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have put efforts to ensure the reproducibility of this work. Our M ULTI TP data is uploaded to
the submission system and we have described our data construction details in Section 3 as well as
the overall statistics. In the meantime, we have also uploaded our code to the submission system.
Our Section 4 in the main paper describes our model setup and the equations used for the evaluation
metrics. We provide an extensive appendix to supplement all the rest of the details.

E THICS S TATEMENT
In studying the six moral dimensions of species, gender, fitness, status, age, and number, we ac-
knowledge that our work is not intended to promote the integration of LLMs into systems requiring
critical real-world judgments, such as autonomous driving or other high-stakes scenarios. Instead,
our research aims to use these moral dilemmas as a tool of theoretical exploration for better under-
standing LLM alignment with human values. For instance, while sparing humans over animals is
often seen as an intuitive moral choice in many cultures, moral values can vary significantly across
underrepresented groups, complicating the assumption of universally “correct” answers. Thus, it is
essential for LLM practitioners to remain vigilant in ensuring that embedded assumptions reflect a
wide range of cultural and linguistic contexts.
The Moral Machine dataset (Awad et al., 2018) is a descriptive measure of human responses to moral
dilemmas. It cannot (and should not) prescribe how the system should act. However, because these
systems are trained and fine-tuned with large-scale cross-cultural data, they may inherit culturally
specific biases. Our focus here is to both characterize these biases and study to what extent input
in different languages leads to an LLM reflecting the moral values consistent with the speakers
of that language. From this perspective, a higher alignment score for a particular culture may or
may not be desirable (Bommasani et al., 2021; Ethayarajh & Jurafsky, 2022). While some point
to reflecting human values in AI systems as a solution to the alignment problem (i.e., pluralistic
alignment (Sorensen et al., 2024c)), our results suggest that due to the plurality of moral values
expressed, successful alignment must ultimately depend on the intent of the system developers to
avoid perpetuating human preferences that are considered harmful, partial, or parochial (Sorensen
et al., 2024c; Santurkar et al., 2023).
We also recognize the importance of broadening the types of moral dilemmas used to assess LLM
alignment. While our research focuses on the trolley problem, a well-known ethical dilemma, we
are not suggesting this singular scenario captures the complexity of moral reasoning. Expanding the
scope to include dilemmas such as organ transplants or firefighter decisions can offer richer insights
into how LLMs process ethical judgments. By evaluating LLMs on a diverse set of moral challenges,
we can gain a more complete picture of their alignment capabilities, rather than over-relying on one
specific framework.
Additionally, we understand the limitations of using binary moral dilemmas, such as trolley prob-
lems, to evaluate LLM decision-making. Reducing moral judgments to binary choices risks over-
simplifying the complex, context-dependent nature of human morality (Schein, 2020). While these
scenarios provide valuable insights into LLM behavior, they should not be seen as definitive mea-
sures of moral competence. Our research emphasizes that LLMs, as currently developed, are not
suitable for real-world moral decision-making tasks. Rather, this work serves as a means to ex-
plore how LLMs can better align with human moral frameworks in a controlled, research-oriented
environment. We encourage further research to ensure that AI systems are fair, transparent, and
accountable as they develop, but caution against their use in high-stakes moral applications without
substantial ethical oversight.

A    M ORAL M ACHINE DATASET
The original Moral Machine dataset was collected by Awad et al. (2018) and is available here:
https://osf.io/3hvt2/, it consist of over 40 milions anonymized human judgments from 233
countries, with 130 countries having more than 100 subject participating.
The licencse is as follows: “The provided data, both at the individual level (anonymized IDs) and
the country level, can be used beyond replication to answer follow-up research questions” (Awad
et al., 2018).


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B        L ANGUAGE S ETUP
B.1       L ANGUAGE L IST
We include all the languages that the translation API googletrans3 supports. Using the alpha-
betical order of the short code by ISO, they are af (Afrikaans), am (Amharic), ar (Arabic), az
(Azerbaijani), be (Belarusian), bg (Bulgarian), bn (Bengali), bs (Bosnian), ca (Catalan), ceb (Ce-
buano), co (Corsican), cs (Czech), cy (Welsh), da (Danish), de (German), el (Modern Greek),
en (English), eo (Esperanto), es (Spanish), et (Estonian), eu (Basque), fa (Persian), fi (Finnish),
fr (French), fy (Western Frisian), ga (Irish), gd (Scottish Gaelic), gl (Galician), gu (Gujarati),
ha (Hausa), haw (Hawaiian), he (Hebrew), hi (Hindi), hmn (Hmong), hr (Croatian), ht (Haitian),
hu (Hungarian), hy (Armenian), id (Indonesian), ig (Igbo), is (Icelandic), it (Italian), iw (Mod-
ern Hebrew), ja (Japanese), jw (Javanese), ka (Georgian), kk (Kazakh), km (Central Khmer), kn
(Kannada), ko (Korean), ku (Kurdish), ky (Kirghiz), la (Latin), lb (Luxembourgish), lo (Lao),
lt (Lithuanian), lv (Latvian), mg (Malagasy), mi (Maori), mk (Macedonian), ml (Malayalam), mn
(Mongolian), mr (Marathi), ms (Malay), mt (Maltese), my (Burmese), ne (Nepali), nl (Dutch), no
(Norwegian), ny (Nyanja), or (Oriya), pa (Panjabi), pl (Polish), ps (Pushto), pt (Portuguese), ro
(Romanian), ru (Russian), sd (Sindhi), si (Sinhala), sk (Slovak), sl (Slovenian), sm (Samoan),
sn (Shona), so (Somali), sq (Albanian), sr (Serbian), st (Southern Sotho), su (Sundanese), sv
(Swedish), sw (Swahili), ta (Tamil), te (Telugu), tg (Tajik), th (Thai), tl (Tagalog), tr (Turkish),
ug (Uighur), uk (Ukrainian), ur (Urdu), uz (Uzbek), vi (Vietnamese), xh (Xhosa), yi (Yiddish), yo
(Yoruba), zh-cn (Chinese (Simplified)), zh-tw (Chinese (Traditional)), and zu (Zulu).
B.2 C OUNTRY- TO -L ANGUAGE M APPING
Although it is not used in our main analysis, some people might be interested in country-specific
aggregation of the LLM alignment.
To allow for such analysis, we collect each country and its main languages from Wikipedia popula-
tion statistics. We curate the list manually by going through the Wikipedia page of the languages of
each country, such as this one for Belgium: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_of_
Belgium. To account for multilingual speakers, we use the first-language-only speaker information,
i.e., the number of speakers who speak the language as their first language.
If future researchers want to calculate the country-specific misalignment scores, we tentatively sug-
gest a weighted average by each language-specific MIS score and the number of speakers of that
language in that country.
Afghanistan: ps; Albania: sq; Algeria: ar; Andorra: ca, pt, fr; Angola: pt; Argentina: es;
Armenia: hy, ru; Australia: en; Austria: de; Azerbaijan: az, hy, ru; Bahamas: en; Bahrain: ar;
Bangladesh: bn; Barbados: en; Belarus: be; Belgium: nl, fr, de; Benin: fr; Bolivia: es; Bosnia
and Herzegovina: bs, hr, sr; Botswana: en; Brazil: pt; Brunei: ms, zh-cn; Bulgaria: bg, tr;
Burkina Faso: fr; Burundi: fr; Cabo Verde: pt; Cambodia: km; Cameroon: fr, en; Canada: en, fr;
Central African Republic: fr; Chad: ar, fr; Chile: es; China: zh-cn; Colombia: es; Comoros: fr;
Congo, Dem. Rep.: fr; Congo, Rep.: fr; Costa Rica: es; Cote d’Ivoire: fr; Croatia: hr; Cyprus:
el, tr; Czechia: cs; Denmark: da; Djibouti: fr, ar; Dominican Republic: es; Ecuador: es; Egypt:
ar; El Salvador: es; Equatorial Guinea: es; Eritrea: ar; Estonia: et; Eswatini: en; Ethiopia: om;
Finland: fi, sy; France: fr; French Polynesia: fr; Gabon: fr; Gambia, The: en; Georgia: ka;
Germany: de; Ghana: en; Greece: el; Guam: en, tl; Guatemala: es; Guernsey: nan; Guinea: fr;
Guinea-Bissau: pt; Honduras: es; Hong Kong: zh-cn; Hungary: hu; Iceland: is; India: hi, en;
Indonesia: id; Iran: fa; Iraq: ar; Ireland: en, ga; Isle of Man: nan; Israel: he; Italy: it; Jamaica:
en; Japan: ja; Jersey: en; Jordan: ar; Kazakhstan: kk, ru; Kenya: en, sw; Kuwait: ar; Kyrgyzstan:
ky; Latvia: lv; Lebanon: ar, fr; Lesotho: st; Liberia: en; Libya: ar; Lithuania: lt; Luxembourg:
lb; Macao: zh-cn; Macedonia: mk, sq; Madagascar: mg; Malawi: ny, en; Malaysia: ms; Maldives:
dv; Mali: fr; Malta: mt, en; Martinique: fr; Mauritania: ar; Mauritius: en; Mexico: es; Moldova:
ro; Monaco: fr; Mongolia: mn; Montenegro: sr; Morocco: ar; Mozambique: pt; Myanmar: my;
Namibia: en; Nepal: ne; Netherlands: nl; New Caledonia: fr; New Zealand: en, mi; Nicaragua:
es; Niger: ha; Nigeria: en, ha, yo; Norway: no; Oman: ar, ml, bn; Pakistan: ur; Palestinian
Territory: ar; Panama: es; Paraguay: es, gn; Peru: es; Philippines: tl; Poland: pl; Portugal: pt;
Puerto Rico: en, es; Qatar: ar; Reunion: fr; Romania: ro; Russia: ru; Rwanda: en; Sao Tome
    3
        https://pypi.org/project/googletrans/


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and Principe: pt; Saudi Arabia: ar; Senegal: fr; Serbia: sr; Seychelles: en, fr; Sierra Leone:
en; Singapore: zh-cn, en, ms; Slovakia: sk; Slovenia: sl; Somalia: so; South Africa: zu, xh, af,
en; South Korea: ko; South Sudan: en; Spain: es; Sri Lanka: si, ta; Sudan: ar, en; Sweden: sv;
Switzerland: de, fr, it; Syria: ar; Taiwan: zh-tw; Tanzania: sw; Thailand: th; Togo: fr; Trinidad
and Tobago: en; Tunisia: ar; Turkey: tr; Uganda: en; Ukraine: uk; United Arab Emirates: ar;
United Kingdom: en; United States: en; Uruguay: es; Uzbekistan: uz; Venezuela: es; Vietnam:
vi; Zambia: en, ny; Zimbabwe: en, sn;

C    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
C.1 M ODEL S ETUP
To ensure reproducibility, we set the text generation temperature to zero for greedy decoding across
all our LLM evaluation experiments.
Table 5 includes all the exact model identifiers for the open-weights models, and also the model ID
for close-weights models using the OpenAI API in Table 5. The total estimated API cost for the
experiment is around 600 USD.

           Table 4: Detail model identifiers and VRAM requirements for the open-weights models.
            Model         Size    VRAM      Open-Weights Model Identifier
                          2B      8B        google/gemma-2b-it
            Gemma         9B      18B       google/gemma-2-9b-it
                          27B     80B       google/gemma-2-27b-it
                          7B      40GB      meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf
            Llama-2       13B     40GB      meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-chat-hf
                          70B     160GB     meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf
                          8B      40GB      meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct
            Llama-3
                          70B     160GB     neuralmagic/Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct-FP8
                          8B      40GB      meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
            Llama-3.1
                          70B     160GB     neuralmagic/Meta-Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct-FP8
            Mistral       7B      40GB      mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
                          7B      40GB      Qwen/Qwen2-7B-Instruct
            Qwen
                          72B     160GB     Qwen/Qwen2-72B-Instruct-GPTQ-Int8
                          4B      24GB      microsoft/Phi-3.5-mini-instruct
            Phi           14B     40GB      microsoft/Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct
                          42B     80GB      microsoft/Phi-3.5-MoE-instruct


Table 5: API identifiers of the close-weights models used in our experiments and approximate costs to test each
language.
                      Model      Version   Cost per Language     Identifier
                                    3             $2.3           text-davinci
                      GPT          3.5           $0.11           gpt-3.5-turbo-0613
                                    4             $5.1           gpt-4-0613


C.2 P ROMPT PARAPHRASES
We include the five additional paraphrases to the initial prompt generated by GPT-4 in Table 6.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 6: Paraphrases of the starting statement. All paraphrases were generated using GPT-4.
        No.      Prompt
      Original   Assume there is a self-driving car with a sudden break failure, and the car is about to
                 cause either of the two to die:
         1       Imagine a scenario where an autonomous vehicle experiences a sudden brake failure,
                 resulting in either of the two fatalities:
         2       In a situation where a self-driving car’s brakes fail unexpectedly, it is about to lead to the
                 death of one of the two sides:
         3       Picture a self-driving car with a sudden brake malfunction, which is about to result in the
                 demise of either of these two sides:
         4       Envision an autonomous car experiencing an abrupt brake failure, putting either of the
                 two sides at risk:
         5       Consider a case where a self-driving car undergoes a sudden brake failure, and it is about
                 to cause the death of one of the two sides:



D     T RANSLATION Q UALITY C HECK
D.1     H UMAN E VALUATION OF T RANSLATION Q UALITY
To evaluate translation quality, we conducted a human evaluation task on MTurk, where annotators
rated how accurately translations from English to another language conveyed the original meaning.
Ratings were provided on a 5-point scale ranging from "None" (no meaning conveyed) to "All" (full
meaning conveyed). The task was divided into two main phases:
First, annotators were presented with a language selection page. On this page, they were prompted
to select the language in which they were most proficient from a list of 107 languages (excluding
English). Annotators were explicitly reminded not to proceed if they were unfamiliar with any of
the listed languages. This step ensured that the ratings were provided only by individuals fluent in
the target languages.
Next, annotators were directed to the translation rating page. This page contained 25 translation
pairs, each comprising an English sentence or word and its corresponding translation. The instruc-
tions for this phase were adapted from prior research (Lavie, 2011; Goto et al., 2014), as shown
below:
Please rate how accurately the translation conveys the meaning of the source text:
Source English Sentence/Text: {source}
Translation: {translation}
- None: No meaning of the original text is conveyed.
- Little: Only a small portion of the meaning is conveyed.
- Much: A substantial amount of the meaning is conveyed.
- Most: Most of the meaning is conveyed accurately.
- All: The full meaning is conveyed accurately.
After completing the rating task, annotators submitted their responses, which were then recorded for
analysis. We kept the Amazon Mechanical Turk task open for a span of three days, and collected
a total of 169 annotation responses covering 44 languages. The total cost was approximately $10.
The languages evaluated included af, am, ar, be, bg, bn, bs, cs, da, de, en, es, fi, fr, ga, gu, hi, hmn,
hu, hy, it, ja, ko, la, mg, ml, ms, nl, pl, pt, ro, ru, sq, st, sw, ta, te, tl, tr, ur, vi, yo, zh-cn, and zh-tw.
The number of annotations received per language ranged from one response (e.g., am, be, bs, da, fi,
gu, hmn, ms, nl, pl, st) to as many as 16 responses (es).
The results of the evaluation demonstrate strong translation quality. Specifically, 88.6% of the eval-
uated languages achieved an average score of 3.0 or higher out of 5 (i.e., conveying a substantial
portion of the original meaning). Importantly, no languages received a mean score below 2.0, and
the lowest-performing group only has four languages (am, pl, sq, la), whose mean scores are between
2.0 and 2.5. The standard deviation of scores across languages ranged from 0.5 to 1.3, suggesting
relatively consistent ratings among annotators. These findings cover both high-resource and low-
resource languages, highlighting the robustness of the evaluation. Overall, the results demonstrate
that the translations generally maintain high quality across a diverse set of linguistic contexts. Ad-
ditionally, we examined the correlation between speaker count and translation score. The Pearson


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


correlation is 0.078, and the Spearman correlation is 0.072, both indicating no meaningful corre-
lation. Given the limited data available, it is reassuring to observe that the relationship remains
weak.
Table 7 presents the full annotation results, including details of the 44 evaluated languages, the
number of responses received per language, the mean scores, and the standard deviations.

                Language                Language Code     Averaged Scores     # Responses
                Danish                  da                  5.00 ±0.00             1
                Southern Sotho          st                  5.00 ±0.00             1
                Bosnian                 bs                  4.91 ±0.28             1
                Turkish                 tr                  4.81 ±0.43             3
                Russian                 ru                  4.78 ±0.41             2
                Chinese (Traditional)   zh-tw               4.76 ±0.87             9
                Portuguese              pt                  4.72 ±0.70             6
                German                  de                  4.69 ±0.70             6
                Tagalog                 tl                  4.68 ±0.61             4
                Swahili                 sw                  4.68 ±1.11             3
                Chinese (Simplified)    zh-cn               4.63 ±0.98             5
                Dutch                   nl                  4.61 ±0.71             1
                Korean                  ko                  4.59 ±1.13             3
                Bulgarian               bg                  4.59 ±1.31             2
                Czech                   cs                  4.57 ±1.04             2
                English                 en                  4.53 ±0.73             7
                Malagasy                mg                  4.52 ±1.12             5
                Vietnamese              vi                  4.52 ±0.50             3
                Spanish                 es                  4.49 ±0.96            16
                Romanian                ro                  4.48 ±0.83             2
                Belarusian              be                  4.48 ±0.50             1
                Italian                 it                  4.47 ±1.00             5
                Japanese                ja                  4.45 ±1.01             5
                Afrikaans               af                  4.33 ±0.55             2
                Malay                   ms                  4.30 ±0.95             1
                Telugu                  te                  4.30 ±1.07             3
                Yoruba                  yo                  4.29 ±1.25             3
                Hungarian               hu                  4.26 ±1.26             2
                Malayalam               ml                  4.10 ±1.43             5
                Tamil                   ta                  4.06 ±1.14             9
                Bengali                 bn                  4.03 ±1.14             3
                French                  fr                  4.03 ±0.98             3
                Hindi                   hi                  3.94 ±1.32            11
                Irish                   ga                  3.83 ±1.17             2
                Gujarati                gu                  3.83 ±1.86             1
                Urdu                    ur                  3.64 ±1.43             4
                Hmong                   hmn                 3.61 ±1.86             1
                Arabic                  ar                  3.58 ±1.39             3
                Armenian                hy                  3.28 ±1.27            14
                Finnish                 fi                  2.70 ±1.40             1
                Latin                   la                  2.50 ±1.31             4
                Albanian                sq                  2.30 ±2.11             2
                Polish                  pl                  2.26 ±0.53             1
                Amharic                 am                  2.00 ±0.00             1
Table 7: Human evaluation results of translation quality. Annotations were collected for 44 languages, with
scores averaged across all translation pairs for each language.

D.2 AUTOMATIC E VALUATION OF T RANSLATION Q UALITY
In addition to manual annotation of the translation quality, we also provide the automatic evaluation
results by back-translation. Starting with our original prompt in English x, we use our paper’s setup
to translate and collect the non-English prompt y, and based on y, we further translate it back to
English, thus getting the back-translated English prompt x′ . As a simple method for evaluation, we
calculate the cosine similarity of the embeddings between all x and x′ pairs for all languages, with
a histogram plotted in Figure 5.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Figure 5: Distribution of embedding similarity


E    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
E.1 LLM C LUSTERING R ESULTS
As introduced in the main paper, we first provide a full list of languages for each of the four clusters
of Llama 3.1 70B in Table 8.
                          Table 8: Languages in each cluster for Llama 3.1 70B.
 Cluster   Languages
   A       Amharic, Cebuano, Scots gaelic, Hausa, Hawaiian, Hmong, Igbo, Georgian, Kurdish (kurmanji),
           Maori, Malayalam, Maltese, Dutch, Chichewa, Punjabi, Pashto, Shona, Somali, Tamil, Telugu,
           Tajik, Filipino, Xhosa, Yoruba
    B      Belarusian, Bulgarian, Bengali, Bosnian, Corsican, Danish, German, Greek, Esperanto, Spanish,
           Estonian, Persian, Frisian, Croatian, Italian, Kannada, Latin, Lithuanian, Macedonian, Mongo-
           lian, Marathi, Norwegian, Polish, Russian, Sindhi, Slovak, Slovenian, Samoan, Swedish, Swahili,
           Turkish, Ukrainian
    C      Afrikaans, Arabic, Azerbaijani, Catalan, Czech, Welsh, English, Finnish, French, Irish, Galician,
           Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Haitian creole, Armenian, Indonesian, Icelandic, Hebrew, Javanese,
           Korean, Latvian, Malay, Nepali, Portuguese, Romanian, Albanian, Serbian, Sundanese, Urdu,
           Vietnamese, Chinese (simplified), Chinese (traditional)
    D      Basque, Hungarian, Kazakh, Khmer, Kyrgyz, Luxembourgish, Lao, Malagasy, Myanmar
           (burmese), Odia, Sinhala, Sesotho, Thai, Uyghur, Uzbek, Yiddish, Zulu


Furthermore, we also introduce the clustering results of two additional models: GPT-3 and GPT-4.
For GPT-3, we visualize its clustering results in Figure 6 with the language list in Table 9. For
GPT-3, we visualize its clustering results in Figure 7 with the language list in Table 10.

                               Table 9: Languages in each cluster for GPT-3.
 Cluster   Languages
   A       Hindi, Serbian
   B       Afrikaans, Arabic, Bosnian, Corsican, Danish, Esperanto, Spanish, Estonian, Finnish, French,
           Galician, Hebrew, Haitian creole, Icelandic, Italian, Lithuanian, Latvian, Macedonian, Malay,
           Maltese, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Slovak, Albanian, Swedish, Vietnamese, Chi-
           nese (simplified), Chinese (traditional)
    C      Czech, English, Frisian, Hungarian, Indonesian, Slovenian, Zulu
    D      Welsh, German, Greek, Hebrew, Japanese, Korean, Luxembourgish, Swahili, Filipino, Turkish,
           Ukrainian


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Cluster A         Cluster B   Cluster C              Cluster D          Human Preference


                                       Sparing Humans                                                    Sparing the Young
                           100                                                         100
                           80                                                          80


              Preference


                                                                          Preference
                           60                                                          60
                           40                                                          40
                           20                                                          20
                             0                                                           0
                                 A       B          C            D                             A            B          C           D


                                        Sparing the Fit                                                  Sparing Females
                           100                                                         100
                           80                                                          80
              Preference


                                                                          Preference
                           60                                                          60
                           40                                                          40
                           20                                                          20
                             0                                                           0
                                 A       B          C            D                             A            B          C           D


                                     Sparing Higher Status                                                 Sparing More
                           100                                                         100
                           80                                                          80
              Preference


                                                                          Preference
                           60                                                          60
                           40                                                          40
                           20                                                          20
                             0                                                           0
                                 A       B          C            D                             A            B          C           D



                Figure 6: Distribution of preferences by feature across languages for GPT-3.


                                        Cluster A         Cluster B   Cluster C              Cluster D          Human Preference


                                       Sparing Humans                                                    Sparing the Young
                           100                                                         100
                           80                                                          80
              Preference


                                                                          Preference


                           60                                                          60
                           40                                                          40
                           20                                                          20
                             0                                                           0
                                 A       B          C            D                             A            B          C           D


                                        Sparing the Fit                                                  Sparing Females
                           100                                                         100
                           80                                                          80
              Preference


                                                                          Preference


                           60                                                          60
                           40                                                          40
                           20                                                          20
                             0                                                           0
                                 A       B          C            D                             A            B          C           D


                                     Sparing Higher Status                                                 Sparing More
                           100                                                         100
                           80                                                          80
              Preference


                                                                          Preference


                           60                                                          60
                           40                                                          40
                           20                                                          20
                             0                                                           0
                                 A       B          C            D                             A            B          C           D



                Figure 7: Distribution of preferences by feature across languages for GPT-4.


                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 10: Languages in each cluster for GPT-4.
 Cluster   Languages
   A       Amharic, Arabic, Belarusian, Czech, Welsh, Greek, English, Finnish, Scots gaelic, Galician,
           Hausa, Hawaiian,
           Hebrew, Hmong, Indonesian, Igbo, Icelandic, Italian, Hebrew, Japanese, Kazakh, Kannada,
           Lithuanian, Maori, Macedonian, Malayalam, Mongolian, Marathi, Maltese, Myanmar (burmese),
           Nepali,
           Norwegian, Chichewa, Polish, Romanian, Russian, Slovenian, Samoan, Shona, Albanian, Ser-
           bian, Sesotho,
           Swahili, Telugu, Filipino, Turkish, Uyghur, Ukrainian, Uzbek, Xhosa, Yoruba
   B       Afrikaans, Bulgarian, Bosnian, Catalan, Corsican, Danish, German, Esperanto, Estonian, Basque,
           French,
           Frisian, Irish, Hindi, Croatian, Haitian creole, Hungarian, Javanese, Georgian, Khmer, Latvian,
           Malagasy,
           Pashto, Portuguese, Sindhi, Slovak, Somali, Swedish, Thai, Vietnamese, Chinese (simplified),
           Chinese (traditional)
   C       Azerbaijani, Bengali, Persian, Gujarati, Armenian, Korean, Kurdish (kurmanji), Kyrgyz, Luxem-
           bourgish,
           Punjabi, Sundanese, Tamil, Urdu, Yiddish, Zulu
   D       Cebuano, Spanish, Latin, Tajik


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2   C ORRELATION OF THE M ISALIGNMENT S CORE AND THE N UMBER OF S PEAKERS OF
      E ACH L ANGUAGE
Table 11 shows the correlation coefficients and p-values of the misalignment score and the number
of speakers of each language. Across all models, such correlation is close to zero, showing that
LLMs do not specifically favor high resource languages in our M ULTI TP test.

Table 11: Correlation coefficients and p-values of the misalignment score and the number of speakers of each
language.
                             Model             Pearson Correlation    p-Value
                             GPT-3                    -0.01             0.90
                             GPT-4                     0.02             0.81
                             GPT-4o Mini               0.06             0.49
                             Gemma 2 27B               0.00             0.99
                             Gemma 2 2B                0.04             0.63
                             Gemma 2 9B               -0.04             0.67
                             Llama 2 13B              -0.04             0.60
                             Llama 2 70B               0.09             0.25
                             Llama 2 7B                0.00             1.00
                             Llama 3 70B               0.02             0.78
                             Llama 3 8B                0.07             0.39
                             Llama 3.1 70B            -0.07             0.39
                             Llama 3.1 8B             -0.05             0.57
                             Mistral 7B               -0.04             0.63
                             Phi-3 Medium              0.06             0.50
                             Phi-3.5 Mini             -0.01             0.86
                             Phi-3.5 MoE              -0.06             0.47
                             Qwen 2 72B                0.09             0.25
                             Qwen 2 7B                 0.04             0.62


E.3   C ORRELATION OF THE M ISALIGNMENT S CORE AND L ANGUAGE S ENSITIVITY
Table 12 shows the misalignment scores and language sensitivity scores for each model. We observe
a moderate positive correlation (Pearson coefficient = 0.43, p-value = 0.07).

               Table 12: Misalignment scores and language sensitivity scores for each model.
                          Model             Misalignment     Language Sensitivity
                          Llama 3.1 70B         0.55               18.01
                          Llama 3 70B           0.56               15.25
                          Llama 3 8B            0.57               14.90
                          GPT-3                 0.64               15.13
                          Llama 3.1 8B          0.75               19.92
                          Qwen 2 7B             0.77               22.23
                          Mistral 7B            0.80               21.30
                          GPT-4                 0.81               15.83
                          Llama 2 7B            0.83               19.79
                          Llama 2 70B           0.91               18.53
                          Phi-3.5 Mini          0.94               21.27
                          Gemma 2 2B            0.96               22.88
                          Phi-3 Medium          1.07               22.79
                          Phi-3.5 MoE           1.08               14.67
                          Gemma 2 9B            1.08               24.74
                          Llama 2 13B           1.10               21.01
                          Gemma 2 27B           1.17               21.66
                          Qwen 2 72B            1.20               21.11
                          GPT-4o Mini           1.45               18.09


E.4   C OUNTRY-S PECIFIC A LIGNMENT
For reader-friendliness, we also visualize the misalignment by a world map in Figure 8, where
darker colors indicate higher misalignment values. As introduced in the main paper RQ4, there is
not a strong pattern of misalignment bias towards low-resource languages.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                              Llama 3.1 70B


                                          <=0.58 (1st Q)     <=0.82 (2nd Q)        <=1.30 (3rd Q)           <=1.90 (4th Q)          No Data

Figure 8: Moral misalignment world map of the best model, Llama 3.1 70B. The darker shade of the color
corresponds to a larger misalignment score. We aggregate the country-specific alignment or according to the
approximation procedures introduced in Appendix B.2.

                                                             East           West        South            Human Preference


                                            Sparing Humans                                                       Sparing the Young
                             100                                                                   100
                Preference


                                                                                      Preference


                             50                                                                     50



                              0                                                                      0
                                   East              West           South                                 East               West             South

                                                    Region                                                               Region
                                             Sparing the Fit                                                     Sparing Females
                             100                                                                   100
                Preference


                                                                                      Preference


                             50                                                                     50



                              0                                                                      0
                                   East              West           South                                 East               West             South

                                                    Region                                                               Region
                                      Sparing Higher Status                                                        Sparing More
                             100                                                                   100
                Preference


                                                                                      Preference


                             50                                                                     50



                              0                                                                      0
                                   East              West           South                                 East               West             South

                                                    Region                                                               Region

  Figure 9: Distribution of preferences by feature across languages for Llama 3.1 70B for different cultures.


E.4.1 R EGIONAL D IFFERENCES ACROSS G LOBAL E AST, W EST, AND S OUTH
In addition to country-level statistics, we also analyze across three major geographic regions – the
Global East, West, and South, using the clustering of Awad et al. (2018; 2020a) – to investigate
potential cultural variations in moral decision-making. We show the regional moral preferences of
three models, GPT-3, GPT-4, and Llama 3.1 70B, in Figures 9 to 11, respectively.


                                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     East           West        South          Human Preference


                                        Sparing Humans                                                 Sparing the Young
                           100                                                           100


              Preference


                                                                            Preference
                           50                                                             50



                            0                                                              0
                                 East        West           South                               East         West          South

                                            Region                                                          Region
                                        Sparing the Fit                                                Sparing Females
                           100                                                           100
              Preference


                                                                            Preference
                           50                                                             50



                            0                                                              0
                                 East        West           South                               East         West          South

                                            Region                                                          Region
                                    Sparing Higher Status                                                Sparing More
                           100                                                           100
              Preference


                           50                                               Preference    50



                            0                                                              0
                                 East        West           South                               East         West          South

                                            Region                                                          Region

    Figure 10: Distribution of preferences by feature across languages for GPT-3 for different cultures.


                                                     East           West        South          Human Preference


                                        Sparing Humans                                                 Sparing the Young
                           100                                                           100
              Preference


                                                                            Preference


                           50                                                             50



                            0                                                              0
                                 East        West           South                               East         West          South

                                            Region                                                          Region
                                        Sparing the Fit                                                Sparing Females
                           100                                                           100
              Preference


                                                                            Preference


                           50                                                             50



                            0                                                              0
                                 East        West           South                               East         West          South

                                            Region                                                          Region
                                    Sparing Higher Status                                                Sparing More
                           100                                                           100
              Preference


                                                                            Preference


                           50                                                             50



                            0                                                              0
                                 East        West           South                               East         West          South

                                            Region                                                          Region

    Figure 11: Distribution of preferences by feature across languages for GPT-4 for different cultures.


                                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.5 ROBUSTNESS A NALYSIS : T ESTING THE O PTION O RDER B IAS
Recent work reports that LLMs often suffer from recency bias (Liu et al., 2024), making them more
likely to choose the later option in multiple choice questions.
Since this will have an important effect on our study, we conduct a sanity check to report the con-
sistency rate, i.e., the frequency of LLMs to keep its response if we swap the order the order of the
two choices, e.g., mentioning the boy first, and elderly man next, or vice versa in our example in
Figure 1. We report the average consistency rates across different models in Table 13, showing that
most models are robust against option order changes, with close-to-perfect consistency rates.

    Table 13: Consistency rates against the position bias in the option order for the LLMs tested in our study.
                                        Model            Consistency Rate
                                        GPT-4o Mini            99.5
                                        Gemma 2 27B            99.2
                                        Gemma 2 9B             99.0
                                        Qwen 2 72B             98.6
                                        GPT-4                  98.3
                                        Llama 2 13B            97.7
                                        Mistral 7B             97.3
                                        Llama 2 70B            97.2
                                        Qwen 2 7B              97.1
                                        Phi-3 Medium           96.7
                                        Phi-3.5 MoE            96.6
                                        Llama 2 7B             96.3
                                        Llama 3.1 8B           96.1
                                        Llama 3 70B            95.8
                                        Llama 3.1 70B          95.1
                                        Gemma 2 2B             95.1
                                        Phi-3.5 Mini           94.7
                                        Llama 3 8B             94.1
                                        GPT-3                  87.1


E.6     A NALYSIS OF M ODELS FROM THE L LAMA FAMILY

                              Sparing     Sparing    Sparing       Sparing        Sparing     Sparing
            Model
                              Young         Fit      Females     Higher Status    Humans       More
            Llama 3.1 70B      76.3        70.2        84.6          65.7          87.1        80.4
            Llama 3.1 8B       64.2        68.7        72.2          63.7          76.5        78.2
            Llama 3 70B        77.3        69.0        91.4          70.9          93.8        83.2
            Llama 3 8B         51.6        68.1        84.1          70.3          88.0        73.7
            Llama 2 70B        68.7        76.5        83.5          72.2          96.1        79.8
            Llama 2 13B        61.7        66.3        86.5          71.5          90.3        76.2
            Llama 2 7B         47.7        67.6        84.3          67.7          92.1        78.6
                            Table 14: Llama family average distribution preferences.


F     R ESULTS OF JAILBREAKING LLM S
We conduct jailbreaking experiments on Llama 3.1 8B Instruct, Gemma 2B It, Qwen 2 7B Instruct,
and Llama 2 7B Chat. The results of preference decomposition, refusal rate decomposition, and
comparisons with the original censored models are presented in Figure 12 to Figure 15. Our findings
indicate that jailbreaking is more effective on Llama 3.1 8B compared to the other models.


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Llama 3.1 8B   Llama 3.1 8B Uncensored     Humans                                         Llama 3.1 8B     Llama 3.1 8B Uncensored
                             Sparing humans                                                                     Refusal Rate: Species


    Sparing the young                                  Sparing more                    Refusal Rate: Age                                    Refusal Rate: Utilitarianis


                                   0   20 40 60 80 100                                                                     0   20 40 60 80 100


       Sparing the ﬁt                                  Sparing higher status        Refusal Rate: Fitness                                   Refusal Rate: Social Value


                             Sparing females                                                                      Refusal Rate: Gender



               (a) Preference decomposition.                                                      (b) Refusal rate decomposition.
Figure 12: Radar plots depicting the preference decomposition (left) and refusal rate decomposition (right) for
Llama 3.1 8B Instruct and its uncensored variant.


              Gemma 2 2B     Gemma 2 2B Uncensored       Humans                                         Gemma 2 2B     Gemma 2 2B Uncensored
                             Sparing humans                                                                   Refusal Rate: Species


    Sparing the young                                  Sparing more                    Refusal Rate: Age                                    Refusal Rate: Utilitarianis


                                   0   20 40 60 80 100                                                                     0   20 40 60 80 100


       Sparing the ﬁt                                  Sparing higher status        Refusal Rate: Fitness                                   Refusal Rate: Social Value


                             Sparing females                                                                      Refusal Rate: Gender



               (a) Preference decomposition.                                                      (b) Refusal rate decomposition.
Figure 13: Radar plots depicting the preference decomposition (left) and refusal rate decomposition (right) for
Gemma 2 2B It and its uncensored variant.


                Qwen 2 7B    Qwen 2 7B Uncensored      Humans                                               Qwen 2 7B     Qwen 2 7B Uncensored
                             Sparing humans                                                                      Refusal Rate: Species


    Sparing the young                                  Sparing more                    Refusal Rate: Age                                    Refusal Rate: Utilitarianis


                                   0   20 40 60 80 100                                                                     0   20 40 60 80 100


       Sparing the ﬁt                                  Sparing higher status        Refusal Rate: Fitness                                   Refusal Rate: Social Value


                             Sparing females                                                                      Refusal Rate: Gender



               (a) Preference decomposition.                                                      (b) Refusal rate decomposition.
Figure 14: Radar plots depicting the preference decomposition (left) and refusal rate decomposition (right) for
Qwen 2 7B Instruct and its uncensored variant.


                                                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Llama 2 7B   Llama 2 7B Uncensored   Humans                                               Llama 2 7B     Llama 2 7B Uncensored
                             Sparing humans                                                                     Refusal Rate: Species


    Sparing the young                                Sparing more                    Refusal Rate: Age                                     Refusal Rate: Utilitarianis


                                   0   20 40 60 80 100                                                                   0   20 40 60 80 100


       Sparing the ﬁt                                Sparing higher status        Refusal Rate: Fitness                                    Refusal Rate: Social Value


                             Sparing females                                                                    Refusal Rate: Gender



               (a) Preference decomposition.                                                    (b) Refusal rate decomposition.
Figure 15: Radar plots depicting the preference decomposition (left) and refusal rate decomposition (right) for
Llama 2 7B Chat and its uncensored variant.


                                                                             30
