Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SWE B : A L ARGE W EB DATASET FOR THE
S CANDINAVIAN L ANGUAGES
 Tobias Norlund∗, Tim Isbister, Amaru Cuba Gyllensten, Paul Dos Santos,
 Danila Petrelli, Ariel Ekgren, Magnus Sahlgren
 AI Sweden



                                             A BSTRACT

           This paper presents the hitherto largest pretraining dataset for the Scandinavian
           languages: the Scandinavian WEb (SWEb), comprising over one trillion tokens.
           The paper details the collection and processing pipeline, and introduces a novel
           model-based text extractor that significantly reduces complexity in comparison
           with rule-based approaches. We also introduce a new cloze-style benchmark
           for evaluating language models in Swedish, and use this test to compare mod-
           els trained on the SWEb data to models trained on FineWeb, with competitive
           results. All data, models and code are shared openly.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Large language models have made significant strides in recent years due to their general capabilities
in language-processing tasks. This progress has been largely driven by the development of extensive
and high-quality pretraining datasets sourced from open web data (Wenzek et al., 2020; Brown et al.,
2020; Abadji et al., 2022; Penedo et al., 2023; 2024). However, the majority of research aimed at
improving pretraining data focuses on high-resource languages such as English. Our goal is to
create a large-scale and high-performing open pretraining dataset specifically for the Scandinavian
(north-germanic) languages: Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, and Icelandic.
Existing large-scale datasets for these languages primarily include mC4 (Xue et al., 2021), OSCAR
(Abadji et al., 2022), and HPLT Datasets 1.2 (de Gibert et al., 2024). The Scandinavian portion
of mC4 comprises approximately 100B tokens, 10B tokens for OSCAR 23.01, and 35B tokens for
HPLT, which are all relatively small numbers considering that state-of-the-art large language models
today are trained on trillions of high-quality tokens.
In this paper we make the following contributions:

         • We release1 the largest to date pretraining dataset for the Scandinavian languages:
           Scandinavian WEb (SWEb). SWEb is the result of running our proposed pipeline on
           98 Common Crawl snapshots. SWEb contains 1.01 trillion tokens in the Scandinavian lan-
           guages, approximately an order of magnitude more than other available open alternatives.
         • We introduce a new cloze-style benchmark for evaluating language models in Swedish,
           HP-MEK, a subset of the Swedish Scholastic Aptitude Test (Högskoleprovet) used for
           university admissions in Sweden. Using HP-MEK, we show our data performs on-par with
           data from the recently proposed FineWeb (Penedo et al., 2024) pipeline.
         • We propose a new comprehensive pipeline for curating pretraining data for large language
           models, built around a model-based text extractor that significantly reduces complexity and
           is easily adaptable through rapid data annotation2 . Most notably, we demonstrate that our
           pipeline returns about +60% more high quality tokens than FineWeb on the same input
           data.
    ∗
      Corresponding author: tobias.norlund@ai.se
    1
      Data available here: https://huggingface.co/datasets/AI-Sweden-Models/SWEb
    2
      Code and extractor model is available here: https://github.com/aidotse/SWEb


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2       BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK


Early efforts to extract massive amounts of text from the open internet for LLM training start from
WebText (Radford et al., 2019), developed for training GPT-2. In this case, outbound links from
Reddit with a certain number of upvotes were used as the content selection criterion. Text was
extracted using Dragnet (Peters et al., 2018) and Newspaper3 and filtered with several heuristics,
resulting in a dataset of 40GB after deduplication. Soon after, CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2020) and C4
(Roberts et al., 2019) were proposed, both based on open web data from Common Crawl. C4 was
initially developed exclusively for English but was later followed by a multilingual version, mC4
(Xue et al., 2021). CCNet, on the other hand, was multilingual from the outset.
Both CCNet and C4 are based on the WET archives from Common Crawl, where all HTML format-
ting has been stripped, leaving only the text. However, this text still contains a significant amount
of noise in the form of menu and ad text, headers, footers, and sidebars, which are irrelevant to the
page’s primary content. A successful method for extracting primary content from WET archives
is to deduplicate the documents at the line level. C4 globally deduplicates all lines, while CCNet
deduplicates over a subset of documents from the same Common Crawl dump. Line-by-line dedu-
plication is the primary extraction method in CCNet, whereas C4 additionally employs a range of
English-specific cleaning heuristics.
Following extraction comes a language detection and filtering step. Whilst more computationally
expensive, performing language detection post extraction been shown to achieve better detection
accuracy than filtering pre extraction (especially for low-resource languages) (Wenzek et al., 2020).
Quality filtering differs slightly between the two, with C4 filtering using several heuristics, a bad
words filter, and URL deduplication. In contrast, CCNet employs a model-based filter, using per-
plexity as a quality measure with a KenLM model trained on Wikipedia.
CCNet has since been utilized in subsequent works such as RedPajama (v1 and v2) (Together Com-
puter, 2023) and Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024). RedPajama-Data v2 runs CCNet on an expanded
number of Common Crawl snapshots and filters for five high-resource languages (none of which are
Scandinavian, however). They also extend CCNet’s quality filtering by pre-computing a larger set
of popular quality signals but leave the thresholding and filtering to the user.
Recently, several works have moved away from Common Crawl’s WET archives in favor of pro-
cessing the raw HTML of webpages found in the WARC archives. Utilizing mor sophisticated text
extraction turns out to be critical for the improving quality of the resulting data (Penedo et al., 2024).
In MassiveWeb (Rae et al., 2021), the tree structure of HTML is utilized to more easily group and
identify the primary content of pages. Some formatting is also retained, with the argument that
this “diversity in formatting style translates effectively to the generative capabilities of the Gopher
models.”
A similar approach is developed in NeuScraper (Xu et al., 2024), where a model is trained to – on
an element level – decide whether it should be extracted or not. Both RefinedWeb and FineWeb use
the open-source framework Trafilatura (Barbaresi, 2021) to extract text from HTML. Trafilatura is
based on rules and heuristics on the DOM tree to identify primary content and has been shown to
be the best non-commercial extractor for certain domains (Lopuhin, 2019). However, quality issues
are still prevalent, and in RefinedWeb (Penedo et al., 2023) further (line-based) filters are added in
an attempt to address these.
MassiveWeb introduce what they call “repetition filters” to remove documents with repetitive text,
that is found beneficial with their extractor. These are also sucessfully reused in both RefinedWeb
and later FineWeb. Through a systematic analysis, FineWeb further adds a small set of quality filters,
that is shown through ablation experiments to yet increase quality. For a state of the art pipeline like
FineWeb, the filtering can add up to 30 or more quantities and rules that might be difficult to oversee
and adapt to new languages.


    3
        https://github.com/codelucas/newspaper


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Stage 1: Content selection       Stage 2: Content extraction & formatting                          Stage 3: Filtering & Cleaning



                                             Convert HTML to    Extract primary   Text normalization
      Common     Common           CCNet                                                                Quality filtering    De-duplication    PII replacement
                                               Markdown        Markdown content         (FTFY)
       Crawl       Crawl
      (WARC)      (WET)


Figure 1: The SWEb pipeline. We use Common Crawl’s preprocessed WET archives for content
selection, and WARC for extraction. At the center stage sits our model based Markdown extractor,
that is the primary workhorse to produce our dataset.


3      T HE SWE B P IPELINE

As evident by the previous section, much focus has been placed on the development of heuristics
and filters to enhance the quality of the resulting data.
To move away from the extensive number of manual thresholds and complex extraction rules, we
propose a more data-driven alternative. By learning a model for extraction, this complexity can be
significantly reduced.
We begin by describing our pipeline that, like existing approaches, consists of the overarching steps
of content selection, extraction, quality filtering, and deduplication (Figure 1).


3.1     S TAGE 1: C ONTENT S ELECTION

Our pipeline begins with content selection, which aims to identify and select source documents from
Common Crawl that are likely to be in one of the Scandinavian languages. Since the Scandinavian
languages make up a very small portion of the entire Common Crawl, we want to implement this
step early to filter out all non-relevant content.
We use CCNet to identify Scandinavian documents within the entire Common Crawl dataset. CCNet
processes the WET archives, and after line-by-line deduplication, language detection is performed
using fastText (Joulin et al., 2016b). Documents with a detected language score above 0.2 for any
of the four languages are selected for the next stage.


3.2     S TAGE 2: C ONTENT E XTRACTION AND F ORMATTING

In Stage 2, we start from the documents indentified in Stage 1 but discard their content and instead
use Common Crawl’s index to download their original HTML from the WARC archives. This
means we use CCNet and the WET documents solely for content selection, but not for extraction. In
the WET archives, all formatting and structure, such as header information, tables, text styles, bullet
lists, and images, have been removed. We believe it is useful for language models to also model such
structural information, in addition to plain text. Therefore, we aim to extract also this information
from the webpages, and retain it in Markdown format.
We propose a new method for extracting primary content from the webpages, consisting of two
steps: 1) Convert HTML to Markdown, 2) Extract primary content from the resulting Markdown
through line-by-line filtering with a trained model.


3.2.1          C ONVERT HTML TO M ARKDOWN

Since we want to preserve basic textual formatting, we choose to convert from HTML to Markdown
with its very lightweight markup, thus does not add many extra tokens. We convert all incoming
HTML documents to Markdown using Pandoc, stripping links and images. See Listing 1 for an
example.
No extraction has yet taken place, so these documents are still full of noise from menus, advertise-
ments, and other extraneous content. We address this in the next step.


                                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Listing 1: A webpage converted to markdown (translated, originally in Swedish), including title, top
menu, headings and primary content. The document is truncated for brevity.
 1   My Life, My Thoughts & My Training
 2
 3   ## The Blog
 4   - The Blog
 5   - Running Times Over the Years
 6   - My Education
 7   - Personal Training
 8
 9   ## Wednesday, December 14, 2011
10
11   ### The Tough Week Continues...
12
13   ...but tomorrow is a rest day.
14
15   I can feel in my body that I am right in the middle of a tough week *(I periodize my training, among other
           things, by alternating between heavy, medium, and light weeks.)* and running was not exactly the first
            thing I thought about when I woke up this morning. But after a nap together, sleep?\!
16
17 Posted by
18
19 Running & Life at
20 ...


3.2.2      M ODEL -BASED C ONTENT E XTRACTION
We observe that individual lines in the Markdown documents often correspond to specific elements
such as headers, paragraphs, or navigation links. This makes lines an appropriate level for extraction.
Therefore, we develop a custom annotation tool (details in Appendix B) to annotate which lines in
these Markdown documents should be extracted and which should not. We ask annotators to mark
what is considered the “main content” on the current webpage, and make some principled decisions
for quality and consistency:

        1. We do not extract navigation text such as menus or buttons.
        2. A significant portion of the webpages are product pages. We decide to extract these only if
           there is a product description consisting of at least three complete sentences.
        3. We extract tables if they are well-formatted and their content is tightly coupled to the main
           content.
        4. On blogs or article pages that include user comments, we extract such comments in addition
           to the main content.
        5. We do not extract information from sidebars unless it clearly constitutes main content.

While not explicitly excluded as per our guidelines, advertisement text isn’t considered to be main
content and is thus implicitly excluded. The full annotation guidelines can be found in Appendix C.
In total, we annotate 1,380 webpages, using 100 of these for validation and the remainder as training
data for our extraction model.

Line Extraction Model Our dataset consists                           BCE BCE     BCE  BCE
                                                                      loss loss  loss loss
of Markdown documents with corresponding
binary line annotations, see Figure 11. We
aim to train a model to predict this label for
                                                                   TRANSFORMER
each line. For this purpose, we choose to use
a transformer encoder, where each newline is
replaced with a special token [SEP]. We then
feed the entire document through the encoder,                My Life, My Thoughts and My Training <s> <s> # The Blog <s> - The Blog <s> - Running Times ...


with each [SEP] token representing the preced-
ing line. This way, each line classification is Figure 2: Illustration of our proposed line clas-
contextualized by (theoretically) the full docu- sification model. Each newline is replaced by a
ment context.                                    special <s> token, and the corresponding embed-
                                                 dings are used for classification

                h0:n = Encoder(x0:n )              (1)


                                                         4
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Content length              Ratio alphanumeric chars         Ratio headings per non heading word                  Unigram entropy
                107
Num documents   106
                105
                104
                103
                102

                      0 1000020000300004000050000 0.0     0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0 0.00          0.05   0.10     0.15    0.20 0           2         4       6       8
                              Num chars                           Ratio                                     Ratio                                   Entropy

 Figure 4: Filtering distributions on two Common Crawl dumps, and exclude regions marked in red.
 We exclude documents whose content length is shorter than 100 chars (invisible in the chart).


 Through a linear projection of the output hidden state of each [SEP] token, we obtain logits for
 predicting the binary label of the current line. Let j denote the token index corresponding to each
 [SEP] token in the document. We then get the predicted probability for the line as:


                                                                      pj = σ(W hj + b)                                                                                 (2)
 where σ is the sigmoid function. The model is trained using binary cross-entropy loss between each
 pj and an annotated line label. See Figure 2 for an illustration. We apply a fixed threshold to pj to
 determine whether to include or exclude the line.
 The Markdown documents can be very long, so
 we use the Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020)                                                                      Line extraction precision/recall
 architecture. Specifically, we use a pre-trained                                              1.0
 model that supports up to 16k tokens and has                                                                       Threshold = 0.995 Threshold = 0.498
                                                                                                                                           Threshold = 0.050
 been trained for representation learning using                                                0.8
 masked language modeling4 . The Longformer                                                                                                       Threshold = 0.001
 is a linear complexity transformer, thanks to its
                                                                                   Precision


                                                                                               0.6
 local self-attention, where each token only at-
 tends to a fixed number of nearby tokens. We                                                  0.4
 use a local attention window size of 256 tokens
 and no global attention, as this turned out to                                                0.2
 only impair generalization.
 We fine-tune the entire model on our training                                                       0.0       0.2           0.4            0.6          0.8          1.0
 set of 1,280 documents, and the results on the                                                                                    Recall
 validation set can be seen in Figure 3. We
 use the Adam optimizer with a constant learn-                                     Figure 3: Precision/recall of our final line extrac-
 ing rate of 1e-5. The results show that despite                                   tion model. We pick a threshold of 0.05 at infer-
 our small-scale training data, we achieve an F1                                   ence, e.g. when applying the model for extraction.
 score of 87%. Some more details and error
 analysis is provided in Appendix D.
 Finally, we normalize the text using Fix Text For You (Speer, 2019).

 3.3                  S TAGE 3: Q UALITY F ILTERING AND C LEANING

 The third stage aims to filter for quality, reduce duplicate content and remove personally identifiable
 information (PII).

 Quality Filtering A significant advantage of our model-based extraction is that it also implicitly
 performs much of the quality filtering. The extractor effectively learns to exclude content that is
 not of sufficient quality, such as spam and advertisements. This allows us to use only a minimal set
                4
                    https://huggingface.co/severinsimmler/xlm-roberta-longformer-base-16384


                                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of simple filters to remove edge cases where the extractor fails. Through qualitative analysis, we
developed four filters to exclude such edge cases:

         1. Content length: We exclude cleaned documents that are shorter than 100 characters.
         2. Ratio of alphanumeric characters: We exclude cleaned documents whose ratio of al-
            phanumeric characters is lower than 0.4. These documents primarily consist of data tables
            and are not relevant without additional context.
         3. Headings per non-heading word: We note that in some documents, only headings are
            extracted with little or no accompanying text. We compute the ratio of the number of
            headings to the total number of words from non-heading lines. If the ratio is greater than
            0.05, we exclude the document.
         4. Unigram entropy: Also used in Together P Computer (2023), this measures the diversity
            of the content and is computed using      −x/total ∗ log(x/total) where the sum is taken
            over counts of unique words in the normalised content. By manual inspection, we found a
            threshold value of 3.0 to be reasonable, and exclude all documents below it.

In Figure 4, we show the distributions of these four quantities, and in Appendix E, we provide
examples of documents that are filtered out.

De-duplication We used MinHashLSH (Leskovec et al., 2020) for document level near duplicate
removal. The MinHash signatures were computed using unicode code point-level shingles of size
165 , 14 bands, and 8 hashes per band (a total of 112 Hashes). Deduplication was done per band
in an iterative fashion: For each band in order, we grouped documents by their hashes within that
band, and kept only one document per group. Following FineWeb (Penedo et al., 2024), we only
performed deduplication within snapshots, and not between them, as this was shown to increase
downstream performance.

PII Replacement As a final processing step, we make a best effort at removing personally identi-
fiable information from our data. To this end, we use regular expressions to replace email addresses
and publicly facing IP-adresses with one of a few samples. This follows what has been done in
previous works (Penedo et al., 2024; Soldaini et al., 2024).


4       E XPERIMENTS

How good is the data produced by our pipeline? To assess this question we conduct experiments
against the recently proposed FineWeb pipeline (Penedo et al., 2024). We do this be performing a
data ablation experiment. Here, we train two language models on data produced by 1) our pipeline
and 2) the FineWeb pipeline respectively. We then evaluate the language models as a proxy for
evaluating the datasets and, in turn, the pipelines.
                                                         How will Sweden be able to ____ itself in the international
FineWeb uses trafilatura (Barbaresi, 2021) as            competition and strengthen its position as a leading knowledge nation?
HTML extractor and relies on quality filter sets         A first step is to look at the ____ that govern the allocation of state
from both C4 and Gopher, as well as some                 research funds.
                                                            A activate – knowledge
novel additions. A notable difference is the fact           B mark – needs
that trafilatura (in the setting used by FineWeb)           C assert – criteria
                                                            D entrust – institutions
produces plain text content, while SWEb for-
mat as Markdown. As mentioned in Section
                                                         Proper shoes are on the way out, while sneakers are spreading. The
3.2, we primarily retain formatting via Mark-            following ____ no longer causes any sensation: blazer, pleated
down as a feature, but note that this may also           trousers, and white sneakers.
affect the learning behavior of the model. In               A manner
                                                            B propriety
this work however, we do not perform spe-                   C ensemble
cific ablations to single out this particular fac-          D attire
tor. Please see Appendix F where we show
side-by-side comparisons of trafilatura vs our           Figure 5: Two examples from the HP-MEK task.
extractor outputs.                                       Translated to English (originally in Swedish).
    5
        We lowercased the text and removed non-alphabetic characters before creating shingles.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        SWEb                FineWeb
Exp. Dataset       #Docs   #Tokens     Tokens/doc


                                                                          37
                                                                        ,3


                                                                                              19
                                                                      07


                                                                                               ,2
                                                                    ,3


                                                                                                20
                                                                   32


                                                                                                   ,8
SWEb               32.3M   25.2B       779.7                                   16,575,986


                                                                                                    22
FineWeb            19.2M   15.8B       820.3

Table 1: Stats of experimental datasets
SWEb and FineWeb                                        Figure 6: Venn diagram of documents in ex-
                                                        perimental SWEb and FineWeb datasets


4.1     B ENCHMARK : HP-MEK

We investigated different benchmarks to evaluate the language models on. An appropriate bench-
mark should give good “early signals” of performance, in small model and data scales. For the
Scandinavian benchmarks, the Scandeval suite (Nielsen, 2023) is commonly used. However, we
found neither of its subtasks to be appropriate for this study, as the models didn’t reach good enough
performace.
Instead, we chose to develop an alternative benchmark based on the Swedish Scholastic Aptitude
Test (Högskoleprovet), that we denote HP-MEK6 . We download and extract the MEK (sentence
completion) section of all available historical tests, and end up with a total of 460 examples. HP-
MEK is a cloze style test, with masked portions of a provided passage. For each passage, four
alternatives of the masked portions are available, see Figure 5. We evaluate a model by inserting
each of the four alternatives into the passage, and pick the alternative with the highest joint log
likelihood.
In our experiments, we see early and consistently increased performance as we train on successively
more data, which speaks for it being a suitable indicator for performance at larger scales.

4.2     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

We extract, filter and deduplicate the 2024-10 and 2024-18 Common Crawl snapshots using our
pipeline to form an experimental dataset (SWEb). We also run the FineWeb pipeline on the same
input documents (selected from Stage 1) to form a competing dataset (FineWeb). Table 1 compares
the two and Figure 6 shows a Venn diagram of their document (url) sets.
We note that the SWEb pipeline extracts significantly more documents (+62%) and tokens (+60%)
than FineWeb’s pipeline. Most of FineWeb’s documents are contained in SWEb, while relatively
few are uniquely selected by FineWeb. Interestingly, FineWeb extracts slightly more tokens per
document on average, despite SWEb containing additional Markdown formating tokens.
We split the two datasets in 90/10 train/test splits and tokenize using the GPT-SW3 tokenizer (Ekgren
et al., 2024). Then, we train small language models on each training set respectively (MSW for
SWEb and MFW for FineWeb), and use the Llama architecture with 1.82B parameters (including
embeddings) with a 2048 sequence length, a global batch size of 2 million tokens and a cosine
decay learning rate schedule. Each model is trained for 10,811 steps, which corresponds to one
full epoch for SWEb, and 1.6 epochs for FineWeb. We checkpoint every 250 steps to evaluate
progression throughout training.

4.3     R ESULTS

In Figure 7, we show perplexity plots where each model is evaluated on the each of the two test
sets. We can first note that MSW achieves lower perplexity on its own data than MFW , i.e. SWEb
seems “easier” to fit despite it being trained on more unique tokens. This could for example be
due to the markdown formating, where markup tokens might be easier to predict. Secondly, MSW
performs relatively better on FineWeb than MFW on SWEb. We speculate this could also be due to
the markdown, where MFW gets more confused not having seen Markdown during training.
   6
       Available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/AI-Sweden-Models/HP-MEK


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             103
                                          SWEb train - SWEb test                                                 SWEb
                                          FineWeb train - SWEb test                                   70%        FineWeb
                                          FineWeb train - FineWeb test
Perplexity                                SWEb train - FineWeb test                                   60%


                                                                                           Accuracy
             102                                                                                      50%
                                                                                                      40%
                                                                                                      30%

             101                                                                                      20%
                   0B      5B       10B         15B         20B                                             0B       5B        10B        15B       20B
                                  Training tokens                                                                            Training tokens

Figure 7: Perplexity cross-evaluation. The                                                 Figure 8: Learning curves. Performance
two models are evaluated on both SWEb and                                                  of our two ablation models on HP-MEK
FineWeb test sets.                                                                         throughout training.

                                                               Document distribution over CC dumps
   20M
   15M
   10M
    5M
    0M
                        2013-20
                        2014-10
                        2014-23
                        2014-41
                        2014-49
                        2015-06
                        2015-14
                        2015-22
                        2015-32
                        2015-40
                        2016-07
                        2016-22
                        2016-30
                        2016-40
                        2016-50
                        2017-09
                        2017-17
                        2017-26
                        2017-34
                        2017-43
                        2017-51
                        2018-09
                        2018-17
                        2018-26
                        2018-34
                        2018-43
                        2018-51
                        2019-09
                        2019-18
                        2019-26
                        2019-35
                        2019-43
                        2019-51
                        2020-10
                        2020-24
                        2020-34
                        2020-45
                        2021-04
                        2021-17
                        2021-25
                        2021-39
                        2021-49
                        2022-21
                        2022-33
                        2022-49
                        2023-14
                        2023-40
                        2024-10
                        2024-22
                                Figure 9: SWEb distribution over the Common Crawl snapshots.


Next, we evaluate MSW and MFW on HP-MEK, and plot learning curves in Figure 8. We can see
that MSW closely matches MFW throughout the training, suggesting the two datasets are on-par with
each other with regards to this task. This suggests that we are able to match the trafilatura extractor
with just 1,380 annotated extraction samples, and at the same time reduce the complex filtering to
only four simple quantities.


 5               T HE SWE B DATASET
                                                                                                                       Language distribution
We run our pipeline on 98 Common Crawl
dumps, starting from 2013-20 until 2024-26,
to produce the Scandinavian Web (SWEb)                                                   500M
dataset. SWEb comprises a total of 1.01 tril-
                                                                                         400M
lion tokens7 , distributed over 1.2 billion docu-
                                                                             Documents


ments, resulting in 3.6TB of raw (UTF-8) text.                                           300M
This makes SWEb the largest open Scandina-
vian dataset to date, an order of magnitude                                              200M
larger than the (to our knowledge) previously
largest mC4 dataset. In Figure 9, we show                                                100M
the document distribution across the Common
                                                                                          0M
Crawl dumps. As we can see, the amount                                                                      sv       da         no             is    en
of Scandinavian content has been steady since
around 2017, averaging about 50M documents                                   Figure 10: Language distribution over the SWEb
per dump.                                                                    dataset
To investigate the language distributon of
SWEb, we use the fastText language indentification classifier by Joulin et al. (2016a;b). Among
the four Scandinavian languages, Swedish is the dominating one with 48% of documents classified
as Swedish, 26% as Danish and 20% as Norwegian, see Figure 10. Only 2.3% are classified as Ice-

             7
                 Using the GPT-SW3 (Ekgren et al., 2024) tokenizer


                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


landic. A small portion of documents are classified as non-scandinavian after our content extraction,
of which a majority is classified as English.
We release the SWEb dataset, the pipeline code, as well as our trained extractor model open source
license, and hope this will further research and development of high performant Scandinavian LLMs.
We also provide a datasheet detailing the dataset further in Appendix A.


6   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE WORK

Comparing to rule-based extractors such as trafilatura, our model based extractor offers greater flex-
ibility as the desired extraction output is demonstrated instead of encoded as heuristics. Our work
also highlights the data efficiency with which this can be done, i.e just 1,380 annoated examples in
our case. However, this also comes with a cost. Running our model extractor for each document in-
creases the compute required substantially over rule-based alternatives, which adds to these already
compute-intensive workloads. In extracting SWEb, we consumed 20k AMD MI250X GPU-hours
which is a significant amount, but comparing to the budgets required for training the downstream
LLMs it is still negligable.
While training LLMs on larger datasets have shown to yield higher performance, a hypothesis is
that there is only a subset of high quality documents that are behind the performance boosts. For
example, in FineWeb-Edu, further filtering web data towards “educational content” is shown to
significantly boosts performance in reasoning- and knowledge-intensive benchmarks. We see work
on topic and content based filtering as a promising avenue for further refinement of SWEb towards
particular LLM capabilities. This could potentially even be built into the extractor for more fine-
grained control instead of as a binary post-hoc filter.


7   C ONCLUSION

A major bottleneck for pre-training LLMs for smaller languages is the lack of large and high-quality
open datasets. In this paper, we have presented the thus far largest open dataset for pre-training
LLMs for the Scandinavian languages (Swedish, Danish, Norwegian and Icelandic). The dataset,
which we call SWEb, comprises 1 trillion high-quality tokens in said four languages, and is openly
shared in order to promote the development of LLMs for the Scandinavian languages. In creating
SWEb, we have also developed a pipeline with a novel model-based text extractor that offers greater
flexibility over the extraction process versus rule-based alternatives. We share both code and mod-
els for the novel text extractor openly. This paper has introduced a new benchmark for Swedish,
which we use to compare models trained using our data with models trained using FineWeb, and we
demonstrate that our data leads to models with performance on par with models trained from data
using the state-of-the-art pipeline FineWeb.


E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

Handling Sensitive Content The SWEb dataset was created using publicly available Common
Crawl data. During processing, efforts were made to filter out low-quality and irrelevant material,
such as advertisements, spam, and repetitive text. While our approach focuses on a simplified and
novel pipeline for text extraction, we do not implement specific filtering mechanisms for harmful
or sensitive content. We acknowledge that pre-training data can influence the behavior of LLMs,
potentially amplifying biases or generating harmful outputs. We encourage researchers and practi-
tioners utilizing our pipeline and dataset to critically assess their data sources and apply appropriate
filtering techniques based on their ethical and application-specific requirements. Future work should
consider integrating robust content moderation strategies to mitigate risks associated with unfiltered
pre-training data. Refer to the datasheet in the appendix for more details on the dataset’s curation
process.

Privacy and Data Protection To address privacy concerns, some personally identifiable informa-
tion (PII) such as email addresses and publicly visible IP addresses were removed using regex-based
filters. While these methods are widely adopted in the field, we acknowledge their limitations and the


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


potential for residual PII. SWEb also adheres to Common Crawl’s policies, which respect robots.txt
and nofollow directives to avoid restricted data. For additional information on how PII and privacy
were handled, refer to the datasheet in the appendix.

Bias and Representation The SWEb dataset is derived from Common Crawl, which reflects the
inherent biases of web-based data. These biases may arise from factors such as the overrepresen-
tation of content from certain languages, regions, or demographics with greater internet access and
technological literacy. Additionally, the dataset may include content from domains or sources that
reflect specific viewpoints, and, as with any web-based resource, there is a risk of including disin-
formation or other misleading content. While the dataset aims to provide a valuable resource for
Scandinavian languages, we encourage users to remain mindful of these potential biases and con-
sider mitigation strategies during training and deployment. Further details on potential biases and
dataset composition can be found in the datasheet in the appendix.

Intended Use and Misuse Prevention The primary goal of SWEb is to support the research and
development of Scandinavian language models. This dataset should not be used to train models
that generate harmful content, misinformation, or other unethical outputs. Users are encouraged to
implement safeguards and adhere to ethical AI development principles. Refer to the datasheet in the
appendix for guidance on intended use and potential misuse.

Takedown Policy We provide a mechanism for stakeholders to request the removal of specific
content through our takedown policy. For more information on this policy, see the datasheet in the
appendix.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the Swedish Innovation Agency (Vinnova) for supporting this work.
This work has also been supported by the Parallel computing center (PDC) at the Royal Institute of
Technology in Stockholm, Sweden. We would like to express our deepest gratitude for providing
the compute required for our experiments and building SWEb. We thank our annotators for their
kind effort in helping out building our text extractor model.


R EFERENCES
Julien Abadji, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Laurent Romary, and Benoît Sagot. Towards a Cleaner
  Document-Oriented Multilingual Crawled Corpus. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2201.06642, Jan-
  uary 2022.

Adrien Barbaresi. Trafilatura: A web scraping library and command-line tool for text discovery and
  extraction. In Heng Ji, Jong C. Park, and Rui Xia (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
  on Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 122–131, Online, August 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-demo.15. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.acl-demo.15.

Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
   arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ona de Gibert, Graeme Nail, Nikolay Arefyev, Marta Bañón, Jelmer van der Linde, Shaoxiong Ji,
  Jaume Zaragoza-Bernabeu, Mikko Aulamo, Gema Ramírez-Sánchez, Andrey Kutuzov, Sampo
  Pyysalo, Stephan Oepen, and Jörg Tiedemann. A new massive multilingual dataset for high-
  performance language technologies. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique Hoste,
  Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Joint
  International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation
  (LREC-COLING 2024), pp. 1116–1128, Torino, Italia, May 2024. ELRA and ICCL. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.100.

Ariel Ekgren, Amaru Cuba Gyllensten, Felix Stollenwerk, Joey Öhman, Tim Isbister, Evangelia
  Gogoulou, Fredrik Carlsson, Judit Casademont, and Magnus Sahlgren. GPT-SW3: An autore-
  gressive language model for the Scandinavian languages. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan,
  Veronique Hoste, Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and
  Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pp. 7886–7900, Torino, Italia, May 2024. ELRA and ICCL.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.695.

Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé III au2, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1803.09010.

Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, Matthijs Douze, Hérve Jégou, and Tomas
  Mikolov. Fasttext.zip: Compressing text classification models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.03651,
  2016a.

Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and Tomas Mikolov. Bag of tricks for efficient
  text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01759, 2016b.

Jure Leskovec, Anand Rajaraman, and Jeffrey David Ullman. Mining of massive data sets. Cam-
  bridge university press, 2020.

Konstantin Lopuhin.  Evaluating quality of article body extraction for commercial ser-
  vices and open-source libraries, 2019.     https://github.com/scrapinghub/
  article-extraction-benchmark.

Dan Nielsen. ScandEval: A benchmark for Scandinavian natural language processing. In Tanel
  Alumäe and Mark Fishel (eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Nordic Conference on Computational
  Linguistics (NoDaLiDa), pp. 185–201, Tórshavn, Faroe Islands, May 2023. University of Tartu
  Library. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.nodalida-1.20.

Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The RefinedWeb
  dataset for Falcon LLM: outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.01116, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01116.

Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Leandro
  Von Werra, Thomas Wolf, et al. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data
  at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17557, 2024.

Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee,
 and Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Marilyn Walker, Heng Ji,
 and Amanda Stent (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
 Papers), pp. 2227–2237, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Lin-
 guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1202. URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-1202.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, H. Francis
  Song, John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford,
  Tom Hennigan, Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche,
  Lisa Anne Hendricks, Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth
  Dathathri, Saffron Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat
  McAleese, Amy Wu, Erich Elsen, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden,
  Esme Sutherland, Karen Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lor-
  raine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Ange-
  liki Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev,
  Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux, Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cy-
  prien de Masson d’Autume, Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan
  Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew J. Johnson,
  Blake A. Hechtman, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, Edward Lockhart, Simon
  Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne
  Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language mod-
  els: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. CoRR, abs/2112.11446, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.11446.

Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, Katherine Lee, Michael Matena, Noam Shazeer, Peter J Liu, Sharan
  Narang, Wei Li, and Yanqi Zhou. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
  text transformer. Google, Tech. Rep., 2019.

Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur,
  Ben Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Valentin Hofmann, Ananya Harsh
  Jha, Sachin Kumar, Li Lucy, Xinxi Lyu, Nathan Lambert, Ian Magnusson, Jacob Morrison, Niklas
  Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crystal Nam, Matthew E. Peters, Abhilasha Ravichander, Kyle
  Richardson, Zejiang Shen, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Oyvind Tafjord, Pete Walsh, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Iz Beltagy, Dirk Groeneveld, Jesse Dodge,
  and Kyle Lo. Dolma: An Open Corpus of Three Trillion Tokens for Language Model Pretraining
  Research. arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00159.

Robyn Speer. ftfy. Zenodo, 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2591652.
  Version 5.5.

A Together Computer. Redpajama: An open source recipe to reproduce llama training dataset, April
  2023. URL https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data.

Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Conneau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzmán,
  Armand Joulin, and Édouard Grave. Ccnet: Extracting high quality monolingual datasets from
  web crawl data. In Proceedings of The 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp.
  4003–4012, 2020.

Zhipeng Xu, Zhenghao Liu, Yukun Yan, Zhiyuan Liu, Chenyan Xiong, and Ge Yu. Cleaner pre-
  training corpus curation with neural web scraping. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.

Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya Siddhant, Aditya
  Barua, and Colin Raffel. mT5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 483–498, Online, June 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.41. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.41.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    SWE B DATASHEET
We provide a datasheet inspired by Gebru et al. (2021):

                                               Motivation
 Purpose of the dataset                     We want to encourage open research and development of
                                            LLMs in the Swedish, Danish, Norwegian and Icelandic
                                            languages. We build and release SWEb to promote this
                                            objective and to address the linguistic challenges specific
                                            to underrepresented Scandinavian languages, improving ac-
                                            cess to language technology in these regions.
 Curated by                                 AI Sweden
 Funded by                                  AI Sweden
                                             Composition
 Data Fields                                Each data instance contains:
                                                  1. The source URL
                                                  2. The original Common Crawl WARC file path
                                                  3. The WARC date
                                                  4. The extracted text content, in markdown format
                                                  5. The detected language (using fastText classifier)

 Data Splits                                We split SWEb based on Common Crawl dump, to allow for
                                            download based on time of crawl. We also include a default
                                            split containing the entire dataset.
 Errors and noise                           As outlined in this paper, we propose a novel model based
                                            approach to extract text from websites. However, the model
                                            is not perfect and non-relevant content as well as noise are
                                            sometimes also erroneously extracted. We try to filter such
                                            examples in our third pipeline stage, but despite our best
                                            effort such examples may sometimes slip through.
 Offensive and toxic content                As we don’t attempt to filter based on content or topic in this
                                            work, SWEb might contain content that can be percieved as
                                            offensive, threatening or otherwise toxic. When considering
                                            using this dataset, it is important to be aware of this and
                                            that further processing might be necessary depending on use
                                            case.
                                           Dataset Curation
 Curation rationale                         We use Common Crawl as it is the (to our knowledge)
                                            largest and most diverse open corpus available in the Scan-
                                            dinavian languages.
 Source data                                The Common Crawl source data consist of large amounts
                                            of webpages crawled from the open web. Common
                                            Crawl’s crawlers has always respected nofollow and
                                            robots.txt policies.
 Time frames of collected data              We use all Common Crawl scraped dating back to week 50
                                            of 2013 and up to week 26 of 2024.
 Data processing steps                      See Section 3.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Annotations                                Among the data fields, only the detected language can be
                                            considered “annotated” by us.
 Personal & sensitive information           We anonymize email addresses and public IP addresses us-
                                            ing regex patterns.
                                    Considerations for using the data
 Social impact of dataset                   With SWEb, our goal is to make LLM training more ac-
                                            cessible to the machine learning community by: (a) mak-
                                            ing the dataset creation process more transparent, by sharing
                                            our entire processing setup including the codebase used (b)
                                            helping alleviate the costs of dataset curation, both in time
                                            and in compute, for model creators by publicly releasing our
                                            dataset with the community.
 Bias and Representation                    While the Common Crawl data gathers diverse text sources,
                                            biases present in the original content may still exist. Users
                                            should critically assess how these biases may affect model
                                            training and outcomes, especially in sensitive applications.
                                            It is recommended to implement bias-mitigation techniques
                                            during training and model development.
 Model Misuse                               When training models with this dataset, it is crucial to pre-
                                            vent harmful uses of the resulting models, such as generat-
                                            ing misleading or dangerous content (e.g., disinformation,
                                            hate speech). Always consider the societal impact of de-
                                            ploying models trained on this data, and take precautions to
                                            implement appropriate safeguards.
                                               Distribution
 Distribution platform                      The dataset will be distributed on the Huggingface Hub
 License                                    The data is released under the CC0 Creative Commons Li-
                                            cense. We make the following clarifications:
                                                  1. We do not warrant or guarantee any rights to
                                                     the underlying data contained within this dataset.
                                                     Users are solely responsible for validating and se-
                                                     curing the appropriate rights and licenses for their
                                                     specific intended uses.
                                                  2. This license applies only to the structure and com-
                                                     pilation of the dataset as provided by us. We do not
                                                     claim any database rights or ownership over the un-
                                                     derlying data itself. Users must ensure compliance
                                                     with any legal obligations, including those related
                                                     to third-party content, copyrighted material, or per-
                                                     sonal information (PII) that may be contained in
                                                     the underlying data.
                                                  3. With the release of this dataset, our goal is to pro-
                                                     mote and advance open research and the develop-
                                                     ment of Scandinavian language models, showcase
                                                     research outcomes as well as enable research vali-
                                                     dation. Open datasets are essential to fostering in-
                                                     novation and expanding knowledge in AI. We dis-
                                                     claim any responsibility for other uses, including
                                                     commercial applications. Users are responsible for
                                                     ensuring the legality of their usage, especially in
                                                     cases involving copyrighted material.



                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Notice and take-down policy             Should you consider that our data contains material that is
                                         owned by you and should therefore not be reproduced here,
                                         please:
                                                1. Clearly identify yourself, with detailed contact data
                                                   such as an address, telephone number or email ad-
                                                   dress at which you can be contacted.
                                                2. Clearly identify the copyrighted work claimed to
                                                   be infringed.
                                                3. Clearly identify the material that is claimed to be
                                                   infringing and information reasonably sufficient to
                                                   allow us to locate the material.
                                                4. You can reach us at datasets@ai.se
                                         We will comply to legitimate requests by removing the af-
                                         fected sources from the next release of the corpus.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    M ARKDOWN ANNOTATION DETAILS


Figure 11: Our web based annotation tool. On the right side the original web page is displayed
and on the left the corresponding markdown. Annotation is performed by selecting individual lines
(marked green) that constitute the main content of the page.

We develop a web based tool that we use to annotate markdown documents, see Figure 11. The tool
is used to annotate data for training and evaluating our text extractor model (Section 3.2.2).
The annotation was performed by the authors as well as additional lab colleagues, in total a group
of 12 people. We started by jointly annotating a gold standard test set of 100 examples (web pages).
This was useful to align and develop our annotation guidelines.
Next, we annotated a first set of 400 training examples and trained a first extractor model. This
model served as a first baseline. We then iteratively annotated additional training data in batches of
300-500 examples, re-trained and re-evaluated after each iteration.
Judging what is “main content” in web pages is not always obvious however. When the evaluation
didn’t improve after a new batch of annotations, we developed a method for discovering “confusing”
training examples in the new batch that we could jointly discuss and align on. For each example x
in the new training batch, we compute the loss lMn (x, y) = L(Mn (x), y), where L is the average
over all BCE losses in the example and Mn is the model trained on all batches including iteration n.
By comparing this loss to the corresponding loss under the previous model Mn−1 , we get a measure
of how “surprising” this example is:

                                   δ = lMn−1 (x, y) − lMn (x, y)                                   (3)
Using this quantity, we could easily identify outliers and correct inconsistent annotations. By per-
forming this post-annotation fix-up, we were able to improve performance on our test set, for each
annotated batch of data.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    C ONTENT E XTRACTION A NNOTATION G UIDELINES
The following description was provided to our annotators

In the provided annotation tool, please select individual lines by clicking and dragging across the
lines you want to select.

      • Please look at the rendered web page on the right. We want to extract the “main textual
        content” of the current page.
      • No navigation (menus, links, button texts etc) should be selected, except well formatted
        tables of content that link within the same page
      • Include headers of main content
      • If duplicate header, select the one closest to the main content
      • Include well formatted tables
      • Don’t include content of sidebars that is unrelated to the main content
      • It is OK to leave the whole document unselectede if there is no relevant content
      • If there are many very similar-looking pages, they can be marked Ignored if they have al-
        ready been annotated. Bad pages without any good content should not be ignored however.
      • Include comment sections if there are any, but exclude navigation associated with those,
        e.g. Svara / Rapportera inlägg or similar.
      • Keep comment headings
      • If text is broken with e.g. “. . . ”, don’t include
      • Select top heading if it exists
      • Keep at most 2 consecutive newlines
      • Remove empty formatting lines (e.g **), except for dividers (———)
      • Pages that are primarily “data” (e.g. tables, numbers) without much text should be unse-
        lected. There should be at least three consecutive sentences of text. This puts a somewhat
        high bar for product pages
      • No HTML should be selected


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D       C ONTENT E XTRACTOR E RROR A NALYSIS
To analyze the errors made by our context extractor, we use the line-level annotations of the 100
validation documents. For each line in each document, the line is predicted to be extracted or
ignored. Therefore, for each document, we get a number of FP and FN line classifications. In Figure
12 we plot the distribution over number of FP and FN lines.

                                                         60
       50
                                                         50
       40
                                                         40
       30
Docs


                                                  Docs
                                                         30
       20                                                20
       10                                                10
        0                                                 0
            0      10         20        30                    0      10        20        30
                  Num false positive lines                         Num false negative lines
    Figure 12: Distribution over number of False Positive/Negative lines, in the test set documents


We can see that the vast majority of documents have less than 10 wrongly classified lines. The
document with the highest number of false negative lines is shown in Figure 13. In this case, the
table of contents, some headings as well as the reference list were wrongly not extracted.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: The extraction for https://da.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flyulykken_i_Kastrup_1947. Green lines are
true positives and blue lines are false negatives. True negative lines are not shown for illustrative
purposes.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     F ILTERED EXAMPLES
We show examples of extracted documents that are filtered out by each of our four quality filters.

E.1    C ONTENT LENGTH < 100 CHARS

https://www.buskerudmynt.no/produkt/norske-mynter-etter-1874/norske-argangsmynter/50-ore/olav-v-1974-1991/
50-ore-1977-kv.-0

1 # 50 øre 1977 kv. 0
2
3 Tatt fra rull. Litt skjoldete mynt.
4
5 NOK5,00 inkl. mva.



https://www.ovedanielsson.se/2021/08/30/ohrmans-fick-inte-bygga-nytt-mot-torget/embed/

1 Öhrmans fick inte bygga nytt mot torget



https://jesper.nu/spel/achtung-die-kurve

1 # Achtung Die Kurve


E.2    R ATIO OF ALPHANUMERIC CHARACTERS < 0.4

https://www.innebandystats.se/statistik/219645/kevin-sandeback

1 |             | CL98IC                                    | Juniorallsvenskan HJ18         |   14    |      16
           |   10    | **26**   |   0       |



https://nn.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kategori:Deltakarar_under_vinter-OL_1984_etter_Ãÿving

1 1896 ** Â·** 1900 ** Â·** 1904 ** Â·** 1906 ** Â·** 1908 ** Â·** 1912 ** Â·** ~~(1916)~~ ** Â·** 1920 ** Â·
        ** 1924 ** Â·** 1928 ** Â·** 1932 ** Â·** 1936 ** Â·** ~~(1940)~~ ** Â·** ~~(1944)~~ ** Â·** 1948 **
        Â·** 1952 ** Â·** 1956 ** Â·** 1960 ** Â·** 1964 ** Â·** 1968 ** Â·** 1972 ** Â·** 1976 ** Â·** 1980
        ** Â·** 1984 ** Â·** 1988 ** Â·** 1992 ** Â·** 1996 ** Â·** 2000 ** Â·** 2004 ** Â·** 2008 ** Â·**
        2012 ** Â·** 2016** Â·** 2020
2 **Vinter-OL**
3
4 Deltakarar etter **nasjon:**
5
6 1924 ** Â·** 1928 ** Â·** 1932 ** Â·** 1936 ** Â·** ~~(1940)~~ ** Â·** ~~(1944)~~ ** Â·** 1948 ** Â·** 1952
         ** Â·** 1956 ** Â·** 1960 ** Â·** 1964 ** Â·** 1968 ** Â·** 1972 ** Â·** 1976 ** Â·** 1980 ** Â·**
        1984 ** Â·** 1988 ** Â·** 1992 ** Â·** 1994 ** Â·** 1998 ** Â·** 2002 ** Â·** 2006 ** Â·** 2010 ** Â·
        ** 2014 ** Â·** 2018 ** Â·** 2022
7
8 Deltakarar etter **øving:**



https://historik.val.se/val/val2010/alkon/K/valdistrikt/12/80/0102/alderkon.html

1 | ------------------------ | ----: | ----: | ----: | ----: | ----: | ----: | ----: | ----: | --: |
        -----------------: | -----------------: | ----: | --: | ------: | ------: | -------------------: |
        -------------------: | --------------------: | --------------------: |
2 | Gamla staden, Stortorget | 1533 | 24,8% |    380 | 43,0% |   659 | 20,4% |    312 | 11,9% | 182 |
                      4,4% |                 68 | 52,6% | 806 |   47,4% |      727 |                13,8% |
                         212 |                       |                       |
3 | Summa                    | 1533 | 24,8% |    380 | 43,0% |   659 | 20,4% |    312 | 11,9% | 182 |
                      4,4% |                 68 | 52,6% | 806 |   47,4% |      727 |                13,8% |
                         212 |                       |                       |
4
5 http://www.val.se


E.3    H EADINGS PER NON - HEADING WORD > 0.05

https://www.sahlgrenska.se/for-dig-som-ar/vardgivare/laboratoriemedicin/analyslistan/
specialprover-cytologisk-diagnostik/16648.html/

1 # Glaskropp
2
3 # Glaskropp cytologisk diagnos
4
5 ### Synonymer
6


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 7   Specialprover, cytologisk diagnostik
 8
 9   ## Provtagningsanvisning
10
11   ### Provmaterial
12
13   ### Rör el. motsv
14
15   10 ml rör med gul kork, konisk botten, steril (för mindre mängder material) eller Burk ca 40 ml m tä
           tslutande lock, sterilt
16
17   ### Provtagning
18
19   Enligt inremitterande kliniks regler Provet skall snarast efter sköljningen transporteras till Cytologen.
20   Ofixerade vätskor ska föranmälas och lämnas direkt till lab. personal före kl 14.00.
21
22   ### Transport
23
24   Transport ska ske omgående till Laboratoriet för klinisk patologi och där lämnas direkt till provinlä
           mningen.



https://folk.sunnhordland.no/publications/211951

 1 # Olive Buchvold Juvik
 2
 3 Gullet vårt Olive «snat 2 år» «Ja, vennen, på lørdag 18. nov, fyller du 2 år» Me gratulerer så masse\!
         Kjempe gla' i deg. Klem fra tanter, onkler, besteforeldre og oldeforeldre.
 4
 5
 6
 7 ## Go'ungen (0-12 år)
 8
 9
10
11 ### Nora Silden Fredheim



https://start.arcada.fi/sv/kurser/303000/2021-2022/IA-2-004/0

 1   ## Kursens undervisningsperiod
 2
 3   3 (2022-01-01 till 2022-03-13)
 4
 5   ## Nivå/kategori
 6   ## Cykel/nivå
 7   Yrkeshögskoleexamen
 8
 9   ## Rekommenderat studieår
10
11   1
12   ## Omfattning
13
14   5 sp
15
16   ## Kompetensmål
17
18   I denna studieenhet står följande kompetenser i
19   fokus:
20   \- Kompetens inom serverprogrammering
21   \- Kompetens inom databashantering och lagring av
22   data
23   \- Kompetensen att skapa dynamiska applikationer
24
25   ## Läranderesultat
26
27   Efter avlagd studieenhet:
28   \- Du behärskar programmering med
29   PHP (Kunskap)
30   \- Du ser skillnaden mellan statiska, interaktiva
31   och dynamiska webbsidor (Kunskap)
32   \- Du kan hantera filer från klienten och på
33   servern (Kunskap)
34   \- Du kan bygga dynamiska webbappar (Färdighet)
35   \- Du kan lagra data säkert i en databas
36   (Färdighet)
37   \- Du inser problematik och lösningar kring att
38   lagra känslig information om en användare
39   (Förhållningssätt)
40   \- Du uppfattar olika sätt att överföra och lagra
41   data och dess koppling till säkeherhet och
42   prestanda (Förhållningssätt)
43   \- Du uppfattar din makt och ditt ansvar som


E.4         U NIGRAM ENTROPY < 3.0

https://hastkatalogen.se/content/horse/info.php?id=31999


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 1 # Catinkaox
 2
 3 ## Arabiskt Fullblod
 4
 5 Catinka är ett sto som föddes 1976 i Sverige.
 6
 7
 8
 9   - Ras: Arabiskt Fullblod
10   - Kön: Sto
11   - Färg: brun
12   - Stofamilj:
13     |                                                      |



https://www.nilssonsilammhult.se/hallmobler/ida-skohorn-ek/

 1   # Ida skohorn ek
 2
 3   430 kr
 4
 5   Ida skohorn i oljad ek från småländska Westroth. Tillverkad i formpressat trä. En fin detalj till hallen\!
 6
 7
 8
 9   Ida skohorn ek mängd
10
11   # Ida skohorn ek
12
13
14
15   Ida skohorn i oljad ek från småländska Westroth. Tillverkad i formpressat trä. En fin detalj till hallen\!
16
17   430 kr



https://kaldarsel.is/author/heidbjort-arney/

 1    -
 2
 3   ## Leikjanámskeið 10. júlí
 4
 5   Höfundur: Heiðbjört Arney|2017-07-12T10:01:09+00:0012. júlí 2017|
 6
 7    -
 8
 9   ## Veisludagur runninn upp
10
11    -
12
13   ## Dvalarflokkur
14
15   Höfundur: Heiðbjört Arney|2017-06-28T10:15:51+00:0028. júní 2017|
16
17    -
18
19   ## Leikjanámskeið 2
20
21   Höfundur: Heiðbjört Arney|2017-06-21T13:07:08+00:0021. júní 2017|


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F      C OMPARING OUR MODEL EXTRACTOR VS TRAFILATURA
We compare our model based extractor vs trafilatura (in the settings used by FineWeb).

                  https://www.ark.no/produkt/boker/dokumentar-og-faktaboker/eksil-9788202253912



Trafilatura                                                   Model extractor (ours)
 1   Innbundet                                                 1 # Eksil - om klosterlasse og andre eksempler
 2   2005                                                      2
 3   Norsk, Bokmål                                             3 Av Georg Johannesen
 4   «Denne boken dreier seg om eksil og dannelse.             4
 5   Lesning av Dante ga meg en italiensk regel:               5 «Denne boken dreier seg om eksil og dannelse.
           Dannelse oppstår alltid og bare i eksil.                    Lesning av Dante ga meg en italiensk
           Det vesle som fins av dannelse i Norge,                     regel: Dannelse oppstår alltid og bare i
           dannes ut fra evnen til distanse i et                       eksil. Det vesle som fins av dannelse i
           livsnødvendig indre eller ytre eksil.                       Norge, dannes ut fra evnen til distanse i
           Dannelse er det motsatte av turisme. Slik                    et livsnødvendig indre eller ytre eksil.
            førte min selvomsorg meg stadig mer inn                     Dannelse er det motsatte av turisme.
           og ut av norsk kultur (og underholdning)                    Slik førte min selvomsorg meg stadig mer
           til jeg ble uhelbredelig gudløs og partil                   inn og ut av norsk kultur (og
           øs i en vag, men livslang interesse for                     underholdning) til jeg ble uhelbredelig
           eksemplariske flyktninger og forrædere                      gudløs og partiløs i en vag, men livslang
           fra Klosterlasse til Asbjørn Sunde.»                         interesse for eksemplariske flyktninger
 6   (fra Georg Johannesens forord)                                    og forrædere fra Klosterlasse til Asbjørn
 7   Klikk&Hent                                                         Sunde.» (fra Georg Johannesens forord)
 8   På lager i 8 butikker
 9   Nettlager Sendes normalt innen 1-2 virkedager
10   Bytt i alle våre butikker
11   -
12   Klikk og hent
13   -


                                    https://gipomusic.se/track/vad-dom-an-tror/



Trafilatura                                                   Model extractor (ours)
 1   Hur dom än                                                1 # Vad dom än tror
 2   Färgerna är blekare än igår                               2
 3   tiden är för mörk för att vi ska kunna le                 3 Text: Clara Rudelius
 4   jag vill inte höra deras röst mer                         4
 5   Illusioner av tröst som drar mig ner                      5 https://gipomusic.se/wp-content/uploads
 6   Hur de än sargar oss så ska vi hålla hand                         /2014/10/04\_Vad-dom-än-tror.mp3
 7   Halva jävla världen är i brand                            6
 8   O hur dom än sänker oss så ska vi skrika högst            7 **Hur dom än**
 9   ett nej är alltid ett nej                                 8
10   Vart vi än går ser vi ner                                 9 Färgerna är blekare än igår
11   aldrig mer igen, aldrig mer                              10 tiden är för mörk för att vi ska kunna le
12   hela tiden får vi säga till                              11 jag vill inte höra deras röst mer
13   ljusen runtomkring står bara still                       12 Illusioner av tröst som drar mig ner
14   Hur de än sargar oss så ska vi hålla hand                13
15   Halva jävla världen är i brand                           14 Hur de än sargar oss så ska vi hålla hand
16   O hur dom än sänker oss så ska vi skrika högst           15 Halva jävla världen är i brand
17   ett nej är alltid ett nej                                16 O hur dom än sänker oss så ska vi skrika högst
18   En vacker stråle som försvann                            17 ett nej är alltid ett nej
19   innan det blev mörkt                                     18
20   innan det blev kallt                                     19 Vart vi än går ser vi ner
21   Och om det var dina skrik som inte hördes                20 aldrig mer igen, aldrig mer
22   eller var din dotter som fördes iväg                     21 hela tiden får vi säga till
23   hur skulle det kännas, hur skulle däää                   22 ljusen runtomkring står bara still
24   Hur de än sargar oss så ska vi hålla hand                23
25   Halva jävla världen är i brand                           24 Hur de än sargar oss så ska vi hålla hand
26   O hur dom än sänker oss så ska vi skrika högst           25 Halva jävla världen är i brand
27   ett nej är alltid ett nej                                26 O hur dom än sänker oss så ska vi skrika högst
                                                              27 ett nej är alltid ett nej
                                                              28
                                                              29 En vacker stråle som försvann
                                                              30 innan det blev mörkt
                                                              31 innan det blev kallt
                                                              32
                                                              33 Och om det var dina skrik som inte hördes
                                                              34 eller var din dotter som fördes iväg
                                                              35 hur skulle det kännas, hur skulle däää
                                                              36
                                                              37 Hur de än sargar oss så ska vi hålla hand
                                                              38 Halva jävla världen är i brand
                                                              39 O hur dom än sänker oss så ska vi skrika högst
                                                              40 ett nej är alltid ett nej
                                                              41
                                                              42 ## Albumspår


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   https://fjordsaga.com/no/turer/2-i-kjolvannet-av-bilfergen-vaage-norvik



Trafilatura                                                Model extractor (ours)
 1 Turinformasjon                                           1   # I kjølvannet av Bilfergen Vaage-Norvik
 2 Tur fra Vågstranda til Norvika i Eidsbygda               2
         Rauma i kjølvannet av bilfergen Vaage-             3   ### 1 100 NOK pr passasjer
         Norvik som gikk der fra 1930 til 1945.             4
 3 Vei til Åndalsnes ble til stor del bygget                5   ## Turinformasjon
         ferdig av okkupasjonsmakten under andre            6
         verdenskrig og veien åpnet rundt                   7   Tur fra Vågstranda til Norvika i Eidsbygda
         tidspunktet for freden i 1945.                               Rauma i kjølvannet av bilfergen Vaage-
 4 Denne fergen ble bygget av samme båtbygger som                     Norvik som gikk der fra 1930 til 1945.
          båten vi går turene med og det blir               8
         fortalt historie rundt dette samt                  9 Vei til Åndalsnes ble til stor del bygget
         hendelsene rundt den tragiske ulykken i                    ferdig av okkupasjonsmakten under andre
         oktober 1942 hvor Kultur og                                verdenskrig og veien åpnet rundt
         Propagandaminister i Quisling regjeringen                  tidspunktet for freden i 1945. Denne
          Gulbrand Lunde m/frue omkom ved                           fergen ble bygget av samme båtbygger som
         fergekaien på Vaage.                                       båten vi går turene med og det blir
 5 Turprisen er oppgitt pr passasjer basert på                      fortalt historie rundt dette samt
         max antall. Ta kontakt for alternativer                    hendelsene rundt den tragiske ulykken i
         og evt allergier.                                          oktober 1942 hvor Kultur og
 6 Eventuelt servering ombord!                                      Propagandaminister i Quisling regjeringen
 7 1. Rik tomat/chili basert kremet fiskesuppe                       Gulbrand Lunde m/frue omkom ved
         servert m/nybakt brød, dessert (Tilslørte                  fergekaien på Vaage.
          bondepiker) og kokekaffe. Kr. 350.-              10
 8 Lunsjpakke fra Braud Håndverksbakeri Vestnes:           11 Turprisen er oppgitt pr passasjer basert på
 9 2. Påsmurt bagett med ost & skinke +                             max antall. Ta kontakt for alternativer
         kanelbolle alt. solskinnsbolle. Kr. 110.-                  og evt allergier.
10 3. Påsmurt bagett med kylling & karri +                 12
         kanelbolle alt. solskinnsbolle. Kr. 120.-         13 **Eventuelt servering ombord\!**
11 4. Pastasalat med kylling og karri. Kr. 175.-           14
12 Mineralvann og annen drikke fås kjøpt separat           15 1\. Rik tomat/chili basert kremet fiskesuppe
         om bord.                                                   servert m/nybakt brød, dessert (Tilslørte
13 5 Timer                                                           bondepiker) og kokekaffe. Kr. 350.-
14 -                                                       16
15 Maks. Passasjerer: 12                                   17 Lunsjpakke fra Braud Håndverksbakeri Vestnes:
16 -                                                       18 2\. Påsmurt bagett med ost & skinke +
17 Vestnes                                                          kanelbolle alt. solskinnsbolle. Kr. 110.-
18 -                                                       19 3\. Påsmurt bagett med kylling & karri +
                                                                    kanelbolle alt. solskinnsbolle. Kr. 120.-
                                                           20 4\. Pastasalat med kylling og karri. Kr. 175.-
                                                           21
                                                           22 Mineralvann og annen drikke fås kjøpt separat
                                                                    om bord.
                                                           23
                                                           24   - **5 Timer
                                                           25   - **Maks. Passasjerer: 12
                                                           26   - Avgang:Vestnes
                                                           27   - Turspråk:Engelsk, Norsk


                                                     24
