Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L OGIC -L OGIT: A L OGIC -BASED A PPROACH                                                             TO
C HOICE M ODELING
 Shuhan Zhang, Wendi Ren & Shuang Li ∗
 CUHK-Shenzhen
 {shuhanzhang,wendiren}@link.cuhk.edu.cn,lishuang@cuhk.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT
             In this study, we propose a novel rule-based interpretable choice model, Logic-
             Logit, designed to effectively learn and explain human choices. Choice models
             have been widely applied across various domains—such as commercial demand
             forecasting, recommendation systems, and consumer behavior analysis—typically
             categorized as parametric, nonparametric, or deep network-based. While re-
             cent innovations have favored neural network approaches for their computational
             power, these flexible models often involve large parameter sets and lack inter-
             pretability, limiting their effectiveness in contexts where transparency is essential.
             Previous empirical evidence shows that individuals usually use heuristic decision
             rules to form their consideration sets, from which they then choose. These rules
             are often represented as disjunctions of conjunctions (i.e., OR-of-ANDs). These
             rules-driven, consider-then-choose decision processes enable people to quickly
             screen numerous alternatives while reducing cognitive and search costs. Mo-
             tivated by this insight, our approach leverages logic rules to elucidate human
             choices, providing a fresh perspective on preference modeling. We introduce a
             unique combination of column generation techniques and the Frank-Wolfe al-
             gorithm to facilitate efficient rule extraction for preference modeling—a process
             recognized as NP-hard. Our empirical evaluation, conducted on both synthetic
             datasets and real-world data from commercial and healthcare domains, demon-
             strates that Logic-Logit significantly outperforms baseline models in terms of in-
             terpretability and accuracy.

1       I NTRODUCTION
In today’s complex decision-making environment, individuals usually encounter an overwhelming
array of options to choose from. In high-stakes areas like healthcare, patients face critical decisions
such as selecting healthcare providers, hospitals, and insurance plans—choices that directly influ-
ence their health outcomes and financial well-being. Similarly, doctors must navigate a multitude
of medications and treatment plans to determine the best course of action for their patients. In the
realm of consumer behavior, homebuyers are tasked with evaluating properties based on various
factors, such as location, price, and amenities, all of which contribute to their decision-making pro-
cesses. This abundance of choices not only highlights the daily challenges individuals face but also
underscores the need for models that can effectively capture the heterogeneous and intricate patterns
inherent in their decision-making.
Empirical research reveals that individuals often simplify decision-making through a consider-then-
choose process (Hauser, 2014). In this cognitive framework, people first establish a consideration
set using heuristic rules—logical guidelines that filter options before selecting from this reduced
set. These rules, often informed by past experiences and contextual knowledge, are typically rep-
resented as disjunctions of conjunctions (OR-of-ANDs). This logical structure enables individuals
to efficiently screen alternatives, manage the complexity of decision-making, and reduce cognitive
effort and search costs. Understanding and modeling this structured decision-making process is
critical for developing systems that can predict and explain human choices.
Inspired by these insights, we propose the Logic-Logit model, a novel rule-based choice model
designed to capture and explain heterogeneous human choice patterns through OR-of-ANDs logic
rules. Our approach addresses two fundamental challenges: 1) representing diverse human deci-
    ∗
        Corresponding author


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sion rationales using OR-of-ANDs logic rules, and 2) efficiently extracting compact rule sets from
preference datasets despite the inherent combinatorial complexity.
In our framework, human preferences are modeled through a rule-based utility function, capturing
decision-making via disjunctions of conjunctions (OR-of-ANDs) logic rules. These logic-informed
features, grounded in data, provide a structured and interpretable representation of how individuals
evaluate and prioritize options. The utility of each option is modeled as a linear combination of these
logic-based features, ensuring that the model remains interpretable while capturing the complexity
and heterogeneity of human preferences, where different preference types may utilize various rules
with distinct weights. To estimate human preference types and their associated rule sets, we employ
a two-tiered optimization framework:
In the outer loop, we utilize the Frank-Wolfe algorithm (conditional gradient) to systematically
search for new preference types and estimate their proportions. This algorithm is well-suited for
constrained convex optimization, enabling efficient exploration of the model space by iteratively
updating preference types based on their respective logic rules (Jagabathula et al., 2020). Continuous
refinement through the Frank-Wolfe algorithm ensures the model captures diverse decision-making
behaviors while optimizing overall structure.
In the inner loop, the column generation algorithm effectively addresses the combinatorial nature
of rule search by iteratively refining the rule set (Wei et al., 2019). This approach alternates between
two essential tasks: solving a master problem to update the weights of the existing rules and tackling
a subproblem to identify new rules that can enhance model performance. We begin with a small,
manageable rule set and progressively introduce new rules as the algorithm iterates. The subproblem
employs a risk-seeking search strategy, focusing on rules with the greatest potential for performance
gains, which encourages a more exploratory approach. This ensures that the rule set remains diverse
and prevents premature convergence to suboptimal solutions.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1) We introduce the Logic-Logit model, which effectively combines interpretability with computa-
tional efficiency, providing a structured framework for capturing human choice patterns.
2) By utilizing OR-of-ANDs logic rules and integrating the Frank-Wolfe algorithm with column
generation, we address the complexities involved in understanding human decision-making logic
and rule extraction.
3) Our empirical evaluation, conducted on synthetic datasets and real-world data from commercial
and healthcare domains, demonstrates that the Logic-Logit model significantly outperforms baseline
models in interpretability and accuracy, effectively bridging the gap between identifying heterogene-
ity and clarifying underlying decision-making logic.


2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   C HOICE M ODEL AND P REFERENCE L EARNING
Choice models provide structured frameworks for examining how individuals assess various al-
ternatives during the decision-making process. This constitutes a pivotal element in preference
learning. Guided by the Random Utility Theory (RUT) proposed by McFadden (1981), the primary
objective of choice modeling is to establish a mapping function that translates option features into a
utility value, which is a real number.
The Multinomial Logit (MNL) Model, as introduced by Hausman & McFadden (1984), serves as
the cornerstone for nearly all extant models and has been diversified into numerous extensions to
accommodate various scenarios. For instance, the Nested Logit Model, developed by Wen & Kop-
pelman (2001) and Hensher & Greene (2002), addresses issues of independence among options.
The Mixture MNL, as explored by Jagabathula et al. (2020), Bhat (1997), and Greene & Hensher
(2003), is designed to handle complex distributions within the mapping function. Both our model
and the model proposed by Jagabathula et al. (2020) are grounded in the Frank-Wolfe framework;
however, the utility value of options in his model is computed using a linear approach.
More recently, Neural Network-based MNL models, such as those presented by Aouad & Désir
(2022) and Wang et al. (2020), have been introduced to capture intricate and non-linear relationships
between utility values and option features. These models leverage the power of neural networks to
enhance the predictive accuracy and flexibility of traditional MNL models, addressing the limitations
of linear assumptions and enabling more sophisticated modeling of choice behaviors.

                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the above work, all alternatives are evaluated simultaneously. In contrast, Consider-then-Choose
models adopt a two-stage decision process: first, consumers form a consideration set using screening
rules or heuristics; second, they select the option that maximizes utility within the consideration set.
Liu & Arora (2011) highlight the conjunctive screening rule, where a product is considered only if all
its features meet specific criteria. Aouad et al. (2021) develop a dynamic programming framework
to analyze the computational aspects of assortment optimization under this paradigm. Akchen &
Mitrofanov (2023) emphasize the importance of consideration sets, defining a nonparametric choice
model characterized solely by a distribution over these sets.

2.2   L INEAR RULE L EARNING
Logic Rule Rule learning has long been an important technique in supervised learning, partic-
ularly in fields that demand model interpretability. As indicated by Rivest (1987) and Wei et al.
(2019), Logic Rules are conceptualized as the process of thresholding original option features into
binary features. These rules can take the form of conjunctions represented by the logical operator ∧.

Rule Learning The number of potential rules that can be derived from thresholding and conjunc-
tions is virtually infinite, making the identification of appropriate rule sets and their corresponding
weights in influencing choice behavior an NP-hard problem. Various methods have been proposed
to tackle this challenge. Ruczinski et al. (2003) employed multiple logic trees fitted to the data,
utilizing regression on the weights of these trees; however, the adjustment of logic trees proved to
be time-consuming.
To address the inefficiencies associated with traditional approaches, Wei et al. (2019) introduced
Generalized Linear Rule Models and implemented a column generation algorithm—an advanced
technique for optimizing problems afflicted by dimensionality issues (Desaulniers et al., 2006). This
approach involves an iterative process of searching for and evaluating potential rules, thereby en-
abling the refinement of the rule set through reweighting. Chen & Mišić (2022) proposed a decision
tree-based choice model that incorporates column generation to capture the mutual effects among
options. However, the applicability of this model is limited by its inability to leverage option-specific
features and the interpretability deficit inherent in random forests, whereas rules can be readily un-
derstood and explicated.


3     BACKGROUND : D ISCRETE C HOICE M ODEL
Discrete choice models describe individuals’ preferences among a set of alternatives. Let S be a set
of alternatives, each characterized by a feature vector xs , s ∈ S. Let x = [xs ]s∈S . Given a choice
set, it predicts the probability that an individual select one of the alternatives. The choice probability
of an alternative s is based on its utility, which is a function of the feature vector. For example, one
can consider a linear utility function, f (xs ) = w⊤ xs , where w is the taste vector to be estimated.

Multinomial Logit This is the most classic choice model traced back to Plackett (1975); Luce
(1959). With a linear utility, it models the choice probability
                                                                as a softmax function
                                         exp wT xs
                                    P               T
                                                         , s ∈ S.
                                       s′ ∈S exp (w xs )
                                                       ′

This model can be explained through Random Utility Maximization theory (McFadden, 1981). In
this framework, the utility of item s is random, expressed as Us = wT xs + ϵs , where ϵs is the
Gumbel noise. When the decision maker chooses the item that maximizes the random utility, i.e.,
arg maxs∈S Us , the resulting choice probability is given by the softmax expression above.

Mixed Logit To account for heterogeneity in the taste vector w, the mixed logit model assumes
that w is drawn from a latent distribution ρ, referred to as the mixture distribution. Each user
behaves according to a multinomial logit, but their specific taste vector is unobservable and treated
as a random sample from the population distribution ρ. Consequently, the choice probability is
                                   "                        #
                                          exp wT xs
                           Ew ∼ ρ P                   T
                                                               , s ∈ S.
                                        s′ ∈S exp (w xs )
                                                          ′


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     O UR P ROPOSED M ODEL : L OGIC -L OGIT
4.1    M OTIVATING E XAMPLE
Let’s take house-buyers as an example. Different buyer types have unique house-purchasing pref-
erences, represented by human-readable OR-of-ANDs logic rules for filtering unsuitable options.
Middle-class families with children prioritize homes meeting criteria like A (price below $500, 000),
B (within 5 miles of a good school), or C (within 10 miles of work). Their choice rule is
(A ∧ B) ∨ (A ∧ C), preferring affordable homes near a good school or work. Single professionals
focus on criteria such as D (modern amenities), E (within 3 miles of entertainment), or F (within 5
miles of work). Their rule is (D ∧ E) ∨ (D ∧ F ), favoring homes with modern features and close to
entertainment or work. Wealthy buyers look for G (luxury features), H (exclusive neighborhood),
or I (large lot size). Their choice logic is (G ∧ H) ∨ (G ∧ I) ∨ (H ∧ I), preferring luxury properties
in an exclusive area or with a large lot.
These logic - based preferences provide a structured way to capture diverse customer needs. In our
model, each customer type has its own set of rules.

4.2    L OGIC - INFORMED U TILITY AND L OGIC -L OGIT
For each customer type, e.g., middle-class families with children or single professionals, each has
its own distinct OR-of-ANDs logic rule to determine their preferences. We define a set of predicates
             M
P = {pm }m=1 , where each predicate pm : X → {0, 1} maps feature vectors, x ∈ X to Boolean
values X refers to the set of all choice features. A predicate evaluates to 1 if the condition it specifies
is satisfied and 0 otherwise. These mappings, from real-valued features to predicates, are predefined
and fixed. A possible way of predefining the pm and P is shown in Appendix A, which is also used
in our real data experiments.
Given these predicates, an OR-of-ANDs logic rule can be expressed as
                                               _U   ^
                                         R=                 pm
                                               u=1   pm ∈Au
where R represents the disjunction of U conjunction rules specific to a customer type. This is a
general form that can express any logic rules. Each conjunction consists of predicates in the set Au ,
corresponding to the u-th conjunction for that particular type. Given M predicates, there are 2M − 1
possible different conjunctions, each of which corresponds to a non-empty subset     of P, the set
                                                                                                   of
                                                                         W U  V
all predicates. The evaluation of the rule R for an instance x is R (x) = u=1       pm ∈Au pm (x) .
For our proposed Logic-Logit model, the utility function for the customer is modeled as a weighted
combination of these conjunctions, with each conjunction acting as a Boolean feature:
                                     XU         ^
                                         wu ·           pm (x) ,
                                      u=1         pm ∈Au
where wu is the weight associated with the u-th conjunction. Under the multinomial logit model,
the probability of selecting item s from the offer set S can then be expressed as
                                           P
                                             U           V
                                    exp      u=1 wu ·
                                                   pm ∈Au  p m (xs )
             Pw (s | S, x) = P          P                                  ,          s ∈ S.           (1)
                                         U          V
                               ′
                              s ∈S exp   u=1 w u ·     pm ∈Au  pm (x s′)


We remark that the dimension of w is 2M − 1, which corresponds to the number of all possible
Boolean features generated from conjunction rules derived from the predicate set P. On the other
hand, it is a sparse vector with only U nonzero elements {wu }u∈[U ] .

4.3    M IXED L OGIC -L OGIT M ODEL
To account for the diversity in user preferences, we extend the above-introduced Logic-Logit model
to a Mixed Logic-Logit model. In this case, the rule weight vector w is modeled as a sample drawn
from a latent mixture distribution ρ(w). The choice probability of selecting item j from the offer
set S, x under this mixture distribution is
                                Pρ (s | S, x) = Ew∼ρ [Pw (s | S, x)] ,                         (2)


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Pw (s | S, x) is computed in Eq. (1). We denote the mixed logit choice probability vector
from a mixture distribution ρ as
                                 Pρ (S, x) = [Pρ (s | S, x)]s∈S .

5     L EARNING A LGORITHM
Let D be the data distribution, with each data point (S, x, y) records the choice set S, their feature
vectors x, and the corresponding choice frequency y, which is either a probability vector or a one-hot
vector. To learn the mixture distribution ρ, consider minimizing the negative log-likelihood
                          min L(ρ) := −E(S,x,y)∼D y ⊤ log Pρ (S, x) .

                                                                                                   (3)
                           ρ∈P
This problem is an infinite-dimensional functional optimization problem over the mixture distribu-
tion ρ. In addition, from the discussion in Section 4.3, the taste vector w is potentially of high
dimensions due to exponentially many potential rules. On the other hand, in many practical situ-
ations, only a small number of simple rules serve as the main driving force of a decision-making
process. To facilitate an interpretable way to generate sparse mixture distributions, we adopt a func-
tional conditional gradient algorithm to solve (3). The algorithm’s road map is illustrated in Fig. 1.
5.1   F UNCTIONAL C ONDITIONAL G RADIENT A LGORITHM FOR E STIMATING THE M IXING
      D ISTRIBUTION
We perform a functional conditional gradient (a.k.a. Frank-Wolfe) algorithm (Bach, 2017) to solve
the problem Eq. (3). To this end, we first compute the functional gradient of L at ρ, which is itself a
function, as                                  "                                  #
                                                X        y s
                  L′ (ρ)(w) = −E(S,x,y)∼D                         · Pw (s | S, x) .                (4)
                                                    Pρ (s | S, x)
                                                   s∈S

The core of the conditional gradient descent algorithm is the Frank-Wolfe step. At each iteration
k, given a feasible solution ρk , this step computes the optimal solution ρ̄k by solving the following
optimization problem based on the gradient L′ (ρk ):
                                        ρ̄k ∈ arg min ⟨L′ (ρk ), ρ⟩,
                                                ρ∈P
where the inner product is between a function and a distribution, i.e., ⟨L′ (ρk ), ρ⟩ = Eρ [L′ (ρk )].
Using the functional gradient (4), the above
                                        "    minimization problem can be rewritten
                                                                               #     as
                                          X        ys
                   min −E(S,x,y)∼D                          · Eρ Pw (s | S, x) .
                   ρ∈P                       Pρk (s | S, x)
                                          s∈S
Thanks to the linearity of the objective in ρ, it suffices to restrict to Dirac measures, i.e., ρ = δw for
some taste vector w. This leads to the following
                                           "        equivalent form of the Frank-Wolfe
                                                                                 #          step:
                                             X          ys
                      min −E(S,x,y)∼D                             · Pw (s | S, x) .                  (FW)
                        w                         Pρk (s | S, x)
                                             s∈S
Therefore, the Frank-Wolfe step finds a new customer type, denoted as wk . Given δwk , the next
iteration ρk+1 is defined as
                                 ρk+1 ← (1 − ηk )ρk + ηk δwk ,
                                                                    2
where ηk is a suitable step size parameter, often chosen as ρk = k+1   to achieve a sublinear conver-
gence rate O(1/K), or determined by line search.
Practically, one can start with a single customer type ρ0 = δw0 , where w0 is an initial parameter
vector, such as the best multinomial logit weights. The algorithm then iteratively adds new customer
types to the mixture distribution by solving the Frank-Wolfe step (FW). To achieve better empirical
performance, one can also perform a fully corrective step, which updates the mixture distribution by
re-optimizing the weights on all customer types:
                                         n             X k                  o
                        ρk+1 ← arg min L(ρ) : ρ =          αj δwj , α ∈ ∆K .
                                     ρ
                                                          j=0
This is a convex optimization problem over α and can be solved efficiently.
On a high level, this algorithm shares similar aspects as the finite-dimensional conditional gradient
algorithms in Jagabathula et al. (2020); Hu et al. (2022), which estimate mixed logit model by re-
parameterizing it as a constrained convex optimization over choice probability vectors. Different


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from theirs, we develop our algorithm using the functional conditional gradient. Moreover, it is
important to note that in our logic-rule-based problem, the Frank-Wolfe step (FW) has a different
computational challenge than they have, as ours involves searching over a space with a combinatorial
dimension 2M − 1. We devote the next section to discussing how to solve this problem efficiently.


                             Figure 1: The framework of our Algorithm.


5.2   S OLVING F RANK -W OLFE S TEP USING C OLUMN G ENERATION
Plugging in our logic-logit model (1) to the Frank-Wolfe step (FW) yields the following objective
   ϕ(w | {Au }U u=1 ) :=                                                                         (5)
                                                   P            V                        
                                                       U
                       X         ys            exp     u=1 wu ·    pm ∈Au pm (xs )
      − E(S,x,y)∼D                       ·P           P            V                      . (6)
                           Pρk (s | S, x)         exp
                                                          U
                                                              w ·              p (x ′ )
                       s∈S                     s∈S          u=1   u      pm ∈Au   m    s

When the number of predicates M is large, it results in an exponentially large number of possible
conjunctions. To address this challenge, we devise a column generation algorithm. This approach
begins with a smaller, more manageable problem using a limited search space, and then gradually
expands the space by adding new rules iteratively. We start with an empty rule set: R(0) = {}, and
initialize rule weights w(0) = []. We will repeat the following procedures until the convergence or
the stopping criterion is met.

Master Problem: Update Rule Weights Suppose this current rule set is R(U ) = {Au }U
                                                                                  u=1 , the
master problem optimizes the weights by minimizing the Frank-Wolfe objective
                              w(U ) ← arg min ϕ w | {Au }U

                                                           u=1 .
                                               w
This step adjusts the weights for the current set of rules to best fit the data by minimizing the Frank-
Wolfe objective ϕ. Note that this optimization is on the U -dimensional space and thus is more
tractable.

Subproblem: Search for a New Rule With the rule weights w(U ) fixed, the subproblem focuses
on identifying a new rule AU +1 that can further enhance the objective. Specifically, if the gradient
                          M
vector ∇ϕ(w(U ) ) ∈ R2 −1 is not a zero vector, then there exists a descent direction that reduces
the objective (5). To identify a non-zero component of this high-dimensional gradient vector, we
conduct a rule search as follows.
The conjunction rule is identified as a path in a tree, where each node represents a predicate. We
employ two search strategies: Breadth-First Search (BFS) and Depth-First Search (DFS). BFS first
examines all rules with the same length and then gradually increases rule length; whereas DFS
focuses on generating new rules by performing conjunctions on the rules that have already been
identified. To streamline the process, we impose a limit on rule length to ensure that we focus
on rules that are both computationally feasible and manageable. Moreover, we take a risk-seeking
approach by prioritizing the maximization of potential gains over average outcomes. Namely, when
comparing the performance of different rules, we focus on specific quantiles of the performance
distribution rather than the average. This allows us to identify rules that could yield higher rewards
or provide valuable insights. Such an exploratory strategy is especially useful empirically, where
certain rules might produce substantial gains in specific scenarios but could be overlooked when


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: DFS Visualization In the figure, each node corresponds to a predicate. When the search
rule conjunction length increases from n to n + 1, the depth-first search (DFS) algorithm initiates
from the previously detected n-conjunction rules and exhaustively searches through all extensions
with other predicates in order to discover a potential augmentation of the existing n-conjunction.

considering only average performance. Once the new rule AU +1 is found, we add it to the rule set
RU +1 ← R(u) ∪ {AU +1 }.
The algorithm stops until no new rule can significantly improve the objective or after a predefined
number of iterations. The algorithm outputs the final rule set along with their weights. After solving
the master problem, we may choose to eliminate rules with weights below a specified threshold,
ensuring that only the most impactful rules remain in the set, thereby improving the algorithm’s
efficiency and effectiveness. The pseudo-code and additional details are provided in Appendix A.

6     E XPERIMENT
To validate the effectiveness of our proposed method, this experimental section begins with evalu-
ations of synthetic datasets with clearly defined predicates, ground truth consumer types, and deci-
sion rules. We then assess distribution learning and event prediction accuracy using two complex
real-world datasets. The detailed ways we predefine the predicates for the real dataset is shown in
appendix A. Our method is systematically compared against several baseline approaches to provide
a comprehensive performance evaluation.
6.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Baselines We employ MNL and Mix-MNL (Jagabathula et al., 2020) as representatives of the clas-
sic models, while Vanilla NN, TasteNet (Han et al., 2020), DeepMNL (Wang et al., 2020; Sifringer
et al., 2020), Mix-DeepMNL (Jagabathula et al., 2020), and RUMNet (Aouad & Désir, 2022) serve
as neural network-based alternatives. A comprehensive description and comparison of models on
utility value calculation, complexity, and interpretability is provided in Table 4 on Appendix B.
Metric We report the training and testing losses as negative log-likelihoods (Equation 3) and the
top-1 accuracy for both datasets, where top-1 accuracy is the proportion of instances where the most
selected product is predicted to have the highest choice probability. All results are reported as the
average over 10 runs.
6.2   S YNTHETIC DATA
Generation of Offersets and Choice Data A total of 5,000 offer sets are generated, each com-
prising 20 products. Each product is characterized by 50 synthetic binary features sampled from a
Bernoulli distribution, representing the grounded features of 50 product predicates. The complete set
                                                                        50
of predicates associated with products can be denoted as P c = {pcm }m=1 . Additionally, each offer
                                                                                                 20
set is associated with 15 binary features induced by offerset predicates, denoted as P o = {pom }m=1 .
These types of predicates are frequently encountered in practical scenarios and universal for all
choice in offerset, such as search criteria in a query or the age of a patient requiring medication.
The total sales volume Nt for each offer set is fixed as 100 units. Three distinct preference types
are predefined. Each type follows three decision rules, i.e. conjunctions of predicates. Only the first
10 product predicates and 2 offer set predicates are utilized within these preference types, adhering
to the sparsity of effective predicates and demonstrating the model’s selectivity when faced with
redundant predicates. The choice result is computed as 100 · mixed choice probability.
Rule Comparison Metric To facilitate the comparison of rules, we use Jaccard index between
the rules’ predicate sets, defined as follows.
                                                    |A ∩ B|
                                          J(A, B) =                                     (7)
                                                    |A ∪ B|

                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


|·| refers to the set size, A and B refer to the predicate sets of the two rules. For example, the Jaccard
index of the following two rules p1 ∧p2 ∧p3 and p4 ∧p2 ∧p3 is 0.5, with A∩B = {p2 , p3 } |A∩B| = 2
and A ∪ B = {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 } |A ∪ B| = 4. This metric directly shows the difference between the
rule contents.
                                                           Rule Comparison                            1.0


          8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
         GT Type3 GT Type2 GT Type1                                                                   0.8

                                                                                                      0.6
                   GT Rules


                                                                                                      0.4

                                                                                                      0.2

                                 0                     5                      10                      0.0
                                      Learned Type 1         Learned Type 2          Learned Type 3
                                                              Learned Rules

Figure 3: Rule Comparison. The figure shows the Jaccard index between the ground truth (GT) rules
(Y-axis) and the rules learned by our risk seeking model (X-axis), denoted by the color intensity.


                                         Ground Truth Ground Truth         Learned      Jaccard
                                             Type           Rules            Rules       Index
                                                             pc1                /          0
                                            Type 1        pc2 ∧ pc3        pc2 ∧ pc3       1
                                                      pc4 ∧ pc5 ∧ pc6 pc4 ∧ pc5 ∧ pc6      1
                                                             pc7              pc7          1
                                            Type 2    pc8 ∧ pc9 ∧ pc10 pc8 ∧ pc9 ∧ pc10    1
                                                         pc11 ∧ po1       pc11 ∧ po1       1
                                                             pc12             pc12         1
                                            Type 3       pc13 ∧ pc14      pc13 ∧ pc14      1
                                                         pc15 ∧ po2       pc15 ∧ po2       1

              Table 1: Ground truth rules and closest learned rules on the synthetic dataset.


Results and Discussion Figure 3 illustrates the comparison of learned rules with respect to the
ground truth rules. Rule sets associated with the top-3 preference types, regarding their proportions,
are considered as learned rules. A comprehensive comparative analysis between the ground truth
rules and the identified rules is provided in Table 1. Remarkably, eight out of nine ground truth rules
are perfectly learned. The results demonstrate that Logic-Logit effectively and selectively captures
the majority of the rules without being encumbered by other irrelevant predicates included within
the data. Fig4 provides a more intuitive result visualization.


                                                       Figure 4: Rule Coverage



                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Figure 5: Preference Type Analysis of Expedia Hotel Dataset

6.3     E XPEDIA H OTEL DATASET E XPERIMENT
Dataset Introduction The Expedia Hotel Dataset1 is released in 2013 on a Kaggle competition for
improving the recommendation system of Expedia. The dataset is characterized by a structured for-
mat comprising both hotel search queries and corresponding search outcomes. Each search instance
in the dataset consists primarily of two key components: the search criteria and the characteristics
of the retrieved hotel results. The set of hotels retrieved through a search can be conceptualized as
an ‘offerset’, wherein each hotel represents an option. The hotel that the customer ultimately books
can be considered as the selected choice within this set. The detailed feature of each instance and
experiment setting is shown in AppendixD.

Results and Discussions Figure 5 illustrates the two primary preference types identified in the
Expedia Hotel Dataset: the PageRank Preference Type (85%) and the Value-for-Money Preference
Type (15%). It is important to note that this does not imply that 85% of customers strictly follow
PageRank when selecting hotels; rather, individuals typically exhibit characteristics of both types,
with PageRank serving as a significant factor influencing choice behavior.
The ability of Mix-MNL and Logic-Logit to capture the PageRank effect is shown by comparing
the aggregated choice probabilities of options at different ranking positions with actual sales data.
Logic-Logit fits rules to model sales increases from lower to higher ranks. For example, the rule
Rank < 3rd is derived from the substantial sales difference between hotels ranked 1st and 2nd versus
those ranked 3rd to 10th . In scenarios where sales remain consistent across ranks, such as between
4th to 6th and 7th to 9th , no rules are detected. Overall, Logic-Logit segments the PageRank into
distinct stages with defined rules and models the non-linear effect by assigning varying weights to
these rules, whereas Mix-MNL primarily captures a linear effect.
Furthermore, the analysis of the Value-for-Money preference type indicates that customers asso-
ciate price with multiple factors, including PageRank, star rating, location score, and historical
price, through conjunction rules. Unlike neural network-based approaches that encode features into
complex latent layers, Logic-Logit explicitly captures the correlations between features in an in-
terpretable manner. A comprehensive performance comparison between Logic-Logit and baseline
methods using the Expedia hotel dataset is included in Appendix C.
6.4     MIMIC-IV DATASET E XPERIMENTS
MIMIC-IV2 is an electronic health record dataset of patients admitted to the intensive care unit
(ICU) (Johnson et al., 2023). We considered patients diagnosed with sepsis (Saria, 2018), one of the
major causes of mortality in ICU due to septic shock. Septic shocks are medical emergencies and
early recognition and treatment would improve survival. We aim to uncover the treatment choice
behavior of doctors.
   1
       https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/vijeetnigam26/expedia-hotel
   2
       https://mimic.mit.edu/


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Treatments and Vital Signs Suggested by (Komorowski et al., 2018), we extracted 14 treatments
categorized as vasopressors, antibiotics, and auxiliary treatments associated with sepsis. We then
select 16 vital signs that are highly related to sepsis. A detailed introduction to extraction and data
processing can be found in Appendix E.

      Drug Name                         Detected Rules
      Norepinephrine                    P T > 12.6 ∧ ABP d ≤ 59.0
                                        P T T > 31.6 ∧ age ≤ 76.0 ∧ ABP d <= 54.0
      Vasopressin                       P CO2(Arterial) > 41.0
                                        IN R > 1.1 ∧ anchora ge ≤ 66.0
      Packed Red Blood Cells            ABP d ≤ 57.0 ∧ ABP m ≤ 56.0
                                        P T > 12.6 ∧ IN R > 1.4 ∧ RR ≤ 32.0
                                        P lateletCount ≤ 95.0 ∧ P T T > 31.6

                             Table 2: MIMIC Drug Preference Rules Examples.


Results and Discussion In the context of drug prediction tasks, the feature set of the data is pre-
dominantly centered on patient characteristics rather than the attributes of the drugs being consid-
ered. Consequently, classical linear models such as Multinomial Logit (MNL) and Mixed Multino-
mial Logit (Mix-MNL) are ill-equipped to address this task effectively. Table 3 shows NN-based
models also perform badly due to the lack of product features. Furthermore, the medical domain ne-
cessitates decision-making that is interpretable and traceable. Our model is capable of extracting the
underlying logical rules and their associated weights that govern physicians’ medication selection
processes.
Table 11 presents exemplar rules that support drug preference learning, consistent with established
medical knowledge. Taking packed red blood cells as an illustrative example, the rule ABP d ≤
57.0 mmHg ∧ ABP m ≤ 56.0 mmHg indicates that the patient’s blood pressure is below the normal
threshold. Additionally, elevated levels of PTT, PT, and INR, along with a deficiency in platelet
count, suggest that the patient is unable to achieve hemostasis. These rules collectively indicate that
the patient is severely injured and experiencing significant blood loss, which provides interpretable
evidence for the doctor’s preference for packed red blood cells.

                                                        Train accu                     Test accu
    Category        Method          Train loss      Test loss
                                                          (Top1)                        (Top1)
               NN      2.5118(±0.137) 2.5215(±0.033) 0.1261(±0.043)                 0.0727(±0.031)
             TasteNet  2.4223(±0.000) 2.4323(±0.000) 0.1079(±0.008)                 0.0727(±0.064)
    DeepNN  DeepMNL    2.3696(±0.000) 2.4331(±0.000) 0.1102(±0.008)                 0.0818(±0.065)
           mixDeepMNL 2.3394(±0.000) 2.4672(±0.000) 0.1060(±0.008)                  0.0848(±0.065)
             RUMNet    2.3530(±0.000) 2.4426(±0.000) 0.1008(±0.002)                 0.1000(±0.064)
           Ours-NM-50 2.098(±0.0165) 2.2047(±0.020) 0.2961(±0.010)                  0.264(±0.029)
     Ours*
            Ours-RS-50 2.0791(±0.011) 2.1713(±0.025) 0.3269(±0.003)                  0.26(±0.016)

Table 3: Treatment choice prediction on MIMIC-IV dataset. We report Negative log likelihood
(NLL) loss and Top-1 choice prediction accuracy of the training and testing set. NM refers to the
normal mode of our model, while RS indicates the risk-seeking mode. We extract 50 rules for both
types. Our Logit-Logit model performs much better than all the baselines.


7    C ONCLUSION
In this study, we have proposed the Logic-Logit model, which incorporates logic rules into choice
modeling as a pivotal strategy for enhancing both interpretability and accuracy. Our approach uti-
lizes column generation for effective rule learning and leverages the Frank-Wolfe algorithm to facil-
itate the learning of mixture distributions for preference types. The empirical results obtained from
real-world datasets demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms traditional neural network
models in terms of both interpretability and predictive accuracy. This finding underscores the po-
tential of integrating logical reasoning into choice models to produce more transparent and reliable
decision-making tools.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Shuang Li’s research was in part supported by the NSFC under grant No.         62206236,
Shenzhen Stability Science Program 2023, Shenzhen Science and Technology Program
ZDSYS20230626091302006, Longgang District Key Laboratory of Intelligent Digital Economy
Security, and SRIBD Innovation Fund SIF20240010.

R EFERENCES
Yi-Chun Akchen and Dmitry Mitrofanov. Consider or choose? the role and power of consideration
  sets. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2302, 2023.
Ali Aouad and Antoine Désir. Representing random utility choice models with neural networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12877, 2022.
Ali Aouad, Vivek Farias, and Retsef Levi. Assortment optimization under consider-then-choose
  choice models. Management Science, 67(6):3368–3386, 2021.
Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 18(19):1–53, 2017.
Chandra R Bhat. An endogenous segmentation mode choice model with an application to intercity
  travel. Transportation science, 31(1):34–48, 1997.
Yi-Chun Chen and Velibor V Mišić. Decision forest: A nonparametric approach to modeling irra-
  tional choice. Management Science, 68(10):7090–7111, 2022.
Guy Desaulniers, Jacques Desrosiers, and Marius M Solomon. Column generation, volume 5.
  Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
William H Greene and David A Hensher. A latent class model for discrete choice analysis: contrasts
 with mixed logit. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 37(8):681–698, 2003.
Yafei Han, Francisco Camara Pereira, Moshe Ben-Akiva, and Christopher Zegras. A neural-
  embedded choice model: Tastenet-mnl modeling taste heterogeneity with flexibility and inter-
  pretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00922, 2020.
John R Hauser. Consideration-set heuristics. Journal of Business Research, 67(8):1688–1699, 2014.
Jerry Hausman and Daniel McFadden. Specification tests for the multinomial logit model. Econo-
   metrica: Journal of the econometric society, pp. 1219–1240, 1984.
David A Hensher and William H Greene. Specification and estimation of the nested logit model:
  alternative normalisations. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 36(1):1–17, 2002.
Yiqun Hu, David Simchi-Levi, and Zhenzhen Yan. Learning mixed multinomial logits with provable
  guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9447–9459, 2022.
Srikanth Jagabathula, Lakshminarayanan Subramanian, and Ashwin Venkataraman. A conditional
  gradient approach for nonparametric estimation of mixing distributions. Management Science, 66
  (8):3635–3656, 2020.
Alistair EW Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Lu Shen, Alvin Gayles, Ayad Shammout, Steven Horng,
  Tom J Pollard, Benjamin Moody, Brian Gow, Li-wei H Lehman, et al. Mimic-iv, a freely acces-
  sible electronic health record dataset. Scientific Data, 10(1):1–9, 2023.
Matthieu Komorowski, Leo A Celi, Omar Badawi, Anthony C Gordon, and A Aldo Faisal. The arti-
 ficial intelligence clinician learns optimal treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care. Nature
 medicine, 24(11):1716–1720, 2018.
Qing Liu and Neeraj Arora. Efficient choice designs for a consider-then-choose model. Marketing
  Science, 30(2):321–338, 2011.
R Duncan Luce. Individual choice behavior, volume 4. Wiley New York, 1959.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D McFadden. Econometric models of probabilistic choice”, 1981.
Robin L Plackett. The analysis of permutations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C:
  Applied Statistics, 24(2):193–202, 1975.
Ronald L Rivest. Learning decision lists. Machine learning, 2:229–246, 1987.
Ingo Ruczinski, Charles Kooperberg, and Michael LeBlanc. Logic regression. Journal of Compu-
  tational and graphical Statistics, 12(3):475–511, 2003.
Suchi Saria. Individualized sepsis treatment using reinforcement learning. Nature medicine, 24(11):
  1641–1642, 2018.
Brian Sifringer, Virginie Lurkin, and Alexandre Alahi. Enhancing discrete choice models with
  representation learning. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 140:236–261, 2020.
Shenhao Wang, Baichuan Mo, and Jinhua Zhao. Deep neural networks for choice analysis: Architec-
  ture design with alternative-specific utility functions. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
  Technologies, 112:234–251, 2020.
Dennis Wei, Sanjeeb Dash, Tian Gao, and Oktay Gunluk. Generalized linear rule models. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 6687–6696. PMLR, 2019.
Chieh-Hua Wen and Frank S Koppelman. The generalized nested logit model. Transportation
  Research Part B: Methodological, 35(7):627–641, 2001.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX OVERVIEW
In the following, we will provide supplementary materials to better illustrate our methods and ex-
periments.
       • Section A presents more details of our model and implementation.
       • Section B introduces the baseline methods we considered in our paper.
       • Section C provides more additional experiment results about synthetic datasets.
       • Section D provides more additional experiment results about Expedia Hotel datasets.
       • Section E provides more details about MIMIC-IV dataset experiments.

A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
A.1   P REDEFINING THE P REDICATES
The specification of predicates can be quite flexible. Any method generate binary label from the
original choice feature can be used as predicates, such as traditional classification model. Here we
introduce the most direct way to achieve this, which is also used in the two real dataset experiments.
Discrete Features Discrete features inherently possess finite conditions due to the limited set of
possible values that the feature can assume, such as if number of rooms = 3 in a house. If
house containing one to ten rooms appear in the dataset, then there will naturally be ten predicates
indicating how many rooms are in a house.
Continuous Features The possible value of a continuous feature is infinite, thus we cannot use
the equivalence condition like discrete feature. We have continued with the approach of Wei et al.
(2019) to get predicates by thresholding the feature with the percentiles within the dataset, such as
if house price ranks in top 20% and if house area f ail to rank in top 60%. The number of
these percentile thresholds can be determined as a hyperparameter. Dense thresholds bring about
accuracy for the rule content, but also lead to larger searching space and difficulty for the rule
searching step. This methodology is based on the distribution of the feature, and can eliminate the
influence of outlier features and feature scales, which may cause trouble in linear models.
A.2   S UBPROBLEM S OLVING : RULE S EARCHING WITH C OLUMN G ENERATION
The pseudo-code of the rule searching step is shown below:

Algorithm 1 Solving Frank-Wolfe Step using Column Generation
 1: Input: max conjuntion length K
 2: Initialize: k = 1, ruleset R = {}, rule weight w = []
 3: while stopping condition 1 not met do
 4:     while k ≤ K do                                                               ▷ BFS
 5:         q←0
 6:         while stopping condition 2 not met do
 7:             ∆R = Generate Candidate Rules(R, k, q)
 8:             Compute ∇ϕ(wnew ) for each new rule in ∆R
 9:             ∆R∗ ←Select Top-N potential Rules from ∆R with ∇ϕ(wnew ) information
10:             R ← R ∪ ∆R∗
11:             w ← arg minw ϕ (w | R)
12:             q ←q+1
13:         end while
14:         k ←k+1
15:     end while
16: end while
17: return ruleset R, rule weight w


The algorithm 1 shows the entire road map of Solving Frank-Wolfe Step using Column Genera-
tion, including the rule searching and potential evaluation with gradient. The stopping condition 1
controls the number of total preference types to be found. It can be set as a predefined number or
depends on the convergence of NLL loss. The stopping condition 2 controls how many rules with
searching length will be searched in a preference type. It can also be set as a predefined number or


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


depends on the convergence of Frank-Wolfe step loss (as show in Eq. 5). Suppose the current rule
set is R(U ) , the detailed formulation for computation of the ∇ϕ(wnew ) is shown below:
                           T
                                            !                                                              !
                       1 XX           Njt                         X           exp (zℓt )
   ∇ϕ(wnew ) = −                      (k−1)
                                                · Inew (xjt ) −        P                      · Inew (xℓt )
                       N t=1         gjt                                   ℓ′ ∈St exp (zℓ t )
                                                                                         ′
                              j∈St                                ℓ∈St
                             V
                PU                                        (k−1)
where zℓt = u=1 wu ·           pm ∈Au p m (x ℓt )  , and gjt    refers to the choice probability of product
j in offer set St mixed by the previous found k − 1 preference types. With weights of rules that
have already been in rule set fixed, we initialize the candidate rules weights wnew to be zeros, and
calculate the gradient of loss upon this weights. In other words, we use the gradient to determine if
changing the weight of the candidate rule from zero can bring about improvement in Frank-Wolfe
step solving. The absolute value of the gradient directly implies the potential of a candidate rule.
Therefore we can select top-n most potential rules and put them in R.

Algorithm 2 Generate Candidate Rules
 1: Input: R, k, q
 2: Initialize: ∆R = {}
 3: if q = 0 then
 4:      for rule ∈ R do
 5:          if rule conjunction length = k − 1 then
 6:              Extend rule conjunction with each predicate respectively                           ▷ DFS
 7:              Put all extended rules in ∆R
 8:          end if
 9:      end for
10: else
11:      Randomly Sample k predicates and form conjunction
12:      Repeat line 11 for multiple times and put generated rules in ∆R
13: end if
14: return ∆R

From Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, we can find out that the our model searches rules following
the order of rule conjunction length, i.e. BFS. Each time the model finishes length-k rule searching
then start length-k+1 rule searching. Moreover, to improve the rule searching efficiency, we also
introduce DFS when the searching change from length-k to length-k+1. For example, when we start
to search for length-2 rule we first go through all the length-1 rule in the current rule set and form
conjunctions with other predicates to get length-2 rules induced by length-1 rules in current rule set.
This comes from the simple intuition that choices satisfy condition A ∧ B must satisfy condition A
and condition B simultaneously. Although single predicate A doesn’t depict the A ∧ B perfectly,
increasing the weight of predicate A can still increase the utility of choices satisfy A ∧ B and bring
about improvement.
A.3    O PTION F EATURE AND O FFER S ET F EATURE
Our model distinguishes between option-specific features and offerset-specific features, treating
them differently. The offerset features are exclusively considered within the context of conjunction
rule searching. Any rule composed solely of offerset features is skipped during the rule searching
process due to the inherent structure of the logit. Irrespective of the weights assigned to these rules,
they are inevitably discarded during the softmax process since offerset features are common across
all options within the same offerset. Consequently, rules involving offerset features are only func-
tional when they are conjunct with option-specific features. The rules pertaining to option features
elucidate the attractiveness of individual options, whereas the rules associated with offerset fea-
tures delineate the scenarios (or offersets) in which various option-specific rules should be applied.
This nuanced approach enables Logic-Logit to successfully incorporate offerset features into choice
modeling, thereby enhancing its explanatory power and predictive accuracy.
A.4    RULE S ET E XPANSION , R E - WEIGHTING , AND P RUNING
The rule space to be explored is extensive, necessitating careful control of the rule set size for
efficient subproblem resolution. An overly large rule set can lead to time-consuming optimization
and compromise interpretability.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rule Set Expansion During a single subproblem iteration, a substantial number of rules are identi-
fied, many of which exhibit promise. However, only the top-k most promising rules are incorporated
into the rule set. This strategy curbs the expansion rate of the rule set, maintaining its sparsity and
interpretability.

Rule Set Pruning Our algorithm employs two phases of pruning. The first occurs during subprob-
lem resolution, while the second is executed post-resolution.
During subproblem resolution, to ensure the problem remains tractable, we impose a maximum rule
set size, typically set generously. When the size exceeds this threshold, rules with low weights are
discarded. Post-discard, the remaining rules undergo re-weighting.
Following subproblem resolution, to uphold interpretability and sparsity, an ultimate maximum size
limit is enforced, significantly smaller than during the subproblem phase. Similarly, rules are pruned,
and the retained rules are re-weighted.

Re-weighting For each preference type, the number of rules must be manageable to preserve
interpretability. Selecting the most significant rules is critical during the re-weighting process. We
apply a relatively high l1 penalty when optimizing rule weights to ensure sparsity. Notably, this
penalty is not applied post the second pruning phase, as the rule set size is already constrained by
the ultimate maximum limit.

A.5   C OMPUTING I NFRASTRUCTURE
Our experiments are applicable to both CPU and GPU. For this paper, we use GPU NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 3090.

A.6   O PTIMIZER
We choose the Adam optimizer to do stochastic gradient descent in both rule weights learning and
preference type proportion update.

B     BASELINES
       • Classic Choice Models
           – MNL (McFadden, 1981) Multinomial logit model
           – Mix-MNL (Jagabathula et al., 2020) MNL with feature weights belonging to finite
             discrete support learned with Frank-Wolfe algorithm framework.
       • Deep Learning-Driven Choice Models
           – Vanilla NN is a simple and standard feed-forward neural network that takes a concate-
             nated vector of all product and customer attributes as input, and outputs the utility of
             each choice alternative. These utility values are then passed through a softmax layer
             to calculate the choice probabilities for each alternative.
           – TasteNet (Han et al., 2020) uses deep learning to model individual tastes/preferences
             directly in a choice modeling context.
           – DeepMNL (Wang et al., 2020) combines the traditional MNL model with deep learn-
             ing architectures to capture more complex choice behavior.
           – MixDeepMNL (Jagabathula et al., 2020) is a mixture of DeepMNL models that allow
             for heterogeneity in preferences across individuals.
           – RUMNet (Aouad & Désir, 2022) is a deep learning-based model that combines ran-
             dom utility theory with neural networks. It provides an efficient approximation of
             random utility maximization (RUM) discrete choice models.

Hyperparameters setting of Deep learning driven choice models We apply similar hyper-
parameters for all neural network-based models followed the setting in RUMNet (Aouad & Désir,
2022). We select the standard ADAM optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 and batch sizes of
32. We set label smoothing as 0.0001, a norm-based regularization method on the neural network’s
outputs. We tune the neural network structure and report the best one in all tables. In particular, for
each model, we vary the parameters (l, w) ∈ (3, 10), (5, 20), (10, 30), where l denotes the depth of
the network and w denotes its width.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Model             Utility Value     # Parameters      Grounds for Interpretability
       Logic-Logit (Ours)      Rule-Based           O(N n)         Rules Content & Weights
             MNL                                     O(d)
                                  Linear                                 Feature Weights
           Mix-MNL                                  O(N d)
          Vanilla NN
            TasteNet
          Deep-MNL
                                NN-Based        O(ddv + Ld2v )                  /
        Mix-DeepMNL
            RUMNet

Table 4: Model Comparison, In the # parameter column, N represents the consumer type number, n
denotes the maximum rule number, and d indicates the dimensionality of the product feature vector.
For NN-based models, dv are dimensions of latent features and L is the number of layers. As the
inherent complexity of NN-based models, their interpretability is often considered negligible.

C    D ETAILED E XPERIMENTS R ESULTS

In this section, we present the detailed experimental results by comparing our model with several
baseline approaches. In ours, NM refers to the normal mode of our model, while RS indicates the
risk-seeking mode. The number at the end denotes the count of rules for each preference type.



                                                                   Train accu      Test accu
 Category          Method                Train loss          Test loss
                                                                     (Top1)         (Top1)
                 MNL            2.7503(±0.003) 2.7751(±0.005)    0.16(±0.002)  0.1312(±0.007)
 Classic
         Mix-MNL (Frank-Wolfe) 2.7472(±0.003) 2.7679(±0.004) 0.1631(±0.002) 0.1382(±0.011)
                  NN            2.9671(±0.016) 3.0075(±0.007) 0.0739(±0.008) 0.0553(±0.014)
                TasteNet        2.7178(±0.022) 2.7511(±0.054) 0.1759(±0.012) 0.1620(±0.027)
 DeepNN        DeepMNL          2.4603(±0.024) 2.6001(±0.040) 0.2564(±0.004) 0.2099(±0.006)
             mixDeepMNL         2.4538(±0.021) 2.5798(±0.057) 0.2404(±0.004) 0.2253(±0.019)
               RUMNet           2.4444(±0.050) 2.5749(±0.071) 0.2442(±0.012) 0.2186(±0.048)
              Ours-NM-5         2.6032(±0.017) 2.6397(±0.023) 0.2151(±0.010) 0.2048(±0.011)
              Ours-NM-20       2.5242(±0.0069) 2.5871(±0.0098) 0.2204(±0.0034) 0.1876(±0.007)
  Ours*
               Ours-RS-5        2.5926(±0.008) 2.6305(±0.014) 0.2208(±0.005) 0.2058(±0.011)
              Ours-RS-20       2.5215(±0.0047) 2.5836(±0.0041) 0.2231(±0.0019) 0.1908(±0.0064)

Table 5: Choice prediction results on the synthetic dataset. We report Negative log likelihood (NLL)
loss and Top-1 choice prediction accuracy of the training and testing set. NM refers to the normal
mode of our model, while RS indicates the risk-seeking mode. We extract 5 / 20 rules for both types.



The synthetic data is generated with single sales, implying that within every offerset, only one
option is selected. The Logic-Logit model demonstrates comparable performance in terms of both
Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) Loss and Top1 accuracy. Notably, the risk-seeking mode model
yields improved outcomes compared to the normal mode, as it aids the model in fitting to uncovered
samples, maintaining an equilibrium between exploration and exploitation.
In both the Expedia Hotel Dataset and the MIMIC Dataset, our model demonstrates superior perfor-
mance over neural network-based models and classic models in terms of loss and accuracy.
Within the hotel dataset, it is evident that increasing the maximum rule number enhances the expres-
siveness of the Logic-Logit model and improves its fit to the training data, although this may lead
to over-fitting. Notably, the risk-seeking heuristic proves ineffective in this context due to the dom-
inance of preference-type sales and the PageRank effect. Enhancing rule diversity does not yield
significant performance benefits.
The MIMIC dataset predominantly comprises patient features, specifically offerset-specific features
shared among all drug options. Consequently, we primarily focused on models capable of learning
both drug and patient features. Classic linear models and Vanilla Neural Networks are not suitable
to this scenario.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                Train accu        Test accu
 Category               Method               Train loss        Test loss
                                                                                  (Top1)           (Top1)
                        MNL               3.1482(±0.029)   3.1423(±0.032)     0.177(±0.020)    0.1595(±0.005)
 Classic
                Mix-MNL (Frank-Wolfe)     2.9654(±0.023)   2.9576(±0.025)    0.1807(±0.008)    0.1657(±0.006)
                         NN               3.0991(±0.028)   3.1669(±0.023)    0.2168(±0.001)    0.2120(±0.011)
                       TasteNet           3.0909(±0.017)   3.0863(±0.015)    0.1503(±0.007)    0.1431(±0.013)
 DeepNN               DeepMNL             3.0494(±0.011)   3.0696(±0.022)    0.1566(±0.002)    0.1586(±0.007)
                    mixDeepMNL            3.0283(±0.020)   3.0755(±0.025)    0.1620(±0.010)    0.1507(±0.010)
                      RUMNet              3.0182(±0.002)   3.0736(±0.020)    0.1631(±0.004)    0.1489(±0.008)
                     Ours-NM-30           2.9505(±0.019)   2.9754(±0.013)    0.1901(±0.004)    0.1698(±0.009)
    Ours*
                     Ours-RS-30           2.9473(±0.017)   2.9675(±0.016)    0.1909(±0.002)    0.1738(±0.005)

Table 6: Choice prediction on the Expedia Hotel dataset. We report Negative log likelihood (NLL)
loss and Top-1 choice prediction accuracy of the training and testing set. Our Logit-Logit model
performs best. NM refers to the normal mode of our model, while RS indicates the risk-seeking
mode. We extract 30 rules for both types.

D        A DDITIONAL E XPEDIA H OTEL E XPERIMENTS
Feature Introduction The Expedia Hotel Dataset3 is a publicly available dataset released on Kag-
gle in 2013. It records customers’ search-and-booking interaction with Expedia platform. The fea-
tures listed in table 7 are used in the experiment.

         Feature Type     Feature Name     Variable Type                     Description
                            PageRank         Discrete     The recommendation position of the hotel
                            Star Rating     Continuous                The historical star rating
                          Location Score    Continuous        The desirability of a hotel’s location
                          Historical Price  Continuous    Mean price of the hotel over the last period
         Hotel Feature
                             Branded          Binary       If the hotel is part of a major hotel chain
                            Promotion         Binary        If the hotel had a sale price promotion
                               Price        Continuous              Displayed price of the hotel
                             Booking          Binary                 If customer book the hotel
                         Booking Window      Discrete    Number of days in the future from search date
                          Length of Stay     Discrete                   Number of nights stay
                           Adults Count      Discrete                   The number of adults
        Search Criterion Children Count      Discrete                  The number of children
                           Room Count        Discrete                   The number of rooms
                          Saturday Night      Binary          If the stay includes a Saturday night
                             Random           Binary              If the displayed sort is random

                 Table 7: Descrption of feature description on the Expedia Hotel dataset.


Experiment Setting To prepare our dataset, we divided it into training and testing subsets using
a 3:1 ratio based on search timestamps. We selected offersets with 28 to 32 search results, whose
results is not randomly displayed, i.e. sorted by Expedia Recommendation System. Searches with
no bookings, hotels priced over $1000, or booking windows longer than one year were excluded.
Finally, we randomly sampled 10,000 instances for the training set and 1,000 instances for the test
set.


Model Setting The hyper parameters of our model is set as below. This setting is shared for
Expedia Hotel experiments in both Appendix D and Appendix C.
      • Overall Convergence Criterion: The NLL loss decreases less than 0.001 after a new prefer-
        ence type is found and proportion is updated.
      • The ultimate output rule number for each preference type is set to be 30 for Table 6, 30 and
        100 for Table 8.
      • The maximum rule number of the rule set (Rule Prune Threshold) R during column gener-
        ation is set to be 100.
    3
        https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/vijeetnigam26/expedia-hotel


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          • The candidate rule set size generated during the column generation iteration is set to be 100
            * searching rule length.
          • The number of percentile thresholds we put on the continuous features to get predicates is
            set to be 30, i.e. a threshold per 3.3%.
          • We search rules up to 3 conjunctions. For each length-1 to length-3 conjunctions we search
            for 10, 50, 100 iterations.

Additional Large-Scale Expedia Hotel Dataset Experiments Moreover, in order to show our
model’s scalability on bigger dataset, we also evaluate our model with 50,000 training instances and
5000 testing instances, containing 15-32 search results

                                                                                 Train accu       Test accu
 Category             Method               Train loss           Test loss
                                                                                   (Top1)          (Top1)
                MNL                     2.9525(±0.134)       2.9578(±0.131)   0.1633(±0.042)   0.1607(±0.042)
 ClassicMix-MNL (Frank-Wolfe)           2.8267(±0.029)       2.8341(±0.028)   0.1883(±0.014)   0.1875(±0.013)
                 NN                     3.1317(±0.015)       3.2699(±0.011)   0.1138(±0.003)   0.0863(±0.003)
               TasteNet                 2.8278(±0.032)       2.8384(±0.025)   0.1877(±0.007)   0.1885(±0.009)
              DeepMNL                   2.7722(±0.022)       2.7833(±0.030)   0.1999(±0.006)   0.2020(±0.007)
 DeepNN
            mixDeepMNL                  2.7453(±0.025)       2.7717(±0.015)   0.2036(±0.004)   0.2035(±0.008)
              RUMNet                    2.7244(±0.009)       2.7532(±0.016)   0.2105(±0.003)   0.2072(±0.002)
             Ours-NM-30                 2.8258(±0.001)       2.8310(±0.002)   0.2015(±0.000)   0.1958(±0.001)
            Ours-NM-100                 2.8014(±0.008)       2.8166(±0.005)   0.2058(±0.002)   0.1997(±0.001)
 Ours*
             Ours-RS-30                 2.8281(±0.003)       2.8328(±0.003)   0.2013(±0.000)   0.1952(±0.001)
             Ours-RS-100                2.7983(±0.002)       2.8165(±0.003)   0.2067(±0.000)   0.1992(±0.002)

Table 8: Choice prediction on larger scale Expedia Hotel dataset. We report Negative log likelihood
(NLL) loss and Top-1 choice prediction accuracy of the training and testing set. We extract 50/100
rules for both types.

In large-scale datasets, our model performs comparably to NN-based models, excelling in-sample
accuracy over the majority of NN-based models. Logic-Logit, with significantly fewer parameters
compared to neural network models, simultaneously demonstrates superior performance and rule-
based interpretability.

E       A DDITIONAL MIMIC-IV E XPERIMENTS
MIMIC-IV4 is a publicly available database sourced from the electronic health record of the Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center (Johnson et al., 2023). Available information includes patient
measurements, orders, diagnoses, procedures, treatments, and deidentified free-text clinical notes.
Sepsis is a leading cause of mortality in the ICU, particularly when it progresses to septic shock.
Septic shocks are critical medical emergencies, and timely recognition and treatment are crucial for
improving survival rates. In the real-world healthcare data experiments on the MIMIC-IV dataset,
we aim to understand how doctors choose the treatments to diagnose.

Patients We select 3000 patients that satisfied the following criteria from the dataset: (1) The pa-
tients are diagnosed with sepsis (Saria, 2018). (2) Patients, if diagnosed with sepsis, the timestamps
of any clinical testing and timestamps of medication administration and corresponding dosage were
not missing.

Vital signs Referred to (Komorowski et al., 2018), we collected 16 vital signs that are highly
related to sepsis from chart events recorded in the ICU. Table 10 shows these vitals with names and
descriptions.

Treatment Suggested by (Komorowski et al., 2018), we extracted 21 treatments associated with
sepsis which are consistent with expert consensus. Based on the distinct clinical characteristics of
these treatments, they can be categorized into the following three groups, which are shown in Table
9. Vasopressor therapy is a fundamental treatment of septic-shock-induced hypotension as it aims
at correcting the vascular tone depression and then improving organ perfusion pressure; Antibiotics
    4
        https://mimic.mit.edu/


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


also should be given within a few hours of the diagnosis of sepsis; Some auxiliary treatments such
as packed red blood cells and invasive ventilation are also necessary in ICU.
Data Preprocessing For each patient, we extract the treatments belonging to the above three cate-
gories, as well as the corresponding treatment start and end times. Then, we select the patient’s vital
features during the treatment. We only record the first vital value. During this period, some vital
values will be lost, so we only keep the most complete records as the processed dataset. Another
problem is label imbalance, so we only keep 14 treatment types with enough records, and if the
number of some treatment types is too large, we will delete some records. Finally, we randomly
selected 3000 records as the training set and 300 records as the test set.


Experiment Settings The hyper parameters of our model is set as below:
     • Overall Convergence Criterion: The NLL loss decreases less than 0.005 after a new prefer-
       ence type is found and proportion is updated.
     • The ultimate output rule number for each preference type is set to be 50.
     • The maximum rule number of the rule set (Rule Prune Threshold) R during column gener-
       ation is set to be 100.
     • The candidate rule set size generated during the column generation iteration is set to be 100
       * searching rule length.
     • The number of percentile thresholds we put on the continuous features to get predicates is
       set to be 20, i.e. a threshold per 5%.
     • We search rules up to 5 conjunctions. For each length-2 to length-5 conjunctions we search
       for 50, 100, 150, 200 iterations.


Sensitive analysis We conduct sensitive analysis for three significant hyper-parameters, ultimate
rule number for each preference type, the maximum conjunction length and rule prune thresh-
old we search up to in the rule searching with MIMIC dataset.

                     0.30        Train Top-1 Acc                              2.35                                  Train NLL
                                 Test Top-1 Acc                                                                     Test NLL
                                                                              2.30
                     0.28
                                                                              2.25
          Accuracy


                     0.26
                                                                        NLL


                                                                              2.20
                     0.24
                                                                              2.15
                     0.22
                                                                              2.10
                            10      20          30       40        50                10   20          30       40          50
                                         Max Rule Number                                       Max Rule Number

                                                    Figure 6: Max Rule Number


                     0.30                                                     2.40                                  Train NLL
                                                                              2.35                                  Test NLL
                     0.25                                                     2.30
          Accuracy


                                                                              2.25
                                                                        NLL


                     0.20                                                     2.20
                                                                              2.15
                     0.15                             Train Top-1 Acc
                                                      Test Top-1 Acc          2.10
                            1        2          3        4          5                1    2           3        4            5
                                         Max Rule Length                                       Max Rule Length

                                                    Figure 7: Max Rule Length



                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                           2.26
                     0.28                                                              Train NLL
                                                                           2.24        Test NLL
                     0.27                                                  2.22
                     0.26                                                  2.20


          Accuracy
                     0.25


                                                                     NLL
                                                                           2.18
                     0.24                                                  2.16
                     0.23                         Train Top-1 Acc          2.14
                     0.22                         Test Top-1 Acc           2.12
                            50    100      150       200      250                 50      100      150       200   250
                                   Rule Prune Threshold                                    Rule Prune Threshold

                                              Figure 8: Rule Prune Threshold

Fig 6 and Fig 7 shows that the model performance improves significantly with the max rule number
and max rule length. Both of these two hyperparameters increase the complexity of each preference
type’s rule set. For algorithmic point of view, increasing the maximum complexity of the ruleset will
enlarger feasible space P for the functional Frank-Wolfe step solving and bring about improvement
for the whole model. Meanwhile increasing the rule set complexity will also bring about additional
computational cost, a trade-off should be made when tuning these hyperparameters. Setting the
ultimate rule number to be 50, Fig8 shows the relationship between the rule prune threshold and
model performance. Setting a larger rule prune threshold than the maximum rule number allows for
a wider tolerance range for newly searched rules, making it easier for promising rules to be learned.
However, if this value is set too high, excessive deletion of redundant rules during the final pruning
phase can result in significant changes in the ruleset, leading to a decline in model performance.
Therefore, it is generally recommended to set the rule prune threshold to 1.5-2 times the maximum
rule number.

                                       Category                              Treatment
                                                                    Epinephrine
                                                                    Phenylephrine
                                                                    Norepinephrine
                                   Vasoconstrictor                  Dobutamine
                                                                    Dopamine
                                                                    Vasopressin
                                                                    Angiotensin II (Giapreza)
                                                                    Vancomycin
                                                                    Caspofungin
                                                                    Cefepime
                                                                    Ceftriaxone
                                       Antibiotic
                                                                    Gentamicin
                                                                    Micafungin
                                                                    Tobramycin
                                                                    Piperacillin/Tazobactam
                                                                    Furosemide (Lasix)
                                                                    Heparin Sodium
                                                                    Invasive Ventilation
                                 Auxiliary Treatment
                                                                    Packed Red Blood Cells
                                                                    IV Immune Globulin (IVIG)
                                                                    Acetaminophen-IV

                     Table 9: Description of the treatment extracted from MIMIC-IV dataset.


                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Item id Abbreviation                Description                                     Normal Range
 220546   WBC                        White blood count                               4, 000 − 10, 000cells/mm3
 225690   Total Bilirubin            Total Bilirubin                                 0.1 - 1.2 mg/dL
 220235   PCO2 (Arterial)            Partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Arterial)   35 - 45 mmHg
 226063   PO2 (Venous)               Partial pressure of oxygen (Venous)             30 - 40 mmHg
 229761   Creatinine (whole blood)   Creatinine (whole blood)                        0.5 - 1.2 mg/dL
 226253   SpO2 Desat Limit           Oxygen saturation (SpO2)                        95% - 100%
 220210   RR                         Respiratory rate                                12 - 20 breaths per minute
 220052   ABPm                       Arterial Blood Pressure mean                    70 - 100 mmHg
 220051   ABPd                       Arterial Blood Pressure diastolic               60 - 80 mmHg
 223762   Temperature C              Temperature Celsius                             36.1 - 37.2
 220045   HR                         Heart rate                                      60 - 100 beats per minute
 220050   ABPs                       Arterial Blood Pressure systolic                90 - 120 mmHg
 227465   PT                         Prothrombin time                                11 - 13.5 seconds
 227467   INR                        International normalized ratio                  0.8 - 1.2
 227466   PTT                        Partial thromboplastin time                     25 - 35 seconds
 227457   Platelet Count             Platelet Count                                  150 - 450 ×109 platelets/L

Table 10: Description of the vital signs extracted from MIMIC-IV dataset. Item id is the ID extracted
from MIMIC-IV tables.


     Drug Name                         Detected Rules
     Norepinephrine                    P T > 12.6 ∧ ABP d ≤ 59.0
                                       P T T > 31.6 ∧ age ≤ 76.0 ∧ ABP d <= 54.0
     Vasopressin                       P CO2(Arterial) > 41.0
                                       IN R > 1.1 ∧ anchora ge ≤ 66.0
     Epinephrine                       RR > 20.0 ∧ W BC <= 6.8 ∧ IN R <= 3.4
                                       ABP s ≤ 77.0
     Furosemide (Lasix)                ABP s > 93.0 ∧ W BC ≤ 14.55
                                       ABP s > 107.0
     Dobutamine                        IN R <= 1.4 ∧ P CO2(Arterial) ≤ 36.0
                                       P CO2(Arterial) <= 51.0 ∧ ABP s <= 89.0
     Dopamine                          P T T > 65
                                       P lateletCount <= 287.0 ∧ P T T > 48.8
     Packed Red Blood Cells            ABP d ≤ 57.0 ∧ ABP m ≤ 56.0
                                       P T > 12.6 ∧ IN R > 1.4 ∧ RR ≤ 32.0
                                       P lateletCount ≤ 95.0 ∧ P T T > 31.6
     Antibiotic                        age ≤ 66.0 ∧ RR ≤ 30.0 ∧ W BC ≤ 20.6
                                       P CO2(Arterial) <= 42.0

                        Table 11: MIMIC Drug Preference Rules Examples


                                                    21
