Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O N THE M ODELING C APABILITIES OF L ARGE L AN -
GUAGE M ODELS FOR S EQUENTIAL D ECISION M AKING

 Martin Klissarov∗                Devon Hjelm           Alexander Toshev        Bogdan Mazoure
 Mila, McGill University          Apple                 Apple                   Apple



                                             A BSTRACT

           Large pretrained models are showing increasingly better performance in reasoning
           and planning tasks across different modalities, opening the possibility to leverage
           them for complex sequential decision making problems. In this paper, we investi-
           gate the capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) for reinforcement learning
           (RL) across a diversity of interactive domains. We evaluate their ability to produce
           decision-making policies, either directly, by generating actions, or indirectly, by
           first generating reward models to train an agent with RL. Our results show that,
           even without task-specific fine-tuning, LLMs excel at reward modeling. In particu-
           lar, crafting rewards through artificial intelligence (AI) feedback yields the most
           generally applicable approach and can enhance performance by improving credit
           assignment and exploration. Finally, in environments with unfamiliar dynamics,
           we explore how fine-tuning LLMs with synthetic data can significantly improve
           their reward modeling capabilities while mitigating catastrophic forgetting, further
           broadening their utility in sequential decision-making tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) are generative models of natural language that can produce accurate
general and domain-specific knowledge (Singhal et al., 2022; Imani et al., 2023; Manigrasso et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024a), reason over long textual contexts (Reid et al., 2024), and generalize zero-
shot (Kojima et al., 2022). These capabilities suggest that LLMs might be well-suited for complex
sequential decision-making problems, such as in embodied settings where an agent acts in an
environment. Recent research has begun exploring this potential, investigating how LLMs can serve
as sources of intrinsic motivation (Wang et al., 2024; Klissarov et al., 2024), demonstrating world
modeling capabilities (Lin et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b), and for acting and/or planning directly in
an environment (Wang et al., 2023; Padalkar et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024).
However, as the predominant paradigm for training LLMs is not inherently aligned with the challenges
of sequential decision-making problems, such as active exploration, it is not obvious how to best
bridge their capabilities to tackle such challenges in a general manner. We study this problem through
the lens of reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018), which formalizes how an agent
interacts with an environment, receiving scalar rewards for each of its actions over a trajectory. We
examine the capabilities of LLMs to solve RL tasks by comparing how they model policies 1) directly
by generating action tokens, to 2) indirectly through a reward model derived from the LLM to be
used within an RL algorithm. We perform a comprehensive evaluation on a diverse set of domains,
including MiniWob (Liu et al., 2018), NetHack (Küttler et al., 2020), and Wordle (Lokshtanov &
Subercaseaux, 2022), and MetaWorld (Yu et al., 2019). The environments we study present a variety
of challenges, such as different action space granularities, observation modalities ranging from natural
language to pixel data, and varying horizon lengths.
We first consider the off-the-shelf capabilities of LLMs for decision-making without updating them
through additional gradient updates coming from the RL task. We find that indirectly modeling
policies by first extracting knowledge from LLMs in the form of a Bradley-Terry model (Bradley &
Terry, 1952; Christiano et al., 2017) provides the best and most consistent performance across the
environments we study. We empirically analyze the various benefits, and limitations, provided by
    *
        Work done during an Apple internship. Correspondence to: martin.klissarov@mail.mcgill.ca.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


this approach, showing that it improves on long-standing challenges in RL problems, such as credit
assignment and exploration.
Finally, while LLMs possess knowledge useful for many decision making tasks of interest, domains
with complex or unfamiliar dynamics can significantly restrict their broader utility. We explore
how fine-tuning an LLM with domain-specific data can bridge this knowledge gap and study the
effect of this procedure on the LLM’s previous knowledge, as measured through success on datasets
like POPE (Li et al., 2023b), GQA (Hudson & Manning, 2019), AI2D (Kembhavi et al., 2016) and
MMMU (Yue et al., 2024). Our investigation reveals that fine-tuning for indirect policy modeling
mitigates catastrophic forgetting more effectively than direct policy modeling, offering a broadly
applicable strategy for leveraging LLMs across diverse sequential decision-making tasks.

2     U SING L ANGUAGE M ODELS TO S OLVE RL TASKS

We first introduce the types of RL problems as well as formalize the methodologies for using LLMs
for RL tasks used in this work.

Reinforcement Learning. An RL task can be defined through a Markov Decision Process (MDP,
Puterman, 2014), which is composed of a state space S, an action space A, a transition function
p : S × A → ∆(S) which describes the forward dynamics of the system, a reward function
r : S × A → R and a discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1]. Since it is often the case that the state is only
partially observable, we also assume the environment emits an observation ot ∼ pO : S → ∆(O)
from observation space O. A policy, or actor, is a probability distribution π : S → ∆(A) which
describes the action to be taken at every step. The objective of a rational actor is to maximize the
expected cumulative rewards over horizon H > 0,
                                  H
                                  X
                         max E[         γ t r(st , π(st ))|s0 ] = max Es0 [V π (s0 )],               (1)
                          π                                         π
                                  t=0


where the value function, V π (s), represents the expected discounted sum of rewards over the entire
trajectory, re-weighted by the environment’s dynamics model, p, and the actor’s policy, π.

Large Language Models. An LLM is a generative model of discrete random variables (i.e. tokens)
conditioned on a history (i.e. context). The LLM models the data distribution autoregressively:
                                                  t
                                                  Y
                        p(xt+1 |x1 , .., xt ) =           p(xt′ |x<t′ ) = LLM(x<t , l)               (2)
                                                  t′ =1

where x ∈ X are token variables taken from a valid vocabulary. The suitability of LLMs for
solving RL tasks without additional fine-tuning primarily hinges on the hypothesis that LLMs contain
information – i.e., knowledge – about the underlying MDP, for instance, through the policy or reward
function. How that information is extracted depends on the data the LLM was trained on, the ability
of the practitioner to properly prompt the model and interpret its responses to solve decision-making
tasks.

2.1   P ROMPTING

In this section, we describe the inputs, or prompts, to the LLM used in this work which allow to
change the LLM’s output distribution to be useful for solving RL tasks. All prompts in this work
use 1) task specification using natural language as input to provide information about the MDP to
the LLM as context and 2) episode history in order to address issues of partial-observability in some
environments (similar to the Act-only baseline prompt found in Yao et al., 2022). We additionally
use the following set of techniques,

       • Chain of Thought. By prompting the LLM to provide a step-by-step reasoning process for
         its output, rather than just the final answer, we can help surface its internal decision-making
         and improve the resulting performance (Wei et al., 2022).


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • In-Context Learning. To enhance the LLM’s ability to solve the task, example solutions
         (e.g., from expert policies) are provided for in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020), where
         solutions contain sequences of a combination of states, actions, and rewards.
       • Self-Refinement. To further refine its output, the LLM is prompted to provide recursive
         criticism and improvement from its generated outputs. This general strategy knows many
         variants, such as feedback from an environment (Yao et al., 2022), self-critique (Zelikman
         et al., 2022), or self-reflection (Shinn et al., 2023). In this work, we use Recursive Criticism
         and Improvement (RCI, Kim et al., 2024) for its state-of-the-art performance on web agent
         domains and general applicability. In its original form, the LLM is given a task description
         and generates a high-level plan. This plan is used along with the task description and current
         state to refine an action so that it is grounded in the current observation and the action space.

2.2   P OLICY M ODELING U SING LLM S

As shown in Equation 1, the goal of a decision making agent is to learn a high performing policy π.
This can be done either by maximizing the expected cumulative rewards and directly modeling the
policy parameters (Sutton et al., 1999; Kakade & Langford, 2002). Equivalently, this can be done
indirectly by first modeling the parameters of the value function and applying a greedy operator,
such as in Q-Learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992). A similar separation between direct and indirect
approaches can be useful to study the capabilities of LLMs to model RL policies.

Direct Policy Modeling. The most straightforward way to obtain a policy using LLMs is for the
LLM to generate tokens that will be directly interpreted as actions from the environment, a ∈ A (Yao
et al., 2022; Shinn et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024). To ensure the outputted actions adhere to the
environment’s action set, the LLM output tokens can be projected back onto A using projection
operator proj(·, A) (e.g., see Huang et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2024, for examples of projection
operators). A variety of prompting techniques can be combined to increase the ability of the LLM to
act, without task-specific fine-tuning, as a policy, which we detail in Section 2.1. This direct policy
method will be referred to in our experiments as LLM Policy.

Indirect Policy Modeling. On the other hand, we can prompt the LLM to output tokens representing
intermediate quantities that will then be used to learn a policy. For example, one can model the
forward dynamics of the environment for planning (Liu et al., 2024b) or an affordance model for
action selection (Mullen Jr & Manocha, 2024).
In this work, we focus on the case where these intermediate quantities will be used to generate rewards
– i.e., a reward model – which will then be maximized by an off-the-shelf RL policy. In Section 2.3,
we enumerate the different approaches for modeling reward functions with LLMs covered in our
work. It is important to note that there exists many more ways in which we could indirectly model
the policy. In Appendix A.4, we present in detail these possibilities and, in Figure 2b, provide initial
investigations that showcase their potential and limitations.
In direct policy modeling experiments (LLM Policy), we found combining all of the prompting
techniques in Section 2.1 to work the best, while for indirect modeling methods through reward
we relied only on chain-of-thought prompting. Additional details, such specific prompt details and
ablations on these choices are presented in the Appendix A.3.

2.3   I NDIRECTLY M ODELING P OLICIES THROUGH R EWARD M ODELS

We consider a diversity of methods for modeling reward functions using LLMs, with a particular
attention to methods that are applicable to a diversity of environments and modalities. We study the
following set,

       • Direct Scalar. (Kwon et al., 2023) The LLM generates tokens that directly encode the
         reward (e.g., as a float or integer) given an observation (or a sequence of observations and
         actions). This reward is then given to the RL agent.
       • AI Feedback (Lee et al., 2023; Klissarov et al., 2024)). Ask the LLM to express a
         preference y = {1, 2, ∅} between two observations, o1 and o2 , for the one showing the
         most progress towards a certain goal, or no preference if both observations are equally


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         good. These labels can then be collected as a dataset of observation-preference tuples
                    (i) (i)
         Dpref = {(o1 , o2 , y (i) )}M
                                     i=1 , which are then used to train a reward function modeled as,

               rθ = arg min E(o1 ,o2 ,y)∼Dpref I[y = 1] log Pθ [o1 ≻ o2 ] + I[y = 2]Pθ [o2 ≻ o1 ]
                        θ
                                                                                                   (3)
                                                    1
                                                 + I[y = ∅] log Pθ [o1 ≻ o2 ]P [o2 ≻ o1 ]
                                                    2
                                      rθ (o1 )
        where Pθ [o1 ≻ o2 ] = erθ (oe1 ) +erθ (o2 ) the probability of preferring an observation to another,
        referred to as the Bradley-Terry model for preference learning (Bradley & Terry, 1952). The
        minimization of this equation is commonly done through binary cross-entropy.
      • Reward as Code (Xie et al. (2023),Yu et al. (2023); Ma et al. (2023)). Prompt the LLM
        to write code that will take as input a subset of symbolic features from the environment
        observations and will produce a scalar output representing the reward. The code defining the
        reward function is then updated throughout environment interactions as in Li et al. (2023a).
        When symbolic features are not available, these are constructed as in Venuto et al. (2024).
      • Embedding-based (Rocamonde et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b). Instead
        of querying language tokens from the LLM, we can instead, for a given input, leverage
        the information encoded in its latent represention, or embeddings. These embeddings are
        used to calculate the cosine similarity with respect to the embeddings of natural language
        specification of a goal or a behaviour. The resulting similarity value is given as a reward to
        the agent.

Additional details, such specific prompts, are presented in the Appendix A.2.

3   P ERFORMANCE OF I NDIRECT AND D IRECT P OLICY M ODELS


Figure 1: AI feedback has the highest performance across different reward models derived from
tested LLMs. AI feedback, which is a preference-based method for deriving a reward model from an
LLM, generally outperforms other methods.

Due to fundamentally different challenges between direct and indirect policy modeling approaches,
conducting a fair comparison requires care. For example, using the LLM directly as a policy requires
grounding its outputs in the action space defined by the environment (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2022). As the action space can vary significantly between environments and attempting to solve this
problem adds additional algorithm- or domain-specific complexities (e.g. by crafting skills, see (Ahn
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023)), we fix our experimental setting to the following

     1. Atomic actions. We only study approaches which can directly interface with the action
        space supported in the environment. In other words, the action space is at least a subspace
        of the space of language generated by the LLM. This allows for a more direct comparison
        across a variety of domains and study the relationship between an LLM’s knowledge and
        the fixed action space defined by the environment.
     2. No finetuning. In most of the paper we assume that LLMs are used without any gradient
        updates, i.e. without fine-tuning from the RL task, and evaluate their off-the-shelf capabilities.
        In Section 5, we perform a preliminary study on the trade-offs between fine-tuning for direct
        and indirect policy modeling.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       AI Feedback
                         100                                                                                           100
                                                                       LLM Policy


                                                                                          Binary Prediction Accuracy
Normalized Performance
                                                                                                                                                          Random Guess Performance
                          80                                                                                            90                                Action Prediction
                                                                                                                                                          Observation Prediction
                          60
                                                                                                                        80


                                                                                                                        70
                          40


                                                                                                                        60
                          20

                                                                                                                        50
                           0
                               MiniWob-Hard   Wordle         NetHack      MetaWorld                                     40
                                                                                                                             MiniWob-Hard   Wordle     NetHack        MetaWorld
                                               Action Granularity
                                                                                                                                                 (b)
                                                       (a)

Figure 2: a) Building a reward model more-readily solves RL tasks than using an LLM as an
actor. LLM-policy only performs well in domains with coarse-grained actions while LLM feedback
presents strong performance across the entire range of action granularities. b) LLMs have unreliable
zero-shot understanding of the environment dynamics. While LLMs can be used to craft useful
reward models, their failure as direct policies may be explained by their poor understanding of the
action space and the transition function.


We investigate four separate domains, where each domain aims to highlight a specific capability of
LLMs: 1) MiniWob-Hard, a subset of hard tasks from the full MiniWob suite, tests web interaction
in observation/action spaces close to natural language, 2) Wordle measures reasoning and planning
capabilities, 3) NetHack presents the difficulty of exploring open-ended environments under partial
observability, long horizons and procedural scenarios, and 4) MetaWorld assesses the ability to
control low-level, high-frequency actions in continuous space. We provide a detailed description of
each domain in Appendix A.1.
Direct policy modeling is done by querying the closed source GPT-4o model, whereas indirect policy
modeling is done through the open source models of Llama 3 (Dubey et al., 2024), when environment
observations consist of text, and PaliGemma (Beyer et al., 2024), when environment observation
consist of pixel images. In the Appendix A.11, we investigate a larger set of LLMs, including Claude
3.5, Gemini Pro 1.5, Llama 3.2-V and Qwen 2.5 (Qwen Team, 2024). All results are averaged over
10 seeds with error bars indicating the standard error.

Indirect policy modeling through rewards. We first present a comparison of the various indirect
policy modeling approaches discussed in Section 2.3. In these experiments, the LLM generates a
reward function which will be given to a RL agent for optimization, without access to any rewards
coming from the environment. When learning policies through RL we do not perform any hyper-
parameter search and simply borrow the existing empirical setup for each domain, as detailed in
Appendix A.1.
In Figure 1, we present the performance across domains as measured by the average success rate on
all domains, except for NetHack, where performance (the in-game score) is normalized by the highest
recorded value. Results show that AI feedback is the only method that successfully crafts rewards
across all environments and modalities . On easier domains such as MiniWob-Hard, which consists of
short episodes and limited scope of variations, the Direct Scalar method performs nearly as well as AI
feedback. However, the disparity between methods is much more pronounced on harder, open-ended
tasks such as NetHack. Out of all the methods, Embedding-based leads to the lowest performance.
Finally, the effectiveness of Reward as Code appears to be highly contingent on the availability of
symbolic features for code processing. In Appendix A.5, we further examine the assumptions—such
as access to functional knowledge of the environment—under which Reward as Code can achieve
performance comparable to AI feedback.

Direct vs indirect policy modeling. We now compare the direct policy modeling method, LLM
Policy, to the best performing indirect modeling method, AI feedback, reporting performance across
the same set of domains. Results in Figure 2a show that, despite the more complex prompting
    In Appendix A.6, we verify that AI feedback yields policies with performance on par with those optimized
using human-designed environment rewards.


                                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


strategies and the use of a more capable closed source model, LLM Policy is unable to perform well
in most environments, with the exception of MiniWob-Hard, where the performance is on-par with
AI feedback. Given that the reward modeling baseline proceeds to fine-tuning the RL policy, we
may wonder if, for a similar amount of compute and environment samples, what performance could
the LLM Policy achieve by fine-tuning the LLM. In Appendix A.13, we also study this question,
revealing that reward modeling is significantly more efficient. In Figure 15 of Appendix A.12, we
additionally investigate whether the reward obtained by the AI feedback method can be given to the
LLM Policy as context, in order to improve the direct modeling performance. Results indicate that
this additional information does not significantly change the performance.
A question emerging from these results is: what factors cause this significant performance disparity
between direct and indirect policy models? One possible explanation is that LLMs, when directly
queried for actions in an unfamiliar environment, may struggle to understand its dynamics (e.g., the
transition function and action space). To test this hypothesis, we conduct the following experiment.
We prompt the LLM to select between 1) a pair of candidate next observations given the current
observation and action (probing knowledge of p(ot+1 |at , o≤t )), or 2) a pair of candidate actions
given the next observation and current observation (probing knowledge of p(at |ot+1 , o≤t )). In each
case, the pair contains the ground-truth and random sample. In this experiment, a 50% accuracy
corresponds to a random guess.
Results presented in Figure 2b show that the LLM performs relatively poorly on both of these tasks,
indicating limited understanding of both the action space and the environment dynamics. This can
potentially explain the limited performance of the LLM Policy approach on MiniWob-Hard, NetHack,
and MetaWorld, while results on Wordle suggest that additional contributing factors are at play.

4                  A NALYSIS OF AI F EEDBACK FOR RL

Our results so far suggest that, without additional fine-tuning, indirectly modeling policies by
constructing reward functions through AI feedback is the most effective approach across the range
of environments and modalities we studied. In this section, we examine how rewards shaped by
this method can assist RL agents in addressing core decision-making challenges, such as credit
assignment and exploration. Through this analysis, we also emphasize the ways in which reward
misspecification can unintentionally arise and severely impair performance.


                         10.0                                                                 DoorKey-8x8
                                                                               1.0
    Reward Model Value


                          7.5
                                                                               0.8
                          5.0
                                                                      Return


                                                                               0.6
                          2.5
                                                                               0.4
                          0.0

                          2.5                                                  0.2


                          5.0                                                  0.0
                                                                                     0.0     0.5    1.0      1.5
                          7.5                                                                                      1e7
                                                                                               Transitions
                                0   5    10     15     20   25   30
                                                                                     AI Feedback    Environment Reward
                                               Time Step

Figure 3: Rewards learned through AI Feedback distribute rewards to key timesteps. By doing
so, the problem of credit assignment, or learning from delayed rewards, is significantly reduced.
Such distribution effectively shortens the horizon over which the RL algorithm must propagate credit
through its update rule.


4.1                      C REDIT A SSIGNMENT

Setting aside performance of the direct policy method, we now turn our attention to why reward
modeling with AI feedback is performing well. AI feedback-based rewards depend on the prompt


                                                            6
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 used to capture preferences. In the experiments conducted so far, these prompts were designed
 to elicit preferences by emphasizing states that contribute to task progress (see prompts Appendix
 A.2). Additionally, a key aspect of our methodology involved presenting the LLM with observations
 sampled randomly within trajectories. This enabled querying preference for any observation in the
 environment, rather limiting the focus to final states - a distinction also known as process-based and
 outcome-based reward models (Uesato et al., 2023; Lightman et al., 2023). What are the resulting
 characteristics of the reward model under such choices?

 Qualitative experiment In Figure 3, we present the output of the AI feedback-based reward model
 over each timestep of an episode within a simple grid world environment. This task includes an agent,
 a key, a door, and a goal (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023). We notice that this reward model naturally
 captures the fact that picking up the key, as well as opening the locked door, are important steps
 towards the goal. By propagating credit over such key moments in a trajectory, the LLM effectively
 shortens the horizon over which the RL algorithm must assign credit through temporal difference
 learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018). This is manifested in Figure 3 where the agent learning through
 AI feedback reaches a high success rate in a fraction of the timesteps required by a similar agent
 learning from the environment feedback (which in this case is sparse reward of +1 for reaching the
 goal). The dense reward resulting from LLM feedback can be seen as a form of reward redistribution
 (Arjona-Medina et al., 2018), which is an established method for improving credit assignment.
          1.0                                                                 0.6                                                 0.8
                                                                                                     Corr(rAIF, renv)                     Corr(rAIF, renv)
                                                                                                     Corr(rAIF, v )               0.7     Corr(rAIF, v )
          0.8                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                Correlation


                                                                              0.4
Correlation


                                                                                                                        Correlation
          0.6                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                              0.3                                                 0.4
          0.4
                                                                              0.2                                                 0.3
          0.2                                                                 0.1                                                 0.2
                                             Corr(rAIF, renv)                 0.0
          0.0                                Corr(rAIF, v )                                                                       0.1
                0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                   0.1 0M   100M 300M 500M 700M 900M                   0.0 0    100k      200k    300k   400k   500k
                 Policy degree of optimality                                             Training Steps                                         Training Steps
                          (a) Wordle                                                   (b) NetHack                                         (c) MetaWorld

  Figure 4: LLM preferences correlate with value function preferences. The correlation between
  Bradley-Terry models trained from frozen LLM state preferences and value function preferences
  increases as the online policy improves in 3 different domains.


 Quantitative experiment In Figure 4, we present the correlation between the reward model derived
 from AI feedback and the value function of an RL agent across various levels of policy optimality.
 We observe that AI feedback generates reward functions with a stronger correlation to value functions
 obtained later in the training process compared to those from earlier stages. Additionally, this
 correlation is higher than that observed with the environment reward. In the Wordle game, we
 generate, in code, a near-optimal policy and estimate its value function using Monte Carlo. We then
 compare it to the LLM-derived reward function find an almost perfect correlation. These findings
 suggest that the reward models derived from AI feedback inherently encode aspects of high-quality
 value functions, which, when used as rewards for the RL agent, can substantially simplify the credit
 assignment process. In Appendix A.7, we provide additional insights from the lens of heuristic-guided
 reinforcement learning (Cheng et al., 2021).

  4.2             E XPLORATION

 In the previous section, we investigated how our standard prompting strategy can ease the problem
 of credit assignment in downstream RL tasks. This outcome stemmed from the specific preferences
 we requested from the LLM, that is, promoting task progress. However, to address different RL
 objectives, in particular the one of exploration, we may need to elicit alternative preferences.
  Previously, Klissarov et al. (2024) employed AI feedback to design an effective reward function for
  an agent operating in the open-ended environment of NetHack. However, before applying this reward
  to the RL agent, the authors implemented the following transformation:
                                                                              r(ot ) ∝ rAIF (ot )/N (ot )β ,                                                                      (4)


                                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where rAIF is the reward model obtained from AI feedback, N (ot ) denotes the number of times
a particular observation ot was seen in an episode, and β is a positive real-valued coefficient set
to 3. The counting term was added to encourage exploration (Henaff et al., 2022), which is a key
difficulty in NetHack. However, instantiating such a counting function proves difficult in many
practical settings (Bellemare et al., 2016). Given the flexibility of natural language, can we alleviate
the need for such a term and integrate the notion of exploration in the prompt itself?
In Figure 5, we demonstrate that this is indeed possible,                                                                  Score
                                                                                        1.0
leading to performance comparable when using count-                                                                        Scout


                                                               Normalized Performance
based exploration by directly modifying the prompt used                                                                    Dungeon Level
                                                                                        0.8

for preference elicitation. Specifically, when querying
                                                                                        0.6
the LLM for preferences, we present it with a pair of
sequences of observations (rather than a single observa-                                0.4

tion) which provides crucial context. The prompt was also
                                                                                        0.2
modified to steer the LLM towards avoiding low entropy
sequences, i.e. sequences with repetitions (see Appendix                                0.0
                                                                                              Online Preferences &   Offline Preferences &
A.2).                                                                                         Non-Markovian Model      Markovian Model

Our findings reveal two potential failure modes: the of-
                                                              Figure 5: By changing the prompt,
fline nature of the preference elicitation method and the
                                                              LLMs can be steered to provide feed-
assumption of a Markovian reward model. Previous re-
                                                              back that promotes exploration on
search has demonstrated that online preference querying
                                                              NetHack. Additionally, to avoid degen-
can outperform offline methods when aligning LLMs (Bai
                                                              erate solutions, preferences should be
et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023). In our experiments,
                                                              elicited in an online fashion and the re-
offline elicitation led to a performance collapse, likely due
                                                              ward function be non-Markovian.
to frequent RL policy updates during online learning. Ad-
ditionally, assuming a Markov reward model—where the current observation fully determines the
reward—can lead to an equally poor performance, as complex tasks often require historical context
beyond immediate observations (see Appendix A.8 for a full breakdown).



5    B EYOND Z ERO -S HOT R EWARD M ODELING

So far, we have explored the ability of LLMs to model policies, directly and indirectly, without any
fine-tuning. However, in many cases the prior knowledge encoded in LLM might not contain the
necessary information to do so successfully. In such instances, fine-tuning becomes an effective
method for incorporating task-specific knowledge into the model.
We consider the sweep-into task from MetaWorld, where AI feedback rewards lead to a success rate
of only 15%. When measuring the perplexity score of the PaliGemma model on captions describing
the pixel observations from the task, we obtain a value of 16.03. Both of these results indicate poor
understanding and the necessity to adapt the model.
We therefore fine-tune PaliGemma on image-caption pairs annotated by GPT-4o and trained the
model to predict the caption for a given image. Figure 6a shows significant gains in downstream RL
performance after only a few fine-tuning epochs and as few as approximately 100 image-caption pairs.
Moreover, Figure 6a shows how this procedure only marginally decreases performance of the LLM
on the standard multi-modal reasoning benchmarks, such as POPE (Li et al., 2023b), GQA (Hudson
& Manning, 2019), AI2D (Kembhavi et al., 2016) and MMMU (Yue et al., 2024). Surprisingly,
performance on the AI2D benchmark improves as the number of RL-specific fine-tuning epochs
increases.
We contrast these findings with Figure 6b, where we fine-tune PaliGemma with behaviour cloning on
expert data on the same MetaWorld task. Similarly to RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023), we overwrite the
least frequent tokens with residual VQ-VAE codebooks (Szot et al., 2024). In this case, any significant
increase of RL performance comes at the cost of catastrophically forgetting all previous knowledge.
These results hint at an important trade-off: if preserving prior language reasoning knowledge is
important, fine-tuning for AI feedback offers a viable approach. However, if maximizing downstream
RL performance is the sole objective, directly fine-tuning for action selection can be more effective.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       0.88
                    POPE vs RL Performance                                    0.630
                                                                                            GQA vs RL Performance                                    0.42
                                                                                                                                                                  AI2D vs RL Performance                               0.280
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MMMU vs RL Performance
                                                                              0.625                                                                                                                                    0.275
       0.87                                                                                                                                          0.41
                                                                              0.620                                                                                                                                    0.270

       0.86                                                                   0.615                                                                  0.40                                                              0.265


                                                                                                                                                                                                                MMMU
POPE


                                                                        GQA


                                                                                                                                              AI2D
                                                                              0.610                                                                                                                                    0.260
       0.85                                                                   0.605                                                                  0.39                                                              0.255

                                                                              0.600                                                                                                                                    0.250
       0.84                                                                                                                                          0.38
                                                                              0.595                                                                                                                                    0.245

       0.83                                                                   0.590                                                                  0.37                                                              0.240
                     0.2         0.3    0.4   0.5    0.6         0.7                        0.2     0.3     0.4     0.5     0.6         0.7                       0.2     0.3   0.4   0.5     0.6         0.7                        0.2    0.3   0.4   0.5     0.6         0.7
                             RL Performance                                                         RL Performance                                                       RL Performance                                                     RL Performance
                                                                               Off-the-shelf                               1 Epoch                                2 Epochs                      10 Epochs

                                                                                                          (a) Fine-tuning for AI feedback
               POPE vs RL Performance                                                       GQA vs RL Performance                                    0.40
                                                                                                                                                              AI2D vs RL Performance                                           MMMU vs RL Performance
                                                                               0.6
       0.8                                                                                                                                           0.35
                                                                               0.5                                                                   0.30                                                              0.26
       0.6
                                                                               0.4                                                                   0.25


                                                                                                                                                                                                                MMMU
POPE


                                                                         GQA


                                                                                                                                              AI2D
       0.4                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                                     0.20                                                              0.25
                                                                                                                                                     0.15
                                                                               0.2
       0.2                                                                                                                                           0.10                                                              0.24
                                                                               0.1                                                                   0.05
       0.0                                                                     0.0                                                                   0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.23
              0.0          0.2         0.4     0.6         0.8                        0.0         0.2      0.4       0.6          0.8                       0.0         0.2     0.4     0.6         0.8                        0.0         0.2    0.4     0.6         0.8
                            RL Performance                                                         RL Performance                                                        RL Performance                                                     RL Performance
                                                                       Off-the-shelf                              2000 Epochs                                 4000 Epochs                                 6000 Epochs

                                                                                            (b) Fine-tuning for direct policy modeling

Figure 6: Fine-tuning LLMs for AI feedback better preserves their prior knowledge. LLMs fine-
tuned for AI feedback in (a) retain a higher portion of their original language reasoning knowledge
than those fine-tuned for direct action selection in (b).


6              R ELATED W ORKS
Large language models (LLMs) require additional adaptation for general-use language tasks (Chris-
tiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Mialon et al., 2023). Without additional
context and/or fine-tuning, LLMs can generate misleading, harmful, or even nonsensical answers to
queries or conversations with humans (Bai et al., 2022). To modify their behavior, it is necessary
to tune their prompts and/or fine-tune their outputs to ensure their output is desirable w.r.t. some
set of linguistic tasks before deployment. This at least if not more true in embodied settings, where
real-world actions can have physical consequences, and methodologies for modifying LLM behavior
in embodied settings more-or-less align with efforts in the language space.

Prompt tuning Arguably the most common theme among techniques that modify LLM behavior
in general is to change the prompt such that the distribution of LLM outputs better-fits a given
desiderata on behavior. Prompt-engineering can greatly align or calibrate an LLM, pretrained or
no, to desired beneficial behavior (Christiano et al., 2017; Glaese et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022), or
even expose harmful or other unexpected behaviors. Chain-of-thought (CoT, Wei et al., 2022) is
an in-context method to either few-shot or zero-shot (Kojima et al., 2022) adjust an LLM’s outputs
to generate more correct responses to question-and-answering tasks. Further modifications to the
prompt such as providing feedback from an environment (Yao et al., 2022), self-critique (Zelikman
et al., 2022), or self-reflection (Shinn et al., 2023) can improve LLM performance in language as well
as tasks that have an environment. The biggest promise of in-context-based methods in RL is that
somewhere within the LLM’s conditional distribution is the optimal policy for any given task (Brohan
et al., 2023; Szot et al., 2023), an accurate world-explicit model (Lin et al., 2024), and/or a useful
reward-model (Klissarov et al., 2024). For example, Sun et al. (2023) has shown strong results
on text-based domains such as web agents by using LLMs as policies. Other approaches combine
different quantities from the RL problem within the same algorithm, for example by providing LLM
rewards/critiques as context to an LLM acting as a policy (Zhou et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024c). LLMs
have also been shown to be particularly good at devising high-level plans that will guide an agent
acting in the environment (Nottingham et al., 2023).
Querying model for feedback Another hypothesis is that LLMs contain knowledge relevant to tasks,
and this knowledge can be extracted (Xu et al., 2024) in a way to train a policy that has desirable


                                                                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


behavior (Huang et al., 2022). Kwon et al. (2023) first studies the possibility of querying an LLM
to design reward functions. In their method, the LLM is given a task description, examples and an
objective specified by a user, and is used to outputs text that is mapped to a binary value. Their
results show that their approach is significantly more sample efficient compared to a supervised
learning approach. The most successful reward modeling method in our paper is based on RL from
AI Feedback (RLAIF Bai et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023), a scalable method akin to but without the
practical issues that come paired with RL from Human Feedback (RLHF Christiano et al., 2017), the
goal of which is to fine-tune an existing LLM to be more specific, accurate, innocuous, etc. RLAIF
trains a reward model on a dataset collected from an LLM’s preferences given a dataset of language
responses from an LLM and a given set of queries, and this reward model is used to train a policy
using RL, for example using PPO. This process of extracting knowledge using preference data can
also be directly used to train a policy without a reward model, as in Direct Preference Optimization
(Rafailov et al., 2024). A related line of work studies the possibility of LLMs crafting their own
rewards to improve their capabilities. Yuan et al. (2024) leverage DPO to improve an LLM’s ability
to for instruction following. Investigating this idea within the domain of sequential decision making
is particularly promising.


7   D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we explored two distinct approaches to leveraging LLMs for solving RL tasks: 1)
directly, by modeling policies and 2) indirectly, by modeling rewards to be leveraged within a policy
learning algorithm. Our results indicate that, without task-specific fine-tuning, current LLMs only
show limited decision-making capabilities when directly generating actions. However, despite this
limitation, LLMs are capable zero-shot reward modelers. In particular, when eliciting preferences
to define rewards through the Bradley-Terry model, LLMs show strong performance across a wide
range of domains presenting various challenges.
In cases where an LLM’s prior knowledge is not enough to obtain useful reward functions, we also
investigated fine-tuning with task-specific data to bridge this gap. Notably, fine-tuning to enhance
reward modeling capabilities helps mitigate catastrophic forgetting, which is a crucial consideration
for preserving the LLM’s general-purpose abilities Maintaining these capabilities is essential for
broad applicability to sequential decision-making tasks, including out-of-distribution tasks, and for
supporting continued natural language interaction with users.
The reward modeling capabilities presented in this work offer potential solutions to challenges in
RL. First and foremost, LLM-derived reward models alleviate the need for human-designed reward
functions, which are often complex and costly to develop. Second, our empirical analysis reveals
that AI-feedback based rewards produce dense functions which correlate positively with high-quality
value functions. Such reward functions can significantly reduce the difficulty of assigning credit
by redistributing rewards across different steps within a trajectory. Finally, distilling knowledge
from LLMs into reward models opens new possibilities for applying RL in environments where
simulators or symbolic features are unavailable—such as embodied AI agents interacting with humans.
Additionally, when dealing with real-world scenarios, we may be concerned by the speed at which
a model may react to its environment. Direct policy modeling implies that the LLM is executed
in the environment, which might limit the frequency with which it can queried. For example, the
report from Black et al. (2024) emphasizes the necessity of using special techniques such as action
chunking to achieve a 50 Hz control frequency. In contrast, indirect policy modeling can distill an
LLM’s knowledge into a smaller neural network, which would be queried much faster.
Some notable limitations and caveats exist. It is possible that by using LLM feedback to design
reward functions, we may obtain contradictory and inconsistent preferences, simply by virtue of
LLMs having an imperfect understanding of the task at hand. In fact, we believe this is the main
reason why, without fine-tuning, the PaliGemma model produces some unsuccessful RL policies
on MetaWorld, as seen in Figure 6. If a particular task requires detecting subtle, incremental
progress, it is entirely possible that the LLM might miss key milestones. Additionally, interacting
with LLMs through natural language requires experimenting with various prompting techniques and
specifications. However, this flexibility also enables the shaping of reward functions to incorporate
valuable strategies (Knox et al., 2013), such as promoting exploration, which can further enhance the
performance of RL agents.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, and Byron David et al.
 Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot
 Learning, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247939706.

Anonymous. Placeholder title, 2024. Under review.

José Antonio Arjona-Medina, Michael Gillhofer, Michael Widrich, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp
  Hochreiter. Rudder: Return decomposition for delayed rewards. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49320673.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
  Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
  from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.

Marc G. Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Rémi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 2016. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8310565.

Lucas Beyer, Andreas Steiner, André Susano Pinto, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiao Wang, Daniel M.
  Salz, Maxim Neumann, Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin, Michael Tschannen, Emanuele Bugliarello,
  Thomas Unterthiner, Daniel Keysers, Skanda Koppula, Fangyu Liu, Adam Grycner, Alexey A.
  Gritsenko, Neil Houlsby, Manoj Kumar, Keran Rong, Julian Martin Eisenschlos, Rishabh Kabra,
  Matthias Bauer, Matko Bovsnjak, Xi Chen, Matthias Minderer, Paul Voigtlaender, Ioana Bica,
  Ivana Balazevic, Joan Puigcerver, Pinelopi Papalampidi, Olivier J. Hénaff, Xi Xiong, Radu Soricut,
  Jeremiah Harmsen, and Xiao-Qi Zhai. Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer. 2024. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271088378.

Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai,
  Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey
  Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, James
  Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0 : A vision-language-
  action flow model for general robot control, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.24164.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39:324, 1952. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:125209808.

Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, and Krzysztof Choro-
  manski et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818.

Ethan Brooks, Logan Walls, Richard L Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Large language models can
  implement policy iteration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma teusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. ArXiv, abs/2005.14165, 2020. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:218971783.

Ching-An Cheng, Andrey Kolobov, and Adith Swaminathan. Heuristic-guided reinforcement learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:13550–13563, 2021.

Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo de Lazcano, Lucas Willems, Salem
 Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld: Modular &
 customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. CoRR, abs/2306.13831,
 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-
  rectional transformers for language understanding. In North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  52967399.
Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, P. Abbeel, Abhishek Gupta,
  and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language models. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:256846700.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, and Ahmad Al-Dahle et al.
 The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Tr˛ebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Maribeth
 Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, et al. Improving alignment of dialogue
 agents via targeted human judgements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.
Mikael Henaff, Roberta Raileanu, Minqi Jiang, and Tim Rocktäschel. Exploration via elliptical
 episodic bonuses. NeurIPS, 2022.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International conference on
 machine learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022.
Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6700–6709, 2019.
Shima Imani, Liang Du, and Harsh Shrivastava. Mathprompter: Mathematical reasoning using large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05398, 2023.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 267–274, 2002.
Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mike Salvato, Eric Kolve, Minjoon Seo, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi.
  A diagram is worth a dozen images. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference,
 Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14, pp. 235–251.
  Springer, 2016.
Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Martin Klissarov, Pierluca D’Oro, Shagun Sodhani, Roberta Raileanu, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Pascal
 Vincent, Amy Zhang, and Mikael Henaff. Motif: Intrinsic motivation from artificial intelligence
 feedback. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=tmBKIecDE9.
W. B. Knox, Peter Stone, and Cynthia Breazeal. Training a robot via human feedback: A case study.
  In International Conference on Software Reuse, 2013. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:266033110.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  22199–22213, 2022.
Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander H. Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The NetHack Learning Environment. In Proceedings of the
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Minae Kwon, Sang Michael Xie, Kalesha Bullard, and Dorsa Sadigh. Reward design with language
 models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=10uNUgI5Kl.

Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Thomas Mesnard, Johan Ferret, Kellie Lu, Colton
  Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, Abhinav Rastogi, et al. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning
  from human feedback with ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.

Hao Li, Xue Yang, Zhaokai Wang, Xizhou Zhu, Jie Zhou, Yu Qiao, Xiaogang Wang, Hongsheng Li,
  Lewei Lu, and Jifeng Dai. Auto mc-reward: Automated dense reward design with large language
  models for minecraft. 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
 (CVPR), pp. 16426–16435, 2023a. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  266210361.

Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Evaluating object
  hallucination in large vision-language models. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, 2023b.

Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee,
 Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. ArXiv,
  abs/2305.20050, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258987659.

Jessy Lin, Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, Dan Klein, and Anca Dragan.
  Learning to model the world with language, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.01399.

Evan Zheran Liu, Kelvin Guu, Panupong Pasupat, Tianlin Shi, and Percy Liang. Reinforcement
  learning on web interfaces using workflow-guided exploration. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.08802.

Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. Is your code generated by
   chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.

Zeyuan Liu, Ziyu Huan, Xiyao Wang, Jiafei Lyu, Jian Tao, Xiu Li, Furong Huang, and Huazhe
  Xu. World models with hints of large language models for goal achieving. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.07381, 2024b.

Zhihan Liu, Hao Hu, Shenao Zhang, Hongyi Guo, Shuqi Ke, Boyi Liu, and Zhaoran Wang. Reason
  for future, act for now: A principled architecture for autonomous llm agents. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, 2024c. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  272330199.

Daniel Lokshtanov and Bernardo Subercaseaux. Wordle is np-hard. ArXiv, abs/2203.16713, 2022.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247839521.

Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayaraman,
  Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via coding
  large language models. ArXiv, abs/2310.12931, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:264306288.

Francesco Manigrasso, Stefan Schouten, Lia Morra, and Peter Bloem. Probing llms for logical
  reasoning. In International Conference on Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning, pp. 257–278.
  Springer, 2024.

Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta
  Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, Edouard Grave,
  Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Augmented language models: a survey, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2302.07842.

James F Mullen Jr and Dinesh Manocha. Towards robots that know when they need help: Affordance-
  based uncertainty for large language model planners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13198, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kolby Nottingham, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Sameer
  Singh, and Roy Fox. Do embodied agents dream of pixelated sheep?: Embodied decision making
  using language guided world modelling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256389514.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022.

Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander
  Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anikait Singh, Anthony Brohan, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic
  learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.

Davide Paglieri, Bartłomiej Cupiał, Samuel Coward, Ulyana Piterbarg, Maciej Wolczyk, Akbir Khan,
  Eduardo Pignatelli, Łukasz Kuciński, Lerrel Pinto, Rob Fergus, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, Jack
  Parker-Holder, and Tim Rocktäschel. Balrog: Benchmarking agentic llm and vlm reasoning on
  games, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.13543.

Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.

Qwen Team. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models, September 2024. URL https://qwenlm.
 github.io/blog/qwen2.5/.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  231591445.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18290.

Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-baptiste
 Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Gemini
 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.

Juan Rocamonde, Victoriano Montesinos, Elvis Nava, Ethan Perez, and David Lindner. Vision-
  language models are zero-shot reward models for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.12921, 2023.

Peter Shaw, Mandar Joshi, James Cohan, Jonathan Berant, Panupong Pasupat, Hexiang Hu, Urvashi
  Khandelwal, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. From pixels to ui actions: Learning to follow
  instructions via graphical user interfaces. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00245.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
 Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning.(2023). arXiv preprint
  cs.AI/2303.11366, 2023.

Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
  Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode
  clinical knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13138, 2022.

Charles Burton Snell, Ilya Kostrikov, Yi Su, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Offline rl for
  natural language generation with implicit language q learning. ArXiv, abs/2206.11871, 2022. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249954054.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zayne Sprague, Fangcong Yin, Juan Diego Rodriguez, Dongwei Jiang, Manya Wadhwa, Prasann
  Singhal, Xinyu Zhao, Xi Ye, Kyle Mahowald, and Greg Durrett. To cot or not to cot? chain-of-
  thought helps mainly on math and symbolic reasoning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2409.12183.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Haotian Sun, Yuchen Zhuang, Lingkai Kong, Bo Dai, and Chao Zhang. Adaplanner: Adaptive
  planning from feedback with language models. ArXiv, abs/2305.16653, 2023. URL https:
 //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258947337.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html.
Richard S. Sutton, David A. McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Y. Mansour. Policy gradient methods for
  reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Neural Information Processing Systems,
  1999. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1211821.
Andrew Szot, Max Schwarzer, Harsh Agrawal, Bogdan Mazoure, Rin Metcalf, Walter Talbott, Natalie
  Mackraz, R Devon Hjelm, and Alexander T Toshev. Large language models as generalizable
  policies for embodied tasks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Andrew Szot, Bogdan Mazoure, Harsh Agrawal, Devon Hjelm, Zsolt Kira, and Alexander Toshev.
  Grounding multimodal large language models in actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07904, 2024.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu
  Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable
  multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin R. Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, and Yasmine Babaei
  et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. ArXiv, abs/2307.09288, 2023. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259950998.
Jonathan Uesato, Nate Kushman, Ramana Kumar, H. Francis Song, Noah Yamamoto Siegel, Lisa
  Wang, Antonia Creswell, Geoffrey Irving, and Irina Higgins. Solving math word problems with
  process-based and outcome-based feedback, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=MND1kmmNy0O.
David Venuto, Sami Nur Islam, Martin Klissarov, Doina Precup, Sherry Yang, and Ankit Anand.
  Code as reward: Empowering reinforcement learning with vlms. ArXiv, abs/2402.04764, 2024.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267522976.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
Yufei Wang, Zhanyi Sun, Jesse Zhang, Zhou Xian, Erdem Biyik, David Held, and Zackory Erickson.
  Rl-vlm-f: Reinforcement learning from vision language foundation model feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.03681, 2024.
Christopher Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine Learning, 8:279–292, 1992. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:208910339.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Huai hsin Chi, F. Xia, Quoc Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. ArXiv,
  abs/2201.11903, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:246411621.
Tianbao Xie, Siheng Zhao, Chen Henry Wu, Yitao Liu, Qian Luo, Victor Zhong, Yanchao Yang,
  and Tao Yu. Text2reward: Automated dense reward function generation for reinforcement learn-
  ing. ArXiv, abs/2309.11489, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  262053612.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Derong Xu, Wei Chen, Wenjun Peng, Chao Zhang, Tong Xu, Xiangyu Zhao, Xian Wu, Yefeng Zheng,
  Yang Wang, and Enhong Chen. Large language models for generative information extraction: A
  survey, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.17617.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Arenas,
 Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, Brian Ichter, Ted Xiao,
 Peng Xu, Andy Zeng, Tingnan Zhang, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Dorsa Sadigh, Jie Tan, Yuval
 Tassa, and F. Xia. Language to rewards for robotic skill synthesis. ArXiv, abs/2306.08647, 2023.
 URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259164906.
Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason
 Weston. Self-rewarding language models. ArXiv, abs/2401.10020, 2024. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267035293.
Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens, Dongfu
  Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multimodal under-
  standing and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9556–9567, 2024.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with
  reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15476–15488, 2022.
Shenao Zhang, Sirui Zheng, Shuqi Ke, Zhihan Liu, Wanxin Jin, Jianbo Yuan, Yingxiang Yang,
  Hongxia Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. How can llm guide rl? a value-based approach. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.16181, 2024.
Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Language
  agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and planning in language models. ArXiv, abs/2310.04406,
  2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263829963.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

In our experiments, we investigate tasks from four different domains: MiniWob (Liu et al., 2018),
NetHack (Küttler et al., 2020), and Wordle (Lokshtanov & Subercaseaux, 2022), and MetaWorld (Yu
et al., 2019). The observation space for all these environments is text, except fro MetaWorld which
consists of RGB pixels.
In the MiniWob domain, we sample the subset of the five tasks on which state-of-the-art results
are low. Specifically, we carry experiments on: click-tab-2-hard, click-checkboxes-soft,
count-shape, tic-tac-toe and use-autocomplete. To learn RL policies from LLM-based
rewards, we leverage the experimental setup of Shaw et al. (2023). In NetHack, we use the same
environment and the same algorithmic setup as in Klissarov et al. (2024). In Wordle, we build on
the code made available by Snell et al. (2022) and use their proposed subset of 200 words from the
official list of the game. Finally, in MetaWorld we study the same subset of environments presented
in (Wang et al., 2024) consisting of drawer-open-v2, soccer-v2 and sweep-into-v2. Across all
experiments where RL policies are learned, we use the original hyperparameter values defined in the
respective experimental setups we are building upon.

A.2   D ETAILS ON I NDIRECT P OLICY M ODELING T HROUGH LLM- BASED R EWARDS

We use the following prompt templates to query the agent for AI feedback, Scalar Reward and Reward
as Code across various environments. For the Embedding-based approach, we use calculate the cosine
similarity between the representation, provided by a BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) sentence encoder
(specifically the same paraphrase-MiniLM-L3-v2 model) when environments are text-based, and
otherwise we use the CLIP encoder (Radford et al., 2021). The similarity is measured between the
current observation and the same goal description contained in the each of the following prompts
given for the other baselines.

                MiniWob Prompt For Reward Modeling with AI feedback

    I will present you with two HTML descriptions from a web interaction
    environment.

  {task_description}
  Write an analysis describing the semantics of each description
  strictly using information from the descriptions.
  Provide a comparative analysis based on first principles.
  Finally, express a preference based on which description is the
  most likely to make some progress towards the goal, writing either
  ("best_description": 1), ("best_description": 2).
  You could also say ("best_description": None).

    html_description_1:       {description_1}

    html_description_2:       {description_2}


                                            Prompt 1

In Figure 7, we verify the importance of the chain-of-thought prompting used for our AI feedback
baseline. Results show no statistical difference in performance compared to using chain-of-thought.
To understand this result, we can refer to Sprague et al. (2024) which show that across 14 LLMs,
chain-of-thought only significantly helps for mathematical and symbolic problems. We believe
the way LLMs help the tasks studied in this paper (i.e., for generating feedback on trajectories of
experience) can be characterized as being part of the Commonsense and Knowledge categories from
Sprague et al. (2024), in which chain-of-thought does not improve performance.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Wordle Prompt For Reward Modeling with AI feedback

  I will present you with two short gameplay descriptions of Wordle.

  First, tell me about your knowledge of Wordle.

  Mention the goal of Wordle. Use the following information for Wordle
  states: black means that the provided letter is not present anywhere
  in the hidden word. yellow means that the provided letter is present
  somewhere in the hidden word, but not at the correct position. green
  means that the provided letter is present in the hidden word exactly
  at the correct position.

  Then, write an analysis describing the semantics of each description
  strictly using information from the descriptions (which may be empty)
  and your knowledge of Wordle.
  Provide a comparative analysis based on first principles.
  Finally, express a preference based on which description is the
  most likely to make some progress towards the goal, writing either
  ("best_description": 1), ("best_description": 2).
  You could also say ("best_description": None).

  description_1:      {description_1}

  description_2:      {description_2}


                                          Prompt 2



               NetHack Prompt For Reward Modeling with AI feedback

  I will present you with two short gameplay descriptions of Nethack.

  First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack.

  Mention the goal of NetHack. Prefer agents that maximize the score
  in the game, for instance by killing monsters, collecting gold or
  going down the stairs in the dungeon.

  Then, write an analysis describing the semantics of each description
  strictly using information from the descriptions (which may be empty)
  and your knowledge of NetHack.
  Provide a comparative analysis based on first principles.
  Finally, express a preference based on which description is the
  most likely to make some progress towards the goal, writing either
  ("best_description": 1), ("best_description": 2).
  You could also say ("best_description": None).

  description_1:      {description_1}

  description_2:      {description_2}


                                          Prompt 3


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            NetHack Prompt For Online Reward Modeling with AI feedback

  I will present you with two short gameplay descriptions of Nethack.

  First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack.

  Mention the goal of NetHack. Prefer agents that maximize the score
  in the game, for instance by killing monsters, collecting gold or
  going down the stairs in the dungeon.

  Then, write an analysis describing the semantics of each description
  strictly using information from the descriptions (which may be empty)
  and your knowledge of NetHack.
  Provide a comparative analysis based on first principles.
  Finally, express a preference based on which description is the
  most likely to make some progress towards the goal, writing either
  ("best_description": 1), ("best_description": 2).
  You could also say ("best_description": None).

  description_1:       {description_1}

  description_2:       {description_2}


                                             Prompt 4


               MetaWorld Prompt For Reward Modeling with AI feedback

  Does the image satisfy {current_task}?
  image_1: {image_1}
  {llm_response}

  Does the image satisfy {current_task}?
  image_2: {image_2}
  {llm_response}



                                             Prompt 5


A.3   D ETAILS ON D IRECT P OLICY M ODELING

We present the exact prompts used to query GPT-4o for each of the domains we have considered.
These are presented through Prompt 13, 15, 14 and 16.
Additionally, in Figure 8, we ablate the prompting techniques used in our direct policy modeling
approach. Results show that a combination of all prompting techniques presented in Section 2.1
works best.


A.4   A DDITIONAL I NDIRECT P OLICY M ODELING M ETHODS

There are a number of other prompting methods for extracting information or knowledge from an
LLM that may be relevant to solving RL tasks.

      • Direct State Generation. The model generates tokens that will represent next states (or
        other-future-time states). This is similar to world modeling. The next state prediction can be
        conditioned on an action, or marginalized over a policy distribution.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       100

              Normalized Performance
                                        80



                                        60



                                        40



                                        20



                                         0
                                             MiniWob-Hard                             Wordle                   NetHack                   MetaWorld
                                                                                  AI Feedback            AI Feedback (no CoT)


      Figure 7: Ablation on the usefulness of chain-of-thought in the AI Feedback baseline.


                                                                        100
                                                                              Chain-of-Thought + In-Context Learning + Self-Refinement
                                                                              Chain-of-Thought + In-Context Learning
                                                                              Chain-of-Thought
                                               Normalized Performance


                                                                         80


                                                                         60


                                                                         40


                                                                         20


                                                                          0



Figure 8: Ablation on the set of prompting techniques used for direct policy modeling. The reported
performance is averaged over all domains and tasks.


                                                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               MiniWob Prompt For Reward Modeling with Scalar Reward

  I will present you with an HTML descriptions from a web interaction
  environment.

  {task_description}

  Write an analysis describing the semantics of the description
  strictly using information from the description.

  Finally, output a scalar value between 0 and 5, with higher values
  correlation with progress towards the goal.

  html_description:          {description}


                                               Prompt 6

                Wordle Prompt For Reward Modeling with Scalar Reward

  I will present you with a gameplay description of Wordle.

  First, tell me about your knowledge of Wordle.

  Mention the goal of Wordle. Use the following information for Wordle
  states: black means that the provided letter is not present anywhere
  in the hidden word. yellow means that the provided letter is present
  somewhere in the hidden word, but not at the correct position. green
  means that the provided letter is present in the hidden word exactly
  at the correct position.

  Write an analysis describing the semantics of the description
  strictly using information from the description.
  Finally, output a scalar value between 0 and 5, with higher values
  correlation with progress towards the goal.
  description: {description}


                                               Prompt 7


       • High-level plans. Ask the LLM to generate a high-level plan. This can be similar to direct
         state generation, but potentially relies on some subset of features (for examples the inventory
         in MineCraft) and is typically temporally extended.
       • Action Preference. Ask the LLM to select, among two choices, the most likely action given
         previous and future observations.
       • State Preference. Ask the LLM to select, among two choices, the most likely next state or
         observation conditioned on prior history and/or actions.

Many of the above could theoretically be used to construct a policy, yet a full implementation is out
of scope from this paper due to the lack of available code-bases to build upon and we do not seek to
build new algorithms from scratch. For instance, generating a high-level plan can be constructed in
various ways: ranging from in-context learning to hierarchical reinforcement learning agents, with
many variables to be decided upon. For example, what is the space over which plans are established?
Is it the full observation space, a subset of it (e.g., in Minecraft, should it be pixel space or the
inventory)? What action space should be considered (e.g., in web agents tasks should it be low level
mouse click and drag, or human-crafted high levels as we see in many baselines?)? Additionally, the


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                NetHack Prompt For Reward Modeling with Scalar Reward

  I will present you with a gameplay description of Nethack.

  First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack.

  Mention the goal of NetHack. Prefer agents that maximize the score
  in the game, for instance by killing monsters, collecting gold or
  going down the stairs in the dungeon.

  Write an analysis describing the semantics of the description
  strictly using information from the description.
  Finally, output a scalar value between 0 and 5, with higher values
  correlation with progress towards the goal.
  description: {description}


                                               Prompt 8


              MetaWorld Prompt For Reward Modeling with Scalar Reward

  From 0 to 5, how much does the image achieve{current_task}?
  image: {image}



                                               Prompt 9


              MiniWob Prompt For Reward Modeling with Reward as Code

  I will present you with HTML descriptions from a web interaction
  environment.

  {task_description}

  Write an analysis describing the semantics of the descriptions
  strictly using information from the descriptions.

  Finally, write a code that, when executed, will help make progress
  towards the goal.

  html_descriptions:           {descriptions}


                                              Prompt 10


choice of these variables might not easily generalize across many environments, which is why we
decided not to focus on this direction. We do believe that this is a particularly important direction for
future work.
However, in Figure 2b we perform investigations into the capabilities of LLMs to perform Action
Preference and State Preference. The results show that current LLMs struggle to achieve strong
performance on any of these tasks. Additionally, in Table 1, we report the accuracy with which LLMs
directly predicts the next observation (Direct State Generation), providing a probe into their direct
world modeling capabilities. Results show limited performance, except on MiniWob-Hard tasks,
which are fully observable and encode deterministic transitions.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Wordle Prompt For Reward Modeling with Reward as Code

  I will present you with gameplay descriptions of Wordle.

  First, tell me about your knowledge of Wordle.

  Mention the goal of Wordle. Use the following information for Wordle
  states: black means that the provided letter is not present anywhere
  in the hidden word. yellow means that the provided letter is present
  somewhere in the hidden word, but not at the correct position. green
  means that the provided letter is present in the hidden word exactly
  at the correct position.

  Write an analysis describing the semantics of the descriptions
  strictly using information from the description.
  Finally, write a code that, when executed, will help make progress
  towards the goal.
  descriptions: {descriptions}


                                          Prompt 11


             NetHack Prompt For Reward Modeling with Reward as Code

  I will present you with gameplay descriptions of Nethack.

  First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack.

  Mention the goal of NetHack. Prefer agents that maximize the score
  in the game, for instance by killing monsters, collecting gold or
  going down the stairs in the dungeon.

  Write an analysis describing the semantics of the descriptions
  strictly using information from the descriptions.
  Finally, write a code that, when executed, will help make progress
  towards the goal.
  descriptions: {descriptions}


                                          Prompt 12


A.5   A BLATING R EWARD AS C ODE

In Table 2, we ablate the performance of the Reward as Code baseline across LLMs, observation
spaces and additional assumptions. For pixel observations, we follow the methodology laid out in

                                                      Accuracy
                                MiniWob-Hard        65 ± 11.4%
                                Wordle               28 ± 8.3%
                                NetHack             0.0 ± 0.0%
                                MetaWorld                  N/A

Table 1: LLMs struggle to predict the next observation. We show the decreasing accuracy of the
LLM to predict the next observation with increasing task complexity. LLMs are unable to generate
pixel observations, which are used in MetaWorld.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     MiniWob-Hard Prompt For Direct Policy Modeling

  We have an autonomous computer control agent that can perform atomic
  instructions specified by natural language to control computers.
  There are two types of instructions it can execute.

  First, given the instruction that matches the regular expression,
  "^type.{1,}$"
  Second, given the instruction that matches the regular expression,
  "^clickxpath\s.{1,}$" it can click an HTML element with an xpath that
  is visible on the webpage. The target of this instruction should be
  a valid xpath.

  Below is the HTML code of the webpage where the agent should solve
  a task.

  {html_observation}

  Examples:
  task: {example_task}
  plan: {example_plan}

  Current task: Enter an item that starts with Äntiänd ends with d̈a¨
                                                                    .
  Think step-by-step before answering, what is the current plan?
  {llm_plan}

  ===============
  Repeat N times:

  Find problems with this plan for the given task compared to the
  example plans.

  {llm_criticism}

  Based on this, what is the plan for the agent to complete the task?

  Below is the HTML code of the webpage where the agent should solve
  a task.
  {html_observation}

  Current task: Enter an item that starts with Äntiänd ends with d̈a¨
                                                                    .
  Think step-by-step before answering, what is the current plan?
  {llm_plan}
  ===============


                                             Prompt 13


(Venuto et al., 2024), whereas for proprioceptive observations we follow the one from (Yu et al.,
2023). Both methods heavily depend on access to a state-of-the-art, closed-source model to achieve
performance comparable to that of AI Feedback, which uses the smaller, open-source model of
Paligemma (Beyer et al., 2024). Additionally, each method requires expert demonstrations or
specialized domain knowledge to guide the reward design process. While these assumptions may
be viable in certain situations, such as in a controlled simulation environment, they can present
significant practical challenges in more general contexts. In contrast, AI Feedback operates by simply
comparing observations and reasoning using a chain-of-thought approach.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Wordle Prompt for Direct Policy Modeling

  Let’s play a game of Wordle.            You will have to guess the words and I
  will give you the colors.

  Use the following information for Wordle colors:
  black means that the provided letter is not present anywhere in the
  hidden word.
  yellow means that the provided letter is present somewhere in the
  hidden word, but not at the correct position.
  green means that the provided letter is present in the hidden word
  exactly at the correct position.

  You can choose among this list of words:                {list_of_words}

  Here are examples trajectories, containing past observations and
  actions, together with an appropriate action.

  Example 1:
  Trajectory: {example_trajectory}
  Action: {example_action}

  Example 2:
  Trajectory: {example_trajectory}
  Action: {example_action}

  Current trajectory: {trajectory_so_far}
  Think step-by-step before answering, what should be the current
  action? {llm_action}

  ==============
  Repeat N times:

  Find problems with this action for the given task compared to the
  example actions.

  {llm_criticism}

  Based on this, what is the action for the agent to make progress on
  the task?

  Current trajectory: {trajectory_so_far}
  Think step-by-step before answering, what should be the current
  action? {llm_action}
  ==============


                                            Prompt 14



A.6   L EARNING FROM E NVIRONMENT R EWARDS

In Figure 9, we compare the performance of an RL agent trained using a reward function derived from
AI feedback with that of an agent trained on human-designed rewards across different environments.
We observe that AI feedback achieves comparable results, with an average score of 89.93 versus 86.3
for the human-designed reward. The objective of this experiment is not to argue that LLM-based
rewards consistently outperform human-crafted ones—since expert human knowledge can always be
encoded into a reward function—but rather to contextualize the performance of LLM-based rewards.
Notice that for MetaWorld we report the performance after fine-tuning the LLM as described in
Section 5.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         NetHack Prompt for Direct Policy Modeling

  Let’s play the game of NetHack.

  First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack.                       Mention the goal
  of NetHack.

  Prefer maximizing the score in the game, for instance by killing
  monsters, collecting gold or going down the stairs in the dungeon.

  Here are examples sub-trajectories, containing past observations and
  actions, together with an appropriate action.

  Example 1:
  sub-Trajectory: {example_sub-trajectory}
  Action: {example_action}

  Example 2:
  sub-Trajectory: {example_sub-trajectory}
  Action: {example_action}

  Current sub-trajectory: {sub-trajectory_so_far}
  Think step-by-step before answering, what should be the current
  action? {llm_action}

  ==============
  Repeat N times:

  Find problems with this action for the given task compared to the
  example actions.

  {llm_criticism}

  Based on this, what is the action for the agent to make progress on
  the task?

  Here is the current sub-trajectory, containing past observations and
  actions: {sub-trajectory_so_far}
  Think step-by-step before answering, what should be the current
  action? {llm_action}
  ==============



                                              Prompt 15


A.7    AI FEEDBACK AND HEURISTIC FUNCTIONS


While prior works have shown that rewards can be extracted from a language model (Kwon et al., 2023;
Brooks et al., 2024; Klissarov et al., 2024), it can be more generally thought of as encoding a heuristic
function h. The function h contains high-level, multi-step information about the MDP M . To extract
it, one can solve the re-shaped MDP M̃ with r̃(st , at ) = r(st , at ) + (1 − λ)γEst+1 |st ,at [h(st+1 )]
and γ̃ = λγ where λ ∈ [0, 1] Cheng et al. (2021). Solving M̃ yields a policy π ∗ that is also optimal
in M - its value function’s bias can be shown to converge to V ∗ in M as a function of ||h − V ∗ ||∞ .
Specifically, assume access to an initial dataset D0 , from which a heuristic h can be computed. In
the reshaped MDP M̃ , one can learn a new policy π which optimizes r̃ with λ ∈ [0, 1]. Equation (5)
shows the performance difference lemma Kakade & Langford (2002) as a function of true and
reshaped MDP quantities:


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        MetaWorld Prompt for Direct Policy Modeling

  You are controlling a robot for the following task:

  {meta_world_task}

  Here are examples sub-trajectories, containing past observations and
  actions, together with an appropriate action.

  Example 1:
  sub-Trajectory: {example_sub-trajectory}
  Action: {example_action}

  Example 2:
  sub-Trajectory: {example_sub-trajectory}
  Action: {example_action}

  Current sub-trajectory: {sub-trajectory_so_far}
  Think step-by-step before answering, what should be the current
  action? {llm_action}

  ==============
  Repeat N times:

  Find problems with this action for the given task compared to the
  example actions.

  {llm_criticism}

  Based on this, what is the action for the agent to make progress on
  the task?

  Here is the current sub-trajectory, containing past observations and
  actions: {sub-trajectory_so_far}
  Think step-by-step before answering, what should be the current
  action? {llm_action}
  ==============



                                               Prompt 16


  L(π, h) =ED0 [V ∗ (s) − V π (s)]

                      ∗        π             ∗        π                ′      ∗ ′     (5)
          =c1 ED0 Ṽ (s) − Ṽ (s) + c2 EDπ Ṽ (s) − Ṽ (s) + c3 EDπ h(s ) − Ṽ (s ) ,

where c1 , c2 , c3 are non-negative constants. Minimizing L(π, h) with respect to π and h can be
achieved by minimizing each individual term. In particular, the red term suggests that the heuristic h
has to be updated on data from Dπ in order to not become "stale". This points out a shortcoming
of existing LLM-as-critic algorithms, which sometimes fix h after distilling the language model
knowledge into it Klissarov et al. (2024)
These theoretical findings suggest, in particular, that heuristic h (in our case, the Bradley-Terry prefer-
ence model), has to be updated with on-policy samples, similarly to empirical results from Figure 5.

A.8    A DDITIONAL C ONSIDERATIONS FOR P REFERENCE - BASED R EWARD M ODELING

In Figure 10, we present the properties that were important to obtain effective exploration on NetHack,
without the counting term shown in Equation 4.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Reward as Code - RGB Observations
                                                  GPT-4o
                                                      w/o expert demonstration                            0% ± 1%
                                                      with expert demonstration                          79% ± 7%
                                                         Reward as Code - Proprioceptive Observations
                                                  Llama 3 70B
                                                      w/o background functional knowledge                 0% ± 1%
                                                      with background functional knowledge               10% ± 3%
                                                  GPT-4o
                                                      w/o background functional knowledge                 5% ± 3%
                                                      with background functional knowledge               76% ± 6%
                                                                AI Feedback - RGB Observations
                                                    PaliGemma                                            72% ± 8%

Table 2: AI Feedback performs on par with Reward as Code, without proprioceptive observa-
tions or expert demonstrations. To match AI Feedback performance on Metaworld, Reward as
Code requires GPT-4o level knowledge, augmented with either in-context expert demonstrations or
proprioceptive observations.

                                            100
                   Normalized Performance


                                             80

                                             60

                                             40

                                             20

                                              0
                                                  MiniWob-Hard           Wordle            NetHack            MetaWorld
                                                                    AI Feedback           Environment Reward

Figure 9: Comparison between the best performing LLM-based reward (AI Feedback) and human
designed rewards for each domain.


                               1.0                                                                                Score
                                                                                                                  Scout
      Normalized Performance


                               0.8
                                                                                                                  Dungeon Level

                               0.6

                               0.4

                               0.2

                               0.0
                                               Online Preferences Online Preferences Offline Preferences Offline Preferences
                                              & Non-Markovian Model & Markovian Model & Non-Markovian Model & Markovian Model

Figure 10: Successful exploration on Nethack depends on both online preference elicitation and a
non-Markovian reward function.


                                                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.9        I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING FOR R EWARD M ODELING

In Figure 11, we present a variation on the Wordle game where the color code has been altered, which
we refer to as Eldrow (reverse Wordle). Under this transformation, the off-the-shelf model provides
feedback that correlates very poorly with the optimal value function. When we measure the perplexity
of the LLM on a natural language description of the new rule set of Eldrow (see Appendix A) we
obtain a value of 6.97 which is higher than the one measured on the standard rule set of Wordle, with
a value of 5.06. Given that the difference in values is not very large, we leverage the simplest way for
adapting the LLM: through in-context learning. As shown in Figure 11b, by providing hints in the
prompt about the new rule set, the LLM adapts its preferences and generates a Bradley-Terry model
that recovers the correlation values we witnessed in 4.

                  0.2                                                           1.0
                                                    Corr(BTLLM, v )                                               Corr(BTLLM, v )
                  0.1                                                           0.8
                  0.0
    Correlation


                                                                      Correlation
                                                                                0.6
                  0.1
                  0.2                                                           0.4
                  0.3                                                           0.2
                  0.4                                                           0.0
                        0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                   0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                         Policy degree of optimality                                   Policy degree of optimality
                        (a) Before in-context learning                                   (b) After in-context learning

Figure 11: AI feedback can be adapted to novel settings through in-context learning. While the
original LLM does poorly on Eldrow due to out-of-distribution, it manages to correct its feedback the
task using in-context hints.



A.10          LLM S AS NOVELTY DETECTORS

We hypothesize that LLMs with long contexts can effectively act as novelty detectors. Within
the scope of RL problems, this implies the ability to tell, for example, whether a sub-trajectory is
contained in the replay buffer.
To test this, we query Gemini-1.5 Pro (Team et al., 2023) with a context video containing 500
frames of an agent exploring the bottom-left room (Figure 12-left) and a single frame sampled
uniformly at random from a query episode which covers in the top-right room, center and bottom of
the maze (Figure 12-middle). We ask the LLM to identify novel query states, i.e. states which are not
seen in the context episode. We then train a direct predictor (3-layer MLP) to estimate the probability
of any state on the grid to be novel with respect to the context (Figure 12-right). The language model
correctly identifies the top-right portion of the trajectory to be novel, knowledge which could then be
used to construct an intrinsic reward function.


A.11          I NVESTIGATING A LARGER SET OF LLM S

In Figure 13, we investigate a larger set of LLMs for the LLM Policy method. We run experiments
using Claude 3.5 Sonnet and Gemini Pro 1.5 across all environments. Results indicate that the
performance of these frontiers models is generally the same, mirroring recent results from Paglieri
et al. (2024). In Figure 14, we extend the of LLM studied for the AI Feedback method, which is the
best performing method from the reward modeling approaches. We investigate the Qwen 2.5 model
on MiniWob-Hard, Wordle and NetHack (as they are text-based domains), and the Llama 3.2-V
model on MetaWorld (pixel-based). Once again, the results show little difference in performance
across most models, except for the comparison on the MetaWorld domain where the Llama 3.2-V
model performs significantly better than PaliGemma.


                                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: LLMs can capture observation novelty. Given the context trajectory (red), and a
single observation sampled uniformly at random from the query trajectory (blue), the LLM correctly
identifies novel states that are seen in the query but not in the context (green).

                                       100
              Normalized Performance


                                        80



                                        60



                                        40



                                        20



                                         0
                                                 MiniWob-Hard                 Wordle                   NetHack                   MetaWorld

                                                                          GPT-4o       Gemini Pro Exp-114        Claude 3.5 Sonnet



Figure 13: Comparison between different frontier closed-source models as used within the LLM
Policy method.

                                        100
              Normalized Performance


                                         80



                                         60



                                         40



                                         20



                                             0
                                                   MiniWob-Hard            Wordle                 NetHack                 MetaWorld
                                                                Llama 3      Qwen 2.5            PaliGemma               Llama 3.2-V


Figure 14: Comparison between the Llama 3 model and Qwen 2.5 on the three text-based domains
(MiniWob-Hard, Wordle and NetHack) as well as a comparison between the PaliGemma model
and Llama 3.2-V on the pixel-based domain (MetaWorld). We only notice significant difference in
performance between PaliGemma and Llama 3.2-V, which also present quite different architectures
and pre-training regimes.


A.12   R EWARD AS C ONTEXT FOR LLM P OLICY

In Figure 15, we verify whether providing the LLM-based reward as additional context to the LLM
Policy can improve its performance.

A.13   LLM F INE - TUNING E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we investigate how we could fine-tune an LLM for direct policy modeling in the
environments we have studied. During this process, we control the amount of samples seen during


                                                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         100


                Normalized Performance
                                          80



                                          60



                                          40



                                          20



                                           0
                                                 MiniWob-Hard               Wordle             NetHack          MetaWorld

                                                               LLM Policy        LLM Policy with Reward Information


Figure 15: Comparison between the LLM Policy described in Section 2.2 and a variation, LLM
Policy with Reward Information, in which we provide the LLM outputting actions in the environment
with the reward defined from the AI Feedback method.

 Environment Samples                           Direct Policy (only RL)      Direct Policy (only SFT)   Direct Policy (RL after SFT)   AI Feedback
                                                                                Success Rate
 0                                                      0.00                         0.00                         0.92                    0.00
 128k                                                   0.01                         0.10                         0.80                    0.22
 256k                                                   0.05                         0.13                         0.63                    0.48
 1M                                                     0.09                         0.87                         0.65                    0.72
                                                                   Floating Point Operations (FLOPS)
 0                                                       0                            0                       3.65 × 1017               6.9 × 1012
 128k                                               7.36 × 1016                  4.38 × 1017                  4.38 × 1017              4.09 × 1014
 256k                                               1.46 × 1017                  5.11 × 1017                  5.11 × 1017             8.109 × 1014
 1M                                                 7.12 × 1017                  1.09 × 1018                  1.09 × 1018             3.145 × 1015


                                   Table 3: FLOPS for Different Policies and Environment Samples.


optimization and the amount of FLOPS used to fine-tune the LLM. Specifically, we fine-tune the
direct policy method under three settings: only with online RL, only with SFT, and online RL
training on an SFT-pretrained model. We compare these to the performance of the AI feedback
method, which has shown to be the best performing reward modeling method. For AI feedback, we
calculate the FLOPS used by the RL algorithm, as well as any computation spent on the LLM for
inference or fine-tuning.

Results in Table 3 indicates that indirect policy modeling achieves comparable performance
to direct policy modeling trained with SFT at a fraction of the computational cost, i.e. two orders of
magnitude lower. Policy modeling achieves a higher success rate with 1 million training samples,
but is otherwise significantly less efficient than indirect policy modeling. Importantly, direct policy
modeling with SFT relies on a large expert dataset to achieve good performance. On the other
hand, direct policy modeling trained only with RL shows poor performance with 1M samples and
high sensitivity to hyperparameters. This is in line with Anonymous (2024) reporting low sample
efficiency when training LLMs with online RL, without SFT, for sequential decision-making.


                                                                                     31
