Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I MAGINE NAV: P ROMPTING V ISION -L ANGUAGE M OD -
ELS AS E MBODIED NAVIGATOR THROUGH S CENE
I MAGINATION
 Xinxin Zhao∗ , Wenzhe Cai∗, Likun Tang , Teng Wang†
 School of Automation, Southeast University
 {xinxin zhao, wz cai, lktang, wangteng}@seu.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT
             Visual navigation is an essential skill for home-assistance robots, providing the
             object-searching ability to accomplish long-horizon daily tasks. Many recent ap-
             proaches use Large Language Models (LLMs) for commonsense inference to im-
             prove exploration efficiency. However, the planning process of LLMs is limited
             within texts and it is difficult to represent the spatial occupancy and geometry lay-
             out only by texts. Both are important for making rational navigation decisions. In
             this work, we seek to unleash the spatial perception and planning ability of Vision-
             Language Models (VLMs), and explore whether the VLM, with only on-board
             camera captured RGB/RGB-D stream inputs, can efficiently finish the visual nav-
             igation tasks in a mapless manner. We achieve this by developing the imagination-
             powered navigation framework ImagineNav, which imagines the future observa-
             tion images at valuable robot views and translates the complex navigation plan-
             ning process into a rather simple best-view image selection problem for VLM.
             To generate appropriate candidate robot views for imagination, we introduce the
             Where2Imagine module, which is distilled to align with human navigation habits.
             Finally, to reach the VLM preferred views, an off-the-shelf point-goal navigation
             policy is utilized. Empirical experiments on the challenging open-vocabulary ob-
             ject navigation benchmarks demonstrates the superiority of our proposed system.

1       I NTRODUCTION
A useful home-assistant robot should be able to search for different kinds of objects without telling
it the exact 3D object coordinates for completing our human instructions. As our human always
buying and bringing new goods back home, the robot’s object searching capability should not be
limited in a closed-set of categories. Researchers often refer this problem as open-vocabulary object
navigation task. Recently, as the emergence of the foundation models, including capable vision
models (Radford et al., 2021; He et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2024; Kirillov et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2023), large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models
(VLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023;
Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2023; Gao
et al., 2023), building an agent that can accomplish the open-vocabulary object navigation becomes
possible. A popular framework, as shown in Figure 1, uses modular approach to deal with this
problem, which often composes of four components: A real-time mapping and segmentation module
to perceive robot surrounding environments. A template-based translation module to compress the
semantic map information into texts. A LLM-based module to understand the textual information
from the previous step and make a plan in texts. Finally, a path-planning module which project the
reasoning result from LLM back to the map and plan a collision-free path navigating towards it.
Although such a pipeline achieves great success in recent years (Zhou et al., 2023; Kuang et al.,
2024; Wu et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024a; Shah et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023a; Loo et al., 2024),
these complex cascaded systems have several limitations. Firstly, both the depth camera and the
robot localization module can suffer from perception error, especially for long-range depth esti-
mation, and this can make the mapping process inaccurate. Secondly, online object detection and
segmentation are required to augment spatial maps with semantic labels and prepare for LLM’s
    ∗
        Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author: Teng Wang.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


reasoning input. This increases the computational burden for the robots. Thirdly, although the se-
mantic information stored on the map can be easily expressed by text (e.g., list the categories of
the observed objects), such pure text prompts have difficultly in explicitly describing the geometry
information and object details in the map, making it difficult and ambiguous for LLMs to infer the
best navigation plan.
                   LLM-Based Navigation Pipeline                                         Our ImagineNav Pipeline
       Robot                                                Map
                                                                                                             To decide the direction …,
                                                                                                             evaluate the provided
                                                                                                             <Navigation Goal> and
                                                                                                             <Panoramic Images>. Choose
                                                                                                             the most suitable direction for
                   Sensor Data + Pose Estimation                                                             exploration.

                                                               Textualize
                      Role: You are a wheeled robot…    A. <Bedroom…>                                          VLM-Based Reasoning
                       Task: Find a <Target Object>..
                          Options: A… B… C… D…
                                                        B. <Kitchen…>
                                                        C. <Toilet…>
                                                        D. <Corridor…>
                                                                                Imagination
      Trajectory       LLM-Based Reasoning                  Graph                                                  PointGoal Policy


Figure 1: The comparison between the conventional LLM-based navigation pipeline and our Imag-
ineNav pipeline. The traditional LLM-based navigation framework, illustrated on the left, relies
on intricate sensor data processing and pose estimation for map creation, followed by LLM-driven
reasoning to decide the exploration direction. Instead, our ImagineNav directly translates the long-
horizon object goal navigation task into a sequence of best-view image selection tasks for VLM,
which avoids the latency and compounding error in the traditional cascaded methods.
In this work, we try to explore whether it is possible to circumvent the complicated and fragile
mapping→ translation→ planning framework, but develop a visual navigation approach with only
raw RGB/RGB-D observations and pre-trained VLMs. Our proposed method - ImagineNav seeks to
maximize the capabilities of VLMs in multimodal understanding and reasoning, and make the VLMs
become an efficient embodied navigation agent. As most VLMs cannot understand the continuous
physical world, it is infeasible to directly ask VLMs to generate navigable 3D waypoints. Instead, we
translate the visual navigation problem into an imagination-powered best-view image selection task
and let the VLMs select. To generate appropriate options for VLMs to choose from, we propose the
Where2Imagine model which distills the human indoor navigation habits and generates future 3D
navigation waypoints where a human might navigate based on the current visual observation. Such
3D navigation waypoints indicate relative poses with respect to the current frame and can be easily
translated into new observation images using novel view synthesis (NVS) models. Afterwards, the
VLMs only need to select the best imagined observation that is mostly related to the target object
and drive the robot to follow the corresponding point-goal navigation trajectory. The above pose-
aware imagination-and-selection capability allows the Object Goal Navigation (ObjectNav) task to
be decomposed into a sequence of point-goal sub-tasks, facilitating the creation of collision-free
navigation trajectories. Experimental results on standard benchmarks demonstrate the superiority
of our ImagineNav over previous methods in open-vocabulary object navigation. In summary, our
contributions are:
       • We propose a mapless navigation approach ImagineNav. It leverages the imagination to
          generate image observations at potential future 3D waypoints as the VLMs’ visual prompts,
          grounding the VLMs to become efficient navigation agents without any fine-tuning.
       • We design a task-oriented model Where2Imagine to understand human navigation habits.
          This model is crucial to bridge the task-agnostic high-level VLM planners and the low-level
          navigation policies.
       • Our ImagineNav increases success rate by a large margin of 15.1% and 10% respectively
          on HM3D (Ramakrishnan et al., 2021) and HSSD (Khanna et al., 2023). We also provide a
          detailed ablation analysis to help understand the important conclusions in our framework.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1     L ARGE MODELS FOR ROBOTIC PLANNING

Large-scale models pre-trained on extensive internet data have demonstrated formidable zero-shot
reasoning capabilities in tasks such as planning (Huang et al., 2022), code generation (Liang et al.,


                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2023; Huang et al., 2023b), and solving science questions (Lewkowycz et al., 2022). The in-
context learning capability of LLMs allows them to be applied to robotic task planning. Some
methods (Liang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023b; Ahn et al., 2022) leverage LLMs to decompose
tasks into subtasks, enhancing execution efficiency. Cap (Liang et al., 2023) generates robotic policy
code directly from example language commands, enabling autonomous control and task execution
based on natural language instructions. Instruct2Act (Huang et al., 2023b) combines LLM with
foundational models (e.g., SAM and CLIP), reducing error rates in complex task execution, while
SayCan (Ahn et al., 2022) combines LLM task planning with the feasibility of physical skills us-
ing pre-trained value functions, generating actionable plans for robots. However, one limitation
of LLMs is their difficulty in embedding the robot’s state directly into the planning process. To
address this, many studies have turned to VLMs as alternatives. For instance, ViLA (Lin et al.,
2024) significantly improves performance on multimodal tasks without compromising text capa-
bilities by systematically exploring VLM pretraining design choices. CoPa (Huang et al., 2024)
incorporates commonsense knowledge from VLMs, proposing a coarse-to-fine task-oriented grasp-
ing and task-aware motion planning approach. PIVOT (Nasiriany et al., 2024) transforms tasks
into iteratively optimized visual question-answering problems via a refinement process. Socratic
model (Zeng et al., 2022) integrates multiple pretrained large models (e.g., VLMs, LLMs, and au-
dio models) in a modular fashion to enable reasoning and task execution through language-based
interaction. These methods employ a set-of-examples (SOE) approach to guide VLM selection. We
propose a new decision-making paradigm based on imagined imagery, wherein decisions are made
on imaginations, enabling more nuanced, context-aware interactions that better harness VLMs’ spa-
tial perception capabilities.

2.2   O PEN - VOCABULARY OBJECT NAVIGATION

ObjectNav requires the robot to navigate toward a specific target category in unseen environments.
Although previous works (Yadav et al., 2022; Ramrakhya et al., 2023; Chaplot et al., 2020; Ra-
makrishnan et al., 2022) can achieve high success rate in widely accepted benchmarks (e.g., habitat-
challenge (Yadav et al., 2023)), most approaches are limited within a pre-defined object list, which
is contradictory to the open-vocabulary real world. Therefore, many researchers start to discuss the
open-vocabulary object navigation problem. End-to-end methods try to make use of compact mul-
timodal features space (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)) for grounding text knowledge into visual
navigation problem but achieved limited performance (Khandelwal et al., 2022; Gadre et al., 2023;
Majumdar et al., 2022). Instead, modular-based approaches (Huang et al., 2023a; Zhou et al., 2023;
Achiam et al., 2023) typically necessitate the use of sensors for localization and mapping, high-level
planning, and low-level control. These methods rely heavily on high-precision sensors for accurate
self-localization and real-time map construction. Our approach introduces an imagination-based,
mapless navigation framework. This framework circumvents the need for extensive training by
transforming the complex process of navigation planning into a selection problem based solely on
RGB inputs.

2.3   I MAGINATION - BASED NAVIGATION

Recent methods (Zhai & Wang, 2022; Ramakrishnan et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2022) have employed
supervised learning to learn target-related functions in order to address the subtask of ’Where to
look?’ in navigation, specifically focusing on predicting the localization of target. These meth-
ods predict the absolute coordinates (Zhai & Wang, 2022) of the target, the shortest distance to
target (Ramakrishnan et al., 2022), or the nearest boundary (Zhu et al., 2022) based on local maps.
Instead, several studies (Ramakrishnan et al., 2020; Georgakis et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2024b) have proposed various approaches to enhance the prediction of unobserved regions.
For instance, (Ramakrishnan et al., 2020) introduced occupancy anticipation, where the agent in-
fers an occupancy map based on RGB-D inputs. The L2M framework was introduced (Georgakis
et al., 2022), consisting of a two-stage segmentation model that generates a semantic map beyond
the agent’s field of view and selects long-term goals based on the uncertainty of predictions. SS-
CNav algorithm (Liang et al., 2021) leverages semantic scene completion and confidence maps to
infer the environment and guide navigation decisions. A self-supervised generative map (SGM) is
proposed (Zhang et al., 2024b), which employs self-supervised approach to continually generate
unobserved regions in the local map and predict the target’s location. These methods primarily pre-
dict unobserved regions in top-down maps derived from egocentric RGB-D projections. In contrast,


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our method operates in the RGB space to perform guided-imagination. We utilize a compact model
aligned with human navigation habits to generate new viewpoints, followed by the imagination pro-
cess to produce corresponding visual representations.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
The open-vocabulary object navigation task requires the agent to locate an untrained target object
instance in an unknown environment. At the start of each episode, the agent is spawned at a random
position in an unfamiliar environment without any prior knowledge of the layout. The task is to find a
target object gi , which can belong to any category in an open-vocabulary setting. At each time step t,
the agent receives an egocentric panorama view It , divided into 6 separate views, each represented
by an RGB image It,i accompanied by its depth map Dt,i . The discrete action space consists of
the following commands: {Stop, MoveAhead, TurnLeft, TurnRight, LookUp, LookDown}. The
‘MoveAhead’ action moves the agent forward by 0.25m, while the rotational actions ‘TurnLeft’ and
‘TurnRight’ rotate the agent by 30 degrees. The task is considered successful if the agent reaches the
target object with a geodesic distance smaller than a defined threshold (e.g., 1m) and executes the
‘Stop’ command within a fixed number of steps. Each episode has a maximum limit of 500 steps.

         <Navigation Goal>: Chair                                                              Future-View Imagination


                                                                                                    Relative Pose
                                                                  ResNet-18


                                                                                              Δx=0.5, Δy=2.05, θ=-23.6°
                                                                                                                                Novel View
                                                                                              Δx=1.29, Δy=2.14, θ=-29.1°         Synthesis
                                                                               Train



                                                                                                         …
                                                                               from
                                                                                              Δx=-0.94, Δy=2.11, θ=22.3°     Scene
                                                                              Scratch
                                                                                                                           Generation


    Action :                            Vision-Language Model
{Stop,Forward,                      <User>: Analyzing the composite
 TurnLeft,Turn                      image to find a chair.
Right,LookUp, Point Goal
  LookDown} Navigation


                                                                                  Reasoning


                                <VLM>: This image shows a hallway
       Option：2                 leading to other rooms where chair
    （x=-3.50,y=-3.85）           may be found.


Figure 2: The overall pipeline of our mapless, open-vocabulary navigation framework. At each it-
eration, the agent captures a panoramic view of its surroundings. In the Imagination Module, the
trained Where2Imagine module couples with novel view synthesis model to generate novel scene
views. Guided by prompt templates, the VLM engages in target-oriented inference. Subsequently,
the system executes the PointNav policy to determine the next navigational action. The above imag-
ination, reasoning and planning procedure iterates until the target is reached.


3.1    I MAGINE NAV FRAMEWORK

This section provides an overview of the imagination-based open-vocabulary object navigation
framework (ImagineNav). As depicted in Figure 2, the agent initially employs the Where2Imagine
module to generate candidate locations for imagination based on the current observations. Sub-
sequently, the visual observations at these locations are imagined by a NVS model. Utilizing the
generated images, which are annotated with option labels, the agent leverages a multimodal large-
scale model to assess both the spatial and semantic information of each scene, enabling the selection
of a more efficient exploration direction. Specifically, the VLM is employed to reason over the
imagined images from six different views using prompts, selecting the optimal waypoint. Finally,
the agent executes low-level point navigation strategy to reach the corresponding sub-goal. This
process iterates, where each new observation serves as input for further imagination, reasoning, and


                                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


navigation, until the agent successfully identifies an instance of the target object. Consequently,
the ObjectNav task is reduced to a sequence of simpler point-to-point navigation subtasks. Since
our ImagineNav does not require any training on object-oriented data for reasoning and planning, it
is open-vocabulary and can zero-shot generalize to novel semantic targets. Sec 3.2 introduces the
imagination module, Sec 3.3 explains the use of the advanced planner VLM, and Sec 3.4 describes
our underlying point navigation strategy.

3.2   F UTURE -V IEW I MAGINATION

To better leverage the spatial perception and reasoning capabilities of VLMs for open-vocabulary
object navigation in unknown environments, we propose an future-view imagination model, which
is composed by Where2Imagine module and a NVS model. As shown in Figure 2, Where2Imagine
predicts the relative pose (∆x, ∆y, θ) of the potential next navigation waypoint based on the current
RGB observation, where ∆x denotes lateral displacement, ∆y represents longitudinal displacement,
and θ refers to changes in the camera’s viewing angle. Subsequently, a novel view image is generated
based on the predicted relative pose. There are several advanced methods to achieve this, such
as framing the task as a few-shot 3D rendering problem (Sargent et al., 2024; Wimbauer et al.,
2023; Cao & de Charette, 2023) or utilizing generative models (e.g., diffusion models) for image
synthesis (Yu et al., 2024; Tseng et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023b). In this work, we employ a pretrained
diffusion model (Yu et al., 2024), which generates new view images by taking the current image and
the predicted relative pose as inputs, enabling high-quality viewpoint transformation.
Specifically, we trained a ResNet-18 from scratch for the relative waypoint prediction task, with
training data sourced from the Habitat-Web project (Ramrakhya et al., 2022). Habitat-Web collects
remote user demonstrations of virtual robot operations through a virtual teleoperation system on the
Amazon Mechanical Turk platform, including 80k ObjectNav and 12k Pick&Place demonstrations.
Humans in these demonstrations typically opt for directions towards important semantic cues (e.g.,
doors) that facilitate exploration. These navigation preferences serve as a valuable basis for deter-
mining potential waypoints, thereby enhancing the rationality and safety of the navigation strategy.
We transformed the human demonstration trajectories into a paired dataset (It , Pt+T ), where It rep-
resents the RGB image at frame t, and Pt+T denotes the relative pose (∆x, ∆y, θ) at frame t + T
with respect to frame t. To facilitate the learning of the network, we filtered out images with a depth
threshold of less than 0.3, as these images generally lack rich semantic information (e.g., a plain
wall). Due to the limitations of the NVS model in generating high-quality images for large perspec-
tive shifts (e.g., 120°,180°,240°) based solely on a single input image, we restricted the training data
to instances where the angular deviation falls within ±30°. Through the Where2Imagine module,
our imagination model aligns with human navigation habits.

3.3   H IGH - LEVEL PLANNING
High-level planning module leverages the spatial awareness and common-sense reasoning capa-
bilities of the VLM to select the direction most likely to locate the navigation target. We prefer
GPT-4o-mini as the high-level planner because it offers a balance between the reasoning capabilities
and practical efficiency. Compared to larger models (e.g., GPT-4o), GPT-4o-mini is lightweight and
cost-effective. Its smaller size ensures faster inference, allowing the system to make timely decisions
in dynamic environments. To assist GPT-4o-mini in decision making, we designed a simple prompt
template, requiring the VLM to summarize its choice in a JSON format containing { ’Reason’,
’Choice’ }. This format allows for a clear understanding of the VLM’s reasoning process. As illus-
trated in Figure 3, the VLM receives the synthesized observations at future navigation waypoints and
the navigation goal as inputs. Based on the prompt, ’Your choice should first be based on discov-
ering navigation targets, followed by the potential of unexplored areas...’ , the VLM analyzes each
image’s semantic information, selects the optimal exploration direction, and returns the answer in
the specified format. By providing the imagined observations as visual prompts to VLM, our Imag-
ineNav offers significant advantages in spatial reasoning and decision-making processes. Firstly,
the VLMs are more skilled at handling multiple-choice decision tasks compared to 3D geometry
question answering (i.e., directly inferring the 3D coordinates of next waypoints). Moreover, the
introduction of imagination enhances the decision-making capability of the VLM by supplement-
ing detailed information about distant or visually unclear objects. The advanced planning module
proposes new sub-goals after the low-level controller completes navigation to the designated target.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Target: Find a couch
                                                        Analyzing the composite image for the navigation
                                                        goal of finding a couch:
                  Original scenarios


                                                        --Option 1: Shows a living area with a TV
                                                        visible. This direction is promising as it might
                                                        contain the target object.
                                                        --Option 2: Shows a living area with a couch
                                                        visible.
                                                        --Option 3: Shows a bedroom area, which is
                                                        unlikely to contain the couch. This direction is not
                                                        promising.
                                                        --Option 4: This image shows a wall with picture,
                 Future-view scenarios
                                                        making it less relevant.
                                                        --Option 5: Shows a view of the kitchen with no
      Option 1        Option 2           Option 3       couch visible.
                                                        --Option 6: Displays a dining area with chairs, no
                                                        couch visible.

      Option 4        Option 5           Option 6       Based on the analysis, the most promising picture
                                                        to find a couch is **Option 2**, where a couch is
                                                        clearly visible in the living area.


Figure 3: An example of the VLM analysis. By examining different future-view scenarios, the VLM
pinpoints the direction most likely to incorporate the target object couch.


3.4     C ONTROLLER

After the high-level planner provides the navigation points, the low-level controller executes Point
Goal Navigation (PointNav) strategy to achieve these targets. Unlike ObjectNav, PointNav (turn to
∆x, ∆y) does not rely on semantic information from the environment but is instead driven solely by
spatial perception. Currently, there are many methods available for achieving PointNav (Yang et al.,
2023; Roth et al., 2024; Wijmans et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2024). To determine the execution actions
at each step of the PointNav process, we use Variable Experience Rollout (VER) (Wijmans et al.,
2022) as our underlying goal navigation strategy. VER combines the advantages of synchronous
and asynchronous reinforcement learning, improving training efficiency and sample utilization in
PointNav tasks, thereby enabling the agent to demonstrate stronger adaptability and generalization
capabilities in complex environments.


4      E XPERIMENTS

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP AND METRICS

We evaluate the effectiveness and navigation efficiency of our proposed method using the Habitat
v3.0 simulator (Puig et al., 2023) on two standard ObjectNav datasets: HM3D (Ramakrishnan et al.,
2021) and HSSD (Khanna et al., 2023). The HM3D dataset offers high-fidelity reconstructions
of 20 entire buildings, including 80 training scenes and 20 validation scenes. The HSSD dataset
provides 40 high-quality synthetic scenes, comprising 110 training scenes and 40 validation scenes.
The experimental setup follows the ObjectNav-challenge-2023 (Yadav et al., 2023). For the data
collection of the Where2Imagine module, we leveraged human demonstration trajectories from the
MP3D (Chang et al., 2017) dataset within the habitat-web project with the camera height 0.88m and
horizontal field of view (HFOV) of 79°. We report the performance in terms of Success Rate (SR),
defined as the proportion of episodes where the agent’s distance to the target object is less than 1m
after executing the STOP action, and SPL (Anderson et al., 2018), Success weighted by path length,


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             PN
                             ℓi
SP L = N1 i=1 Si max(p          i ,ℓi )
                                          , where Si be a binary success indicator in episode i, pi is the
agent path length and ℓi is the GT path length.

4.2   BASELINES

We conducted a comparative analysis of non-zero-shot and zero-shot ObjectNav methods to sub-
stantiate our proposed approach. Yamauchi (Topiwala et al., 2018) pioneered a frontier-based ex-
ploration strategy, emphasizing the boundaries between explored and unexplored regions. Sem-
Exp (Chaplot et al., 2020) advanced this concept by implementing goal-directed semantic explo-
ration through the construction of semantic maps. In addition, we examined non-mapping closed-
set object navigation baselines, including those based on imitation learning (Ramrakhya et al., 2022)
and visual representation learning (Yadav et al., 2022).
For zero-shot object navigation, we consider several mapping-based baselines (Zhou et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2024b; Yokoyama et al., 2023) that integrate commonsense knowledge and semantic
information to facilitate direct navigation toward target objects, leveraging semantic comprehension
from pre-trained large models to aid in navigation. Furthermore, we explored RGB-based non-
mapping navigation baselines: ZSON (Majumdar et al., 2022), which employs the CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) model to embed target images and object goals within a unified semantic space, thereby
training a semantic goal-navigation agent, and PixNav (Cai et al., 2023), which utilizes pixel-level
goal guidance, enabling pixel navigation through the use of VLMs and LLMs.

4.3   COMPARISON WITH PRIOR WORK

Table 1 presents a comparative analysis of the proposed ImagineNav against prior research efforts.
On the HM3D dataset, ImagineNav achieves a success rate of 53.0% and a SPL of 23.8%, sig-
nificantly outperforming most of the methods especially at success rate. Moreover, ImagineNav
achieves the highest success rate and SPL on the HSSD dataset. Particularly, in open-vocabulary
navigation tasks, our mapless ImagineNav even outperforms the best-performing map-based method
VLFM (Yokoyama et al., 2023) by 0.5% at success rate. The above observations indicate that our
ImagineNav demonstrates outstanding navigation performance across various settings, while main-
taining low storage and computational complexities. Furthermore, since the pretrained NVS is di-
rectly employed without finetunned on the HM3D and HSSD datasets, we see a disparity between
the quality of images generated by the NVS model and real images, limiting the capability of our
model to some extent. To explore the upper limits of our framework, we instead use real panoramic
images—specifically, the observation at the pose predicted by the Where2Imagine module—as vi-
sual prompts for the VLM model. Notably, both the success rate and SPL exhibit obvious improve-
ments, obtaining 62.0% and 59.0% at success rate respectively on H3MD and HSSD benchmarks,
which further demonstrates the superiority of our imagination-based navigation framework.

Table 1: ImagineNav: Comparison with previous work. The Where2Imagine model with T=11,
utilizing ResNet-18 trained from scratch and GPT-4o-mini as the VLM, was evaluated over 200
epochs on the HM3D and HSSD datasets. ImagineNav uses NVS model to generate novel view
images, while ImagineNav-Oracle uses real images of the candidate points.


                                                                          HM3D                  HSSD
               Method                   Open-Vocabulary   Mapless
                                                                    Success Rate   SPL    Success Rate   SPL
      FBE (Topiwala et al., 2018)             ✗             ✗           33.7       15.3       36.0       17.7
    SemExp (Chaplot et al., 2020)             ✗             ✗           37.9       18.8        -          -
 Habitat-Web (Ramrakhya et al., 2022)         ✗             ✓           41.5       16.0        -          -
      OVRL (Yadav et al., 2022)               ✗             ✓           62.0       26.8        -          -
        ESC (Zhou et al., 2023)               ✓             ✗           39.2       22.3        -          -
      VoroNav (Wu et al., 2024b)              ✓             ✗           42.0       26.0       41.0       23.2
   VLFM (Yokoyama et al., 2023)               ✓             ✗           52.5       30.4        -          -
    ZSON (Majumdar et al., 2022)              ✓             ✓           25.5       12.6        -          -
       PixNav (Cai et al., 2023)              ✓             ✓           37.9       20.5        -          -
            ImagineNav                        ✓             ✓           53.0       23.8       51.0       24.9
         ImagineNav-Oracle                    ✓             ✓           62.0       31.1       59.0       27.0



                                                      7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 4.4                      A BLATION S TUDY ON M AIN C OMPONENTS

 We conducted an ablation study on
 main components of the imagina- Table 2: ImagineNav: ablation study on the imagination
 tion module to demonstrate their ef- module. ‘Imagination’ refers to whether the future imagi-
 fectiveness, with each variant eval- nations are used as visual prompts of the VLM. When it is
 uated for 100 epoches. As shown removed, we feed current observations into VLM for decid-
 in Table 2, we increase success rate ing the best exploration direction, and set the next waypoint
 from 43.0 to 55.0 by utilizing future 2 meters away from the current location along the direction.
 imaginations as visual prompt of the Here, the distance of 2 meters is considered as it is compara-
 VLM for deciding exploration direc- ble to that generated by T=11. ‘NVS’ indicates whether the
 tion. Please note that at row #2 with- image is captured from a real environment or synthesized
 out Where2Imagine, we simply gen- via the NVS model.
 erate future views at the six locations,
 which are two meters away from cur-                                                   HM3D
 rent observations along their respec-    Imagination Where2Imagine      NVS
 tive observation orientations. This                                             Success Rate SPL
 improvement suggests the superior-           ✗             ✗           Oracle       43.0      24.7
 ity of future imagination in facilitat-      ✓             ✗           Oracle       55.0      27.6
 ing VLM’s reasoning. Such improve-           ✓            ✓            Oracle       64.0      28.3
 ments can be attributed to the greater       ✓             ✗         PolyOculus     49.0      23.3
 semantic disparity between different         ✓            ✓          PolyOculus     56.0      24.3
 imaginations, as illustrated in Figure
 4. Further incorporating Where2Image improve success rate from 55.0 to 64.0, and from 49.0 to
 56.0 under settings of ‘NVS’ and ‘w/o NVS’, respectively. As mentioned above, the capability of
 our ImagineNav is limited by the performance of the off-the-shelf NVS model (Yu et al., 2024) to
 some extent as evidenced by comparing rows #2 with #4 and rows #3 with #5. Nevertheless, the
 incorporation of Where2Imagine partially mitigates the adverse effects of the NVS model.
   Current Observations


                           Option 1   Option 2    Option 3
                                                                   You will be provided with the following elements:
                                                                   (1)<Navigation Goal>: toilet
                                                                   (2)<Candidate Images>
                          Option 4     Option 5   Option 6         Evaluate these six images and choose the most
                                                                   suitable one for exploration.


                                                                    Answer={'Reason’: 'The image shows a clear
                                                                    view of a hallway leading to another room,
   Future Imaginations


                           Option 1   Option 2    Option 3
                                                                    which is likely to contain the toilet., ‘Choice’: 3}


                                                                   Answer={'Reason': 'The image shows a hallway
                          Option 4    Option 5    Option 6         leading to a bathroom. The other pictures do not
                                                                   indicate potential access to a bathroom.’,
                                                                   ‘Choice’: 2}


 Figure 4: Visualization of the synthesized image observations at future navigation waypoints pre-
 dicted by the imagination module. It can be seen that there exists drastic semantic disparity between
 different imaginations. In contrast, the semantic information is relatively consistent across different
 current observations. The varying semantics across different future views highlight the advantages
 of the imagination module in enhancing the VLM’s decision-making capabilities.

 4.5                      A NALYSIS OF S UCCESSFUL AND FAILED T RAJECTORIES

 Figure 5 illustrates that our method achieves efficient path planning and navigation across different
 targets.
Target:    Especially,
        chair,            as SPL:
               Success: True, shown
                                  0.60in Target:
                                         the topbed,
                                                 middle    ofTrue,
                                                     Success: Figure  5,0.63
                                                                   SPL:  the agent
                                                                              Target:needs
                                                                                      couch,to navigate
                                                                                             Success: True,through
                                                                                                            SPL: 0.90mul-
 tiple rooms. The complex environment increases the risk of losing direction, but our ImagineNav
 successfully infers the optimal path and finds the target, demonstrating its ability to handle long-
 distance and multi-room scenarios. We also present some failure examples at the bottom of Figure


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5. We identified three key factors contributing to these navigation failures. First, some object in-
stances are neglected for marking by the simulator, and therefore a successfully trajectory is wrongly
considered as a failure (a.k.a. false failure) as shown in the bottom left of Figure 5. Second, the syn-
thesized image from the NVS does not align with the real observation, such as creating objects that
are not present in the real scene as shown in the middle of Figure 5, which causes the VLM to make
incorrect inference. Moreover, the lack of historical information make the agent easily trapped in
local optima, thereby limiting its performance in long-term navigationas shown in the bottom right
of Figure 5.


Figure 5: Visualization of the navigation trajectory. The top and bottom rows respectively show the
complete top-down trajectories of successful and unsuccessful examples.

4.6   A NALYSIS OF W HERE 2I MAGINE MODULE

We explore the impact of the sampling step T on the final navigation performance by varying T
from 8 to 15. For each T, we re-generate the labeled image data and re-train the ResNet-18 for
relative pose prediction. Each variant was tested for 100 epochs under conditions where the agent
had access to real panoramic observations. As shown in Table 3, the best success rate and SPL
are obtained when T is set to 11. Furthermore, we visualize several navigational trajectories under
different values of T in Figure 6 to facilitate explanation. As can be seen, when T is relatively
small (i,e., 8), the agent is easily trapped as marked by red square, since it mainly resorts to local
semantic information for inferring its exploration direction, making it susceptible to converging on
suboptimal local solutions.


Figure 6: Comparison of trajectories at different sampling steps T. This image presents a top-down
view of the entire trajectory as the agent searches for the target (a chair). The red box highlights the
situation where the agent encounters a local trap during navigation.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Conversely, when T is excessively large, although the agent has access to more distant information,
it is prone to miss some critical intermediate semantics which are closely related to target and are
worth exploring, leading to erroneous long-range decisions, particularly in intricate environments.
However, an optimally calibrated T can strike a delicate balance between exploration and perception,
thereby facilitating to obtain impressive navigation performance.
We compared different backbones to evaluate their impacts on both the relative waypoint prediction
and final navigation performances. Specifically, we modified the final output layers of the ResNet-
18 and ViT to fit our dataset, allowing parameter updates during training. In contrast, DINOv2
and MAE models were connected to a five-layer MLP, with only the MLP parameters trained while
freezing the backbone. The experiments were conducted on real RGB observations without resort-
ing to the NVS model. Each variant was tested for 100 epochs. The results in Table 4 show that
the ResNet-18, when trained from scratch, achieves the best performances in both relative wayopint
prediction and ObjectNav while featuring a more lightweight architecture. Furthermore, the large
performance gap between different backnones suggests the importance of the Where2Imagine mod-
ule, indicating the usefulness of learning from human demonstrations. Please note that we observe a
slight inconsistency between waypoint prediction loss and navigation success rate under backnones
of DINOv2 and MAE. This might be because the waypoint prediction is evaluated on the testing
data from MP3D dataset while the navigation is performed on HM3D. The differences between the
datasets result in a certain degree of variability.

Table 3: Where2Imagine:         Table 4: Where2Imagine: the impact of different backbones. Loss
the influence of sampling       refers to the test loss of Where2Imagine. TFS: training from scratch,
step T on navigation perfor-    FT: fine-tuning.
mance.
                                                                                         HM3D
                                     Backbone         Params       Flops    Loss
               HM3D                                                                Success Rate   SPL
    T
         Success Rate   SPL       ResNet-18 (TFS)     11.4M         1.8G    0.12       64.0       28.3
  8          51.0       25.1      ResNet-18 (FT)      11.4M         1.8G    0.24       61.0       29.7
 10          64.0       29.4         ViT (TFS)        86.0M        16.9G    0.22       61.0       29.7
 11          64.0       28.3         ViT (FT)         86.0M        16.9G    0.23       58.0       31.0
 12          59.0       30.0          DINOv2          22.6M         5.5G    0.22       58.0       27.9
 15          59.0       26.8           MAE            87.1M         4.4G    0.20       57.0       26.5


4.7     A NALYSIS OF VLM PLANNER

We conducted a comparative evaluation of the effects of differ-
ent VLMs on navigation performance, as detailed in Table 5.          Table 5: Effect of different VLM.
The experiments used real RGB without NVS model. The re-
sults demonstrate that GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4-Turbo exhibit                                HM3D
negligible differences in success rate and SPL metrics, while              VLM
                                                                                    Success Rate SPL
showing a marked advantage over LLaVa, underscoring the
significant role of advanced model reasoning capabilities in in-       LLaVa            44.0      21.6
fluencing experimental outcomes. Moreover, for models of the         GPT-4-Turbo        63.0      29.4
                                                                     GPT-4o-mini        64.0      28.3
same architecture, it is possible to opt for more cost-effective
variants without compromising navigation performance, thus
enabling more resource-efficient and time-saving.


5       CONCLUSION

We propose the ImagineNav framework, a mapless, open-vocabulary object navigation approach
leveraging VLM. By incorporating imagination mechanism, the system effectively predicts future
waypoints, transforming traditional navigation planning into a visual selection task for the VLM.
Ablation studies highlight ImagineNav’s strong potential for long-horizon navigation. Moving for-
ward, we aim to enhance the quality of viewpoint generation and optimize the use of historical
memory to further improve navigation performance and robustness.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
62273093).

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances, 2022. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2204.01691.
Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta,
  Vladlen Koltun, Jana Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, and Amir R.
  Zamir. On evaluation of embodied navigation agents, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1807.06757.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Wenzhe Cai, Siyuan Huang, Guangran Cheng, Yuxing Long, Peng Gao, Changyin Sun, and Hao
 Dong. Bridging zero-shot object navigation and foundation models through pixel-guided naviga-
 tion skill, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.10309.
Anh-Quan Cao and Raoul de Charette. Scenerf: Self-supervised monocular 3d scene reconstruction
  with radiance fields, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02501.
Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Maciej Halber, Matthias Niessner, Manolis Savva,
  Shuran Song, Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. Matterport3d: Learning from rgb-d data in indoor
  environments. International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2017.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Prakashchand Gandhi, Abhinav Gupta, and Russ R Salakhutdinov.
  Object goal navigation using goal-oriented semantic exploration. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:4247–4258, 2020.
Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong
  Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, et al. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning
  for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 24185–24198, 2024.
Tianheng Cheng, Lin Song, Yixiao Ge, Wenyu Liu, Xinggang Wang, and Ying Shan. Yolo-world:
  Real-time open-vocabulary object detection. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):
  1–113, 2023.
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Albert Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose
 vision-language models with instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06500, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Ludwig Schmidt, and Shuran Song.
  Cows on pasture: Baselines and benchmarks for language-driven zero-shot object navigation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  23171–23181, 2023.

Peng Gao, Jiaming Han, Renrui Zhang, Ziyi Lin, Shijie Geng, Aojun Zhou, Wei Zhang, Pan Lu,
  Conghui He, Xiangyu Yue, et al. Llama-adapter v2: Parameter-efficient visual instruction model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.15010, 2023.

Georgios Georgakis, Bernadette Bucher, Karl Schmeckpeper, Siddharth Singh, and Kostas Dani-
  ilidis. Learning to map for active semantic goal navigation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2106.15648.

Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.

Chenguang Huang, Oier Mees, Andy Zeng, and Wolfram Burgard. Visual language maps for robot
  navigation, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05714.

Haoxu Huang, Fanqi Lin, Yingdong Hu, Shengjie Wang, and Yang Gao. Copa: General robotic
  manipulation through spatial constraints of parts with foundation models, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2403.08248.

Siyuan Huang, Zhengkai Jiang, Hao Dong, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and Hongsheng Li. Instruct2act:
  Mapping multi-modality instructions to robotic actions with large language model, 2023b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11176.

Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-
 shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents, 2022. URL https://
 arxiv.org/abs/2201.07207.

Apoorv Khandelwal, Luca Weihs, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Simple but ef-
  fective: Clip embeddings for embodied ai. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14829–14838, 2022.

Mukul Khanna, Yongsen Mao, Hanxiao Jiang, Sanjay Haresh, Brennan Shacklett, Dhruv Batra,
 Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Angel X. Chang, and Manolis Savva. Habitat synthetic
 scenes dataset (hssd-200): An analysis of 3d scene scale and realism tradeoffs for objectgoal
 navigation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11290.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026,
  2023.

Yuxuan Kuang, Hai Lin, and Meng Jiang. Openfmnav: Towards open-set zero-shot object navigation
  via vision-language foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10670, 2024.

Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ra-
  masesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, Yuhuai Wu, Behnam
  Neyshabur, Guy Gur-Ari, and Vedant Misra. Solving quantitative reasoning problems with lan-
  guage models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.14858.

Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.07753.

Jing Liang, Peng Gao, Xuesu Xiao, Adarsh Jagan Sathyamoorthy, Mohamed Elnoor, Ming C. Lin,
   and Dinesh Manocha. Mtg: Mapless trajectory generator with traversability coverage for outdoor
   navigation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.08214.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yiqing Liang, Boyuan Chen, and Shuran Song. Sscnav: Confidence-aware semantic scene com-
  pletion for visual semantic navigation. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), pp. 13194–13200, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9560925.

Ji Lin, Hongxu Yin, Wei Ping, Yao Lu, Pavlo Molchanov, Andrew Tao, Huizi Mao, Jan Kautz,
   Mohammad Shoeybi, and Song Han. Vila: On pre-training for visual language models, 2024.
   URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07533.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.

Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.

Joel Loo, Zhanxin Wu, and David Hsu. Open scene graphs for open world object-goal navigation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02473, 2024.

Arjun Majumdar, Gunjan Aggarwal, Bhavika Devnani, Judy Hoffman, and Dhruv Batra. Zson:
  Zero-shot object-goal navigation using multimodal goal embeddings. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:32340–32352, 2022.

Soroush Nasiriany, Fei Xia, Wenhao Yu, Ted Xiao, Jacky Liang, Ishita Dasgupta, Annie Xie, Danny
  Driess, Ayzaan Wahid, Zhuo Xu, Quan Vuong, Tingnan Zhang, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Kuang-
  Huei Lee, Peng Xu, Sean Kirmani, Yuke Zhu, Andy Zeng, Karol Hausman, Nicolas Heess,
  Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Brian Ichter. Pivot: Iterative visual prompting elicits actionable
  knowledge for vlms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.07872.

Xavier Puig, Eric Undersander, Andrew Szot, Mikael Dallaire Cote, Tsung-Yen Yang, Ruslan Part-
  sey, Ruta Desai, Alexander William Clegg, Michal Hlavac, So Yeon Min, Vladimı́r Vondruš,
  Theophile Gervet, Vincent-Pierre Berges, John M. Turner, Oleksandr Maksymets, Zsolt Kira,
  Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Jitendra Malik, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Unnat Jain, Dhruv Batra, Ak-
  shara Rai, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Habitat 3.0: A co-habitat for humans, avatars and robots,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13724.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Santhosh K. Ramakrishnan, Ziad Al-Halah, and Kristen Grauman. Occupancy anticipation for effi-
  cient exploration and navigation, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.09285.

Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Aaron Gokaslan, Erik Wijmans, Oleksandr Maksymets, Alexan-
  der Clegg, John M Turner, Eric Undersander, Wojciech Galuba, Andrew Westbury, Angel X
  Chang, Manolis Savva, Yili Zhao, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (HM3d): 1000
  large-scale 3d environments for embodied AI. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.

Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Ziad Al-Halah, Jitendra Malik, and Kris-
  ten Grauman. Poni: Potential functions for objectgoal navigation with interaction-free learning.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  18890–18900, 2022.

Ram Ramrakhya, Eric Undersander, Dhruv Batra, and Abhishek Das. Habitat-web: Learning
  embodied object-search strategies from human demonstrations at scale, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2204.03514.

Ram Ramrakhya, Dhruv Batra, Erik Wijmans, and Abhishek Das. Pirlnav: Pretraining with imita-
  tion and rl finetuning for objectnav. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 17896–17906, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pascal Roth, Julian Nubert, Fan Yang, Mayank Mittal, and Marco Hutter. Viplanner: Visual semantic
  imperative learning for local navigation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
  00982.
Kyle Sargent, Zizhang Li, Tanmay Shah, Charles Herrmann, Hong-Xing Yu, Yunzhi Zhang,
  Eric Ryan Chan, Dmitry Lagun, Li Fei-Fei, Deqing Sun, and Jiajun Wu. Zeronvs: Zero-shot
  360-degree view synthesis from a single image, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2310.17994.
Dhruv Shah, Michael Robert Equi, Błażej Osiński, Fei Xia, Brian Ichter, and Sergey Levine. Naviga-
  tion with large language models: Semantic guesswork as a heuristic for planning. In Conference
  on Robot Learning, pp. 2683–2699. PMLR, 2023.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Anirudh Topiwala, Pranav Inani, and Abhishek Kathpal. Frontier based exploration for autonomous
  robot, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.03581.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Hung-Yu Tseng, Qinbo Li, Changil Kim, Suhib Alsisan, Jia-Bin Huang, and Johannes Kopf. Con-
  sistent view synthesis with pose-guided diffusion models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2303.17598.
Erik Wijmans, Irfan Essa, and Dhruv Batra. Ver: Scaling on-policy rl leads to the emergence
  of navigation in embodied rearrangement, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.
  05064.
Felix Wimbauer, Nan Yang, Christian Rupprecht, and Daniel Cremers. Behind the scenes: Density
  fields for single view reconstruction, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.07668.
Junfeng Wu, Yi Jiang, Qihao Liu, Zehuan Yuan, Xiang Bai, and Song Bai. General object foundation
  model for images and videos at scale. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3783–3795, 2024a.
Pengying Wu, Yao Mu, Bingxian Wu, Yi Hou, Ji Ma, Shanghang Zhang, and Chang Liu.
  Voronav: Voronoi-based zero-shot object navigation with large language model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.02695, 2024b.
Karmesh Yadav, Ram Ramrakhya, Arjun Majumdar, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Sachit Kuhar, Dhruv
  Batra, Alexei Baevski, and Oleksandr Maksymets. Offline visual representation learning for em-
  bodied navigation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.13226.
Karmesh Yadav, Jacob Krantz, Ram Ramrakhya, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Jimmy Yang,
  Austin Wang, John Turner, Aaron Gokaslan, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Roozbeh Mootaghi, Olek-
  sandr Maksymets, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Alexander Clegg, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  and Dhruv Batra. https://aihabitat.org/challenge/2023/, 2023.
Fan Yang, Chen Wang, Cesar Cadena, and Marco Hutter. iplanner: Imperative path planning, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.11434.
Naoki Yokoyama, Sehoon Ha, Dhruv Batra, Jiuguang Wang, and Bernadette Bucher. Vlfm: Vision-
  language frontier maps for zero-shot semantic navigation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2312.03275.
Bangguo Yu, Hamidreza Kasaei, and Ming Cao. L3mvn: Leveraging large language models for
  visual target navigation. 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
  Systems (IROS), pp. 3554–3560, 2023a.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jason J. Yu, Fereshteh Forghani, Konstantinos G. Derpanis, and Marcus A. Brubaker. Long-term
  photometric consistent novel view synthesis with diffusion models, 2023b. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2304.10700.
Jason J. Yu, Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong, Fereshteh Forghani, Konstantinos G. Derpanis, and
  Marcus A. Brubaker. Polyoculus: Simultaneous multi-view image-based novel view synthesis,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17986.
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Brian Ichter, Krzysztof Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker,
  Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Van-
  houcke, and Pete Florence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with
  language, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.00598.
Albert J. Zhai and Shenlong Wang. Peanut: Predicting and navigating to unseen targets, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02497.
Lingfeng Zhang, Qiang Zhang, Hao Wang, Erjia Xiao, Zixuan Jiang, Honglei Chen, and Ren-
  jing Xu. Trihelper: Zero-shot object navigation with dynamic assistance. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.15223, 2024a.
Sixian Zhang, Xinyao Yu, Xinhang Song, Xiaohan Wang, and Shuqiang Jiang. Imagine before
  go: Self-supervised generative map for object goal navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 16414–16425, June 2024b.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Kaiwen Zhou, Kaizhi Zheng, Connor Pryor, Yilin Shen, Hongxia Jin, Lise Getoor, and Xin Eric
  Wang. Esc: Exploration with soft commonsense constraints for zero-shot object navigation, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.13166.
Xingyi Zhou, Rohit Girdhar, Armand Joulin, Philipp Krähenbühl, and Ishan Misra. Detecting
  twenty-thousand classes using image-level supervision. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 350–368. Springer, 2022.
Minzhao Zhu, Binglei Zhao, and Tao Kong. Navigating to objects in unseen environments by dis-
 tance prediction, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.03735.


                                               15
