Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L AYER S WAPPING FOR Z ERO -S HOT C ROSS -L INGUAL
T RANSFER IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS


    Lucas Bandarkar§∗     Benjamin Muller            Pritish Yuvraj
    Rui Hou     Nayan Singhal       Hongjiang Lv          Bing Liu
                           §
    Meta GenAI               University of California, Los Angeles


                                              A BSTRACT
            Model merging, such as model souping, is the practice of combining different
            models with the same architecture together without further training. In this work,
            we present a model merging methodology that addresses the difficulty of fine-
            tuning Large Language Models (LLMs) for target tasks in non-English languages,
            where task-specific data is often unavailable. We focus on mathematical reasoning
            and without in-language math data, facilitate cross-lingual transfer by composing
            language and math capabilities. Starting from the same pretrained model, we fine-
            tune separate “experts” on math instruction data in English and on generic instruc-
            tion data in the target language. We then replace the top and bottom transformer
            layers of the math expert directly with layers from the language expert, which
            consequently enhances math performance in the target language. The resulting
            merged models outperform the individual experts and other merging methods on
            the math benchmark, MGSM, by 10% across four major languages where math
            instruction data is scarce. In addition, this layer swapping is simple, inexpensive,
            and intuitive, as it is based on an interpretative analysis of the most important
            parameter changes during the fine-tuning of each expert. The ability to success-
            fully re-compose LLMs for cross-lingual transfer in this manner opens up future
            possibilities to combine model expertise, create modular solutions, and transfer
            reasoning capabilities across languages all post hoc.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Instruction fine-tuning Large Language Models (LLMs) is necessary to customize pre-trained mod-
els for real-world applications. This fine-tuning is especially critical in multilingual settings because
most popular open-source LLMs have been pretrained on highly English-centric data (Jiang et al.,
2023; Llama et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a). Although recent LLMs such as L LAMA 3 and Q WEN 2
have seen more than a trillion non-English tokens due to the sheer scale of their pretraining datasets,
these tokens are still heavily concentrated in just a few languages, resulting in limited capabili-
ties for most other non-English languages (Llama et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a). Furthermore,
the scarcity of high-quality labeled data available for post-training in non-English languages and the
tremendous cost of procuring it further exacerbates the inequality. Even machine-translating English
post-training data into target languages—a typical solution—has significant computational overhead
and often leads to datasets of unreliable quality (Khanuja et al., 2024). Numerous efforts have set out
to annotate or assemble high-quality datasets for lower-resource languages (Khan et al., 2024; Singh
et al., 2024b; Tonja et al., 2024), but a massive gap still exists in many tasks and domains, such as
math. As a result, developers are forced to largely rely on cross-lingual transfer—the generalization
of learned capacities from high-resource languages to lower ones—but the rate of such transfer is
low for most languages (Philippy et al., 2023).
In this paper, we present a novel solution that merges two LLMs together in order to transfer math
reasoning capabilities to lower-resource languages during supervised fine-tuning (SFT). In the ab-
sence of in-language math data, we fine-tune two variants of the same pretrained model: one with
English math samples and the other with generic instruction data in the target language. Provided
    ∗
        Correspondence to lucasbandarkar@cs.ucla.edu


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Our merging method which swaps in top and bottom transformer layers from a language
expert into a math expert, buffered by a transition zone.


these variants, which we refer to as “experts”, we combine their learned language and task ca-
pabilities by re-composing an LLM with a mix of parameters from each while avoiding negative
interference. Notably, the top and bottom few transformer layers are selected from the language
expert, and the middle transformer layers are selected from the math expert. The intuition behind
this simple, yet strategic, method is informed by our analysis of the SFT updates that led to the ex-
perts. We find that the learned math capabilities are concentrated in the middle transformer layers,
especially in the second half of the model. Meanwhile, we find the enhanced language skills to have
come from parameters closest to the input and output, in line with previous literature stating that this
is where the most language-specific representations are concentrated (Wendler et al., 2024; Alabi
et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024). Therefore, our methodology takes the most important layers from
each expert and transfers math capabilities to the target language.
The resulting layer-swapped models deliver strong performance across numerous target languages
(Swahili, Telugu, Bengali, Japanese) on MGSM (Shi et al., 2023), the manually-translated version
of the Grade School Math benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2021). In all these major languages, where math
SFT data is not readily available, layer swapping outperforms baselines, the individual experts, and
model souping (Wortsman et al., 2022)) by 10% on average. For Swahili, layer swapping exceeds
MGSM performance of models fine-tuned on a mixed Swahili and math SFT dataset when evaluated.
Therefore, this methodology provides a simple and effective way to improve the capabilities of
LLMs without the need for any task-specific data in the target language. In addition, it is inexpensive
and fully post hoc, meaning that it has the potential to be practical in many settings. Fundamentally,
the success of this method also provides empirical evidence for cross-lingual patterns in the latent
structures of LLMs that can be further interpreted and exploited.
We discuss relevant literature in the following section. We then explain the analysis that led to our
methodology and present layer swapping in detail in Sections 3 and 4. Next, we show empirical
results and discuss findings in Sections 5 and 6. Finally, we propose future work prompted by the
success of this methodology in Section 7.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   M ODEL M ERGING

While the use of weight averaging to reduce noise in training well predates instability challenges
in deep neural networks (Breiman, 1996), the use of model merging to combine trained model


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


checkpoints is an emerging research space in deep learning. Similar to ensembling model outputs
(Dietterich, 2000), aggregating model weights also improves model robustness and generalization
(Izmailov et al., 2018), even if trained on the same data (Ramé et al., 2022). Numerous studies
seek to improve the pre-merging conditions, either via linearizing fine-tuning (Ortiz-Jimenez et al.,
2023) or aligning weights (Ainsworth et al., 2023). Wortsman et al. (2022) develops an empirical
method to average, or soup, model variants together to increase the search space during hyperparam-
eter tuning. However, simple weight averaging, is vulnerable to negative transfer, or interference,
between variants. To address this, methods have been proposed to selectively combine models at the
individual weight level, using either the magnitude and direction of the fine-tuning deltas (Ilharco
et al., 2023; Yadav et al., 2023; Davari & Belilovsky, 2024; Yu et al., 2024) or leveraging informa-
tion theory (Matena & Raffel, 2022). In parallel, sparse fine-tuning methods have been developed to
create fine-tuned models with a small proportion of weights changed (Guo et al., 2021; Sung et al.,
2021; Xu et al., 2021), which then allows adding together fine-tuning updates with less overlap.
Overall, model merging, especially inexpensive model souping, is very common in practice because
it improves training stability, model robustness and generalization, and performance by increasing
the search space or combining expertise in multi-task settings (Yang et al., 2024b).

2.2   LLM M ULTILINGUALITY

The inability for a language model to learn more languages without undermining other capabili-
ties—the curse of multilinguality (Conneau et al., 2020; Pfeiffer et al., 2022)—was a heavily studied
problem in encoder models. Beyond increasing vocabulary capacity (Zheng et al., 2021; Liang
et al., 2023), numerous works attempt to understand the quantity and location of language-specific
parameters (Wang et al., 2020; Muller et al., 2021; Choenni et al., 2023) in multilingual encoders.
While higher rates of language-specific parameters were found in the top and bottom layers (Chang
et al., 2022; Choenni et al., 2024), language specialization occurs throughout the model. And while
recently model scaling has mitigated the limitation from parameter quantity, the massive amount of
labeled data needed to train LLMs presents a new challenge. In encoder models, cross-lingual trans-
fer was enhanced by aligning cross-lingual representations (Ouyang et al., 2021; Patra et al., 2023;
Gaschi et al., 2023), but this is difficult in decoder-only models (Jain et al., 2023). To boost transfer
in post-training, several data augmentation solutions have been proposed, both for SFT (Qin et al.,
2023; Chai et al., 2024) or reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Dang et al., 2024;
She et al., 2024; Lai et al., 2024). Recent work finds that English-centric LLMs process multilingual
text by mapping them to and from English representations in the first and last transformer layers to
take advantage of English-based capabilities (Kojima et al., 2024; Wendler et al., 2024; Tang et al.,
2024; Alabi et al., 2024). This leads to benefits from prompting such LLMs to “think in English”,
thereby promoting this internal mapping (Shi et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024b).

2.3   M ODEL M ERGING FOR C ROSS -L INGUAL T RANSFER

To address the limited representational capacity of multilingual models, many solutions have been
proposed to strategically share or split parts of the model. This could be major blocks, as in mixture-
of-experts (Fedus et al., 2022; NLLB et al., 2022), or a few parameters in each layer, as in cross-
lingual adapters (Pfeiffer et al., 2020; 2022). Ansell et al. (2022) combines modular and sparse
fine-tuning approaches in a two-stage SFT, where first task and language experts are fine-tuned and
all weights that did not change more than a threshold are masked. Next, the experts are fine-tuned
again from the pretrained model with this mask, creating sparse task vectors that can be composed
together with lower rates of parameter overlap. This composable sparse fine-tuning was also adapted
for larger decoder-only LLMs (Ansell et al., 2024). In this work, we develop a simpler and more
flexible merging method for cross-lingual transfer that does not require fine-tuning more than once.


3     P RELIMINARY A NALYSIS

3.1   S ETUP

We start by training numerous math and language “experts” by fine-tuning L LAMA 3.1 8B (Llama
et al., 2024). We perform SFT runs using next token prediction with 30-40k labeled samples with


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


varying hyperparameters1 and for each type of expert, select the three best checkpoints. The math
experts were fine-tuned on English math word problems from the Orca-Math synthetic dataset (Mi-
tra et al., 2024). In order to select the three experts, we use results on the English splits of MGSM,
as well as the average across languages. For the language experts, we select Swahili, Bengali,
Telugu, and Japanese as the target languages. These are languages present in MGSM and other
benchmarks discussed below, but where L LAMA 3.1’s performance lags behind the top languages
like Spanish. In addition, the lack of in-language math instruction data in these languages moti-
vates the need for effective methods for zero-shot cross-lingual transfer. For each, we mix together
samples from available instruction datasets in that language to create experts with enhanced general
language and instruction-following capabilities. The resulting datasets contain many different types
of tasks—such as translation, NER, and question-answering—but no math2 . After numerous SFT
runs on these “generic” multi-task datasets, the three checkpoints for each language are primarily
selected based off their performance on the target language splits on B ELEBELE (Bandarkar et al.,
2024) and FL O R ES (NLLB et al., 2022). These simple tasks, reading comprehension and trans-
lation, are strong indicators of basic language understanding and generation capabilities. We also
ensure slight improvement on MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021), and
MGSM as secondary measures of language improvement 3 .

3.2    PARAMETER A NALYSIS OF SFT


              (2A) Japanese expert #1                                  (2B) Math expert #1

Figure 2: This visualization displays the location with more significant magnitude of change dur-
ing SFT for two representative experts across transformer layers and parameter types. In detail,
this shows the percentage of rows for each 2-dimensional parameter in the 32 transformer layers of
L LAMA 3.1 8B where the mean absolute value is above a threshold (1.9 × 10−5 and 1.0 × 10−5 , re-
spectively). Darker green shading represents parameters changing more significantly, relative to the
others. Larger versions of these images, as well as for more experts, can be found in Appendix A.5

For these experts, we first investigate where the parameters are being updated the most and where
they remain unchanged during fine-tuning. Using similar notation to Ilharco et al. (2023), let
θpre , θf t be the set of weights for the pretrained model and fine-tuned expert, respectively. We
generalize the delta of fine-tuning as W∆ = Wf t − Wpre for all one- or two-dimensional param-
eters W ∈ θ. To compare deltas across parameter tensors with different shapes, we represent the
   1
     Training specifics such as hyperparameters are provided in Appendix A.2
   2
     Dataset details are provided in Appendix A.1
   3
     See results of chosen experts in Appendix A.3


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


magnitude of change at the row level using the mean absolute value (MAV) of the difference W∆
(for one-dimensional parameters, this is simply the MAV across the vector).
We observe highly consistent patterns in the W∆ magnitudes among math experts and, separately,
among language experts. The latter is particularly notable given the varying mixtures of tasks and
data samples for each language. In Figure 2, we show a visualization for a representative language
expert and a representative math expert. For the language expert, we find that the attention param-
eters (left four columns in the visualization, referring to WQ , WK , WV , and WO , respectively) are
getting updated most significantly, notably in the first couple layers (bottom) and the last couple lay-
ers (top). The feed-forward layers (right three columns, referring to W1 , W3 , and W2 , respectively)
do not change at all until the last few layers. In comparison, the math experts follow a different pat-
tern. In these runs, the first half (bottom 16 layers) remain largely unchanged. In this second half,
the attention parameters are being updated significantly, similar to language experts, yet the feed-
forward layers are also getting changed quite a bit. To demonstrate the consistency across training
runs and languages, we show the same visualization for more experts in Appendix A.5.

3.3   S PARSIFYING U PDATES

We then attempt to create sparse model updates for increased composability similar to Ansell et al.
(2022), but without retraining. We attempt to utilize the magnitude of the deltas to selectively up-
date the model without undermining performance gains. Concretely, we use thresholds to determine
whether to apply the update or revert the value to the original value in the pretrained L LAMA 3.1.
This is done at row-level granularity in order to not partially modify linear transformations. How-
ever, in our analysis across the math experts, we find that more than 70-80% of model parameters
are required to be updated for the increase in performance to remain equivalent. Such a small rate of
sparsification would not significantly reduce interference between the math and language experts.
We next attempt location-based sparsification. This means leveraging our intuition of what patterns
occur during fine-tuning to select specific parameter tensors to merge or not. A breakthrough was
made when we revert the first five and last two transformer layers of our math experts to their original
values. Despite undoing the SFT updates, the math experts maintain their increased performance.
This is significant when considered alongside our intuition that the first few and last few transformer
layers contain the most important language-specific parameters. This is based on our above analysis
and is supported by previous multilingual interpretability research on both encoder-decoder models
(Chang et al., 2022; Choenni et al., 2024) and decoder-only models (Tang et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2024c). Our discovery that SFT updates to these same layers are not critical for mathematical
reasoning led us to experiment with swapping them in from the language expert.

4     M ETHODOLOGY

4.1   L AYER S WAPPING

The layer swapping methodology takes two experts, one fine-tuned on the target language and the
other on the target task in English, and re-composes a single model with the top and bottom trans-
former layers from the language expert and the middle from the math expert.
As displayed in Figure 1, we additionally design a transition zone in between the off-the-shelf layers
from each expert. These buffer layers are weighted averages of the respective layers from each expert
that ensure that the output of one layer does not directly input into a layer fine-tuned separately.
While intuitively these transition zones seem necessary, we do not find empirical evidence that they
provide statistically significant benefit over replacing them with the math expert’s layers. However,
as discussed in Section 3.1, our experts were not fine-tuned for very long and therefore the latent
representation spaces after each layer would not have diverged very much from each other. This
explains, in theory, why transition zones were not helpful in our setting. We conjecture that if the
experts had been trained further (or simply with higher learning rates), such a buffer zone would be
necessary. We therefore still present it as a central component of our layer swapping methodology.
The implementation of layer swapping is as simple as iterating through the state dictionary of the
math expert and for each parameter, either: (1) keeping it as is, (2) replacing its value with that of
the language expert, or (3) averaging that of the math and language expert (see Algorithm 1).


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Layer Swapping
   Input: task expert θtask , language expert θlang , lower layers to swap b, upper layers to swap u,
    lower transition layers tb , upper transition layers tu , weight of each expert αtask , αlang , number
    of model layers L
   Output: Merged model θmerged
 1: for parameter name n in models parameters do
 2:    l ← layer number of n, N/A if n not attention or feedforward parameters
 3:    if l < b or l > L − 1 − u then
 4:       θmerged {n} ← θlang {n}                                # top & bottom layers from language expert
 5:    else if l > b − 1 + tb or l < L − u − tu then
 6:       θmerged {n} ← θtask {n}                                           # middle layers from task expert
 7:    else
 8:       θmerged {n} ← (αtask ∗ θtask {n} + αlang ∗ θlang {n})/(αtask + αlang ) # transition zone
 9:    end if
10: end for
11: Return θmerged


4.2   C ONFIGURATION

Layer swapping has several components that can be configured in various ways. Most notably, the
number of layers to swap at the top and bottom and the number of layers to include in the respective
transition zones. We tested how to configure these swapped layers and transition zones to most
effectively merge these models, empirically. We find, however, that there is a wide range of possible
configurations in which this methodology is still very effective. Note that all these experiments
were conducted on a 32-layer L LAMA 3.1 transformer model. For a model of this size, we find that
the desired configuration of each component is in the ranges listed below, with our default values
underlined:
      1. The number of bottom layers to swap b ∈ {3, 4, 5}
      2. The number of top layers to swap u ∈ {0, 1, 2}
      3. The number of layers in the lower transition zone tb ∈ {0, 1, 2}
      4. The number of layers in the upper transition zone tu ∈ {0, 1, 2}
      5. The transition zones are averages of the layers from both (i.e. soups) that can be unweighted
         or magnitude-adjusted weighted averages (αtask , αlang ).
      6. The non-transformer parameters (input token embeddings, output layers, etc.) work best if
         they are also averages of the two experts, as opposed to simply from the language expert.


 (3A) Possible config. with more layers swapped in.       (3B) Possible config. with less layers swapped in.

Figure 3: The comparison of the maximum (left) and minimum (right) swapping setups that we find
effective empirically. Note on the right, there are no upper layers directly from the language expert.

Although the results were largely equivalent within this range, some patterns did exist. We find that
for languages where performance was lower (e.g. Telugu), the higher performing configurations typ-


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ically had more layers from the language expert. This is perhaps because the boost from improving
the language capabilities was more important relative to languages L LAMA 3.1 was already better
at. For example for languages such as Japanese, the best configuration has close to the minimum
layers from language expert, similar to the minimum swap illustrated in Figure 3. The math expert
where the most cross-lingual transfer occurred naturally during SFT (that is, with the highest scores
on all four target languages), named “math expert #2”, performed understandably better with fewer
layers from the language expert swapped in. Generally, we conjecture that lower-resource languages
tend to require more layers from the language expert.

5      E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

5.1      E XPERIMENTS ON S WAHILI , T ELUGU , JAPANESE , AND B ENGALI

As discussed in Section 3.1, we launched SFT runs with different hyperparameters and on five dif-
ferent datasets: math data in English and generic instruction data in Bengali, Swahili, Telugu, and
Japanese. For each dataset, we selected three checkpoints, striking a balance between top perfor-
mance and sufficient diversity to ensure robust experimental results. For each language, the three
language experts could pair with any of the three math experts, which gives nine merged models to
evaluate. To understand the effectiveness of layer swapping, we present the MGSM scores of the
individual experts and the base model, L LAMA 3.1, to determine whether layer swapping construc-
tively combines the learned task and capabilities. In addition, we present results from the classic
model soup (Wortsman et al., 2022). Model souping is the most common model merging method in
practice, used in pre- and post-training for purposes such as boosting model robustness and gener-
alization, but also to combine capabilities of experts (Yu et al., 2024). In vanilla model souping, the
merged parameters are simple averages of the parameters of the input experts. For each language,
we additionally evaluate adjusting for the magnitude of change from the base model to the expert
using a weighted average. Using notation from Section 3.2, the resulting weight of each expert is
the inverse of the average MAV for all rows in all W∆ for that expert. For all model soup results
presented, we select the highest MGSM score amongst these possible configurations. Given the
number of experts and merged pairs in our evaluations, we present two aggregate metrics: the mean
and maximum of evaluations. While the mean demonstrates the consistency of each method, the
maximum demonstrates the ceiling of the method, which is often more desirable given the ability to
iterate through numerous settings during model training.

Table 1: MGSM 8-shot results of layer swapping across four languages compared to the indi-
vidual experts and model souping. Note that for aggregate statistics of the individual SFT runs, we
select the 3 best checkpoints from numerous training runs with periodic checkpointing. The merging
methods are aggregated over the 9 pairs (3 language experts × 3 math experts), which means the
min, avg, and max measures are not perfectly comparable.

    Setting        L LAMA      language         math expert      model soup       layer swap        layer swap
                   3.1 8B      expert
    Details                    top 3 training   top 3 training   best config, 9   default config,   best config, 9
                               runs             runs             pairs            9 pairs           pairs
    Swahili avg    24.8        24.7             29.5             29.3             32.4              32.8
    Swahili max    24.8        25.6             32.8             32.0             36.4              37.2
    Telugu avg     12.0        20.0             20.1             20.9             22.7              23.0
    Telugu max     12.0        22.4             24.0             26.4             27.6              27.6
    Bengali avg    29.2        33.5             38.3             36.8             37.1              38.7
    Bengali max    29.2        35.2             44.4             38.4             40.4              45.2
    Japanese avg   33.6        35.9             42.7             38.7             38.5              40.1
    Japanese max   33.6        36.8             44.8             40.0             40.8              43.2


As displayed in Table 1, we find that layer swapping consistently outperforms these baselines on
MGSM. For Swahili and Telugu, the default layer swapping configuration scores higher than both
the individual experts across all 9 pairs. This provides tremendous evidence that this merging method


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


prevents negative interference. For Bengali, where the math expert already performs significantly
better than for Swahili and Telugu, numerous layer-swapping configurations consistently surpass the
math expert’s average score. In addition, the best layer swapped model performs higher than the best
math expert on its own. For Japanese, here we find a lower average performance compared to the
individual math experts. However, we note that our Japanese experts were perhaps the weakest; the
increases in performance across B ELEBELE, FL O R ES, MBPP, and MMLU after SFT were minimal
and with the data and hyperparameters tested, we were unable to do better. Furthermore, MGSM
performance of both the base L LAMA 3.1 and the math experts was already decent in Japanese,
prior to merging. Compared to model souping, layer swapping consistently outperforms it in terms
of both maximum and average performance in all languages. The model soup results typically lie
between the individual results of the experts.
We further evaluated these layer-swapped models on B ELEBELE, FL O R ES, MBPP, and MMLU to
ensure no over-optimization to the MGSM benchmark and find that the results are on par, usually
even higher, than the base model and the individual experts. In addition, we manually checked a
sample of text generations to further ensure the quality of the resulting model. Given that there are
several language and math experts, we evaluate combining layer swapping with model souping. We
do so by souping the three experts for each of the languages before layer swapping with a soup of the
three math experts and present results in Table 6 in the Appendix. We find that these language and
math soups perform on par with the individual pairs when layer swapped together. The feasibility in
these settings shows that layer swapping can further extend the search space for fine-tuned models.
Given these results, we conjecture that perhaps layer swapping provides the biggest benefit for
lower-resource languages (e.g. Swahili, Telugu), although such a conclusion would require evalu-
ating more than four languages. This conjecture would be explained by the difficulty of improving
language capabilities with low-data SFT when L LAMA 3.1 was already pretrained on more tokens
in that language. Additionally, for higher-resource languages, cross-lingual transfer occurs more
naturally when fine-tuning on English math data.

5.2   F URTHER E VALUATIONS ON S WAHILI

Given that here, model souping appears to be susceptible to negative interference when merging, we
additionally evaluate TIES-merging (Yadav et al., 2023) for Swahili. This merging method resolves
interference between experts by sequentially trimming conflicting values, determining the sign of
each weight, and then merging the resulting weights. In addition, we present an alternative for
Swahili where, instead of post hoc model merging, we mix the language and math datasets and do
a single fine-tuning run with samples from both. Instead of training two experts, each on 30-40k
samples, the joint SFT is over the union (80k samples). Identical to the training of experts, we
launch many SFT runs with different hyperparameters and select the best three checkpoints.

Table 2: MGSM 8-shot results of layer swapping for Swahili in more detail and with two additional
comparisons, TIES-merging and dataset merging. We display the minimum performance in Swahili,
as well as the average across all 9 languages in MGSM and in English.

 Setting         L LAMA   Swahili        math           swh&math         model          TIES-          layer swap        layer swap
                 3.1 8B   expert         expert         joint SFT        soup           merging
 Details                  top 3 train-   top 3 train-   top 3 training   best config,   best config,   default           best config,
                          ing runs       ing runs       runs             9 pairs        9 pairs        config, 9 pairs   9 pairs

 Swahili min     24.8     23.6           27.2           31.6             25.6           25.2           29.6              29.2
 Swahili avg     24.8     24.7           29.5           32.1             29.3           29.5           32.4              32.8
 Swahili max     24.8     25.6           32.8           32.8             32.0           32.4           36.4              37.2
 English avg     56.0     55.7           66.2           64.3             62.0           60.1           64.7              64.4
 All langs avg   37.7     37.5           45.4           46.0             43.0           41.8           44.1              44.4


Table 2 displays these more detailed results for Swahili. We find that TIES-merging, similar to
model souping, consistently underperforms compared to layer swapping. For mixing the Swahili
and math data prior to fine-tuning, we are able to achieve results comparable to layer swapping on
average, with the average MGSM score for this joint SFT being less than one point lower. How-


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ever, the maximum performance of these checkpoints lagged the best layer-swapped pairs by 4.4
percentage points. This means that the ceiling for cross-lingual transfer is significantly higher with
this methodology than simply mixing datasets together. This is significant because our method of
merging two variants fine-tuned on separate datasets proves to be more effective than an extended
fine-tuning on the combined datasets, consistent with Aakanksha et al. (2024).
We note that by swapping in layers from the Swahili expert, MGSM performance in English and
other non-Swahili languages decreases from the math expert. This is expected given that we opti-
mize for a different language, yet the decrease is relatively small nevertheless. For comparison, we
see that performance drops much more for the other merging methods on these non-target languages.



6   D ISCUSSION

Layer swapping is a simple, yet effective method for merging models for cross-lingual transfer. The
success of this post hoc method prompts numerous key insights.
In settings where in-language task data is unavailable or rare, such as labeled math samples in Tel-
ugu, layer swapping provides a very effective way to create a capable model with simply English
task data and general target language data. For lower-resource languages, such a constrained sce-
nario is extremely common in practice, especially when it comes to instruction fine-tuning data.
All other baselines that we evaluate in such a scenario are not able to combine language and math
capabilities as consistently and effectively, as discussed in Section 5.
The surprising effectiveness of this method can be explained by the observation that English-centric
LLMs do most of their internal thinking in English, which aligns with recent literature (Wendler
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b; Tang et al., 2024; Kojima et al., 2024). Therefore, our method
exploits the finding that the most important language-specific parameters are those in the top and
bottom transformer layers that map multilingual input to and from English representations. Po-
tentially, we can reinterpret the functionality of these transformer layers as, to a certain degree,
natural language interfaces to broader model intelligence. Our method preserves the updates to the
middle layers, as we hypothesize that this is where most of the improvements to the LLM’s mathe-
matical reasoning are concentrated. Consequently, this separability of multilingual parameters from
other model capabilities could motivate a new generation of modular solutions for multilingualism in
decoder-only LLMs—akin to MoE or adapter-based approaches designed for encoder models (Pfeif-
fer et al., 2020; 2022; Liu et al., 2023). Regardless, this work suggests that further interpretability
research into LLM multilinguality could lead to more cost-effective solutions to boost non-English
capabilities.
Model souping is popular because of its flexibility, convenience, and ability to expand the model
search space. In this regard, layer swapping provides a more effective alternative for the multilingual
setting with the same advantages. This method can be implemented fully post hoc between any
number of checkpoints using simple parameter arithmetic, with no further fine-tuning. Because of
how inexpensive it is to implement, it enables the ability to quickly iterate through and test many
configurations (e.g. the number of swapped transformer layers). Similarly to souping, the simplicity
of this method means that it has the potential to work at any stage of training (pretraining, fine-
tuning, preference tuning, etc.). In multi-task fine-tuning scenarios, this could allow for non-English
capabilities being boosted on the side, separately from other reasoning capabilities—such as math,
multi-hop reasoning, coding, safety, etc.—and then models are merged back together post hoc to
combine the learned skills.
In terms of model merging, our analysis indicates that weight-level techniques are perhaps not as
effective in reducing interference when merging parameters together, as compared to parameter-level
or even layer-level merges. A possible explanation is that modifying individual weight values may
disrupt the linear dependence within the transformations defined by the weight tensors. Conversely,
the recent success of self-speculative decoding in LLMs (Zhang et al., 2024a; Elhoushi et al., 2024)
suggests that the token representation spaces of most layers across the model are very similar. If
so, keeping entire layers in tact may alleviate the risk of undermining newfound learning. Another
reason could be that using very granular magnitude measures may be too noisy to properly indicate
which weight updates are important and which are not.

                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

The positive results of this layer swapping methodology largely raise many questions about the
extent to which it is effective and in what settings. We propose here many further investigations that
will build a broader understanding of the method’s practical scope.
Freezing parameters before training experts: Instead of re-composing a model with layers from
separate models, a logical next evaluation would be to freeze model layers from the beginning.
Intuitively, this would only be more effective from a performance standpoint, as there is no ad hoc
merging of experts from disparate training jobs. However, a significant benefit of our solution is that
it is all post hoc and flexible. Parameter freezing would require knowing which configuration would
work prior to training or require numerous training runs to find the best configuration.
LLMs with different pretraining: An explanation for why this method works so well is that English-
centric LLMs “think in English”, which is shown in more than Llama 3.1. It must be studied whether
LLMs with balanced multilingual pretraining have similarly consolidated representations, and if not,
whether layer swapping breaks.
Different model sizes: LLMs with more parameters, either from more transformer layers or from
larger hidden dimensions, would clearly require new merging configurations. In addition, it remains
to be seen how related attributes such as sparsity, redundancy, and the quantity of cross-lingual
shared parameters, would influence the performance of layer swapping.
Lower-resource langs: Among the limited languages evaluated, the lower-resource ones benefited
most from layer swapping. However, the model needs minimum capabilities in the target language
for zero-shot cross-lingual transfer. It is unclear how well the LLM needs to understand the target
language for this to be effective.
Other reasoning tasks: This work only tackles mathematical reasoning, but it is conceivable that
other complex reasoning capabilities are concentrated in parameters separate from language capa-
bilities in a similar manner. That being said, the configuration required for layer swapping may be
completely different and may require a preliminary analysis as in Section 3.
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning: Since layer swapping treats transformer layers as unified blocks,
it would be equivalent if the model were fine-tuned using parameter-efficient SFT methods such as
LoRA, which consists of inserting adapter weights into the transformer layer (Hu et al., 2022). Mod-
ifying other model merging methods for such adapters is simple (Zhang et al., 2023), and therefore
layer swapping has the potential to be effective in parameter-efficient fine-tuning settings.
Different training stage: We limit the focus of this work on low-data SFT. Model souping, itself, is
implemented in practice at all stages (e.g. pretraining, CPT), and layer swapping has the potential to
be effective there as well. Similarly, model souping is effective even when the checkpoints have been
fine-tuned significantly. It is unclear what would be the point for our methodology where the experts
have diverged too significantly that they would no longer recombine well. Either way, it could
still enable a multi-step training where experts are iteratively fine-tuned and merged successively,
analogous to gradient aggregation in data-distributed training.


8   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we address the difficulty of training LLMs to perform tasks in languages where labeled
task-specific data does not exist. We first trained separate experts on English math data and generic
instruction data in numerous target languages. An analysis of the importance of different parameter
updates during fine-tuning led to the development of the layer swapping method which swaps in
the top and bottom layers from language experts into the math expert. Surprisingly, this simple
model merging provides one of the highest performing methods to fine-tune an LLM for math in
a target language without the presence of target language data. The strong intuition behind this
solution and its flexibility, simplicity, and effectiveness provide vast potential to be practical in
many other settings. This method can be potentially adapted for new pretrained models, target tasks,
target languages, training stages, training setups, and more. In addition, this method indicates better
model interpretability of multilinguality can lead to more efficient methods for transferring English
capabilities to lower resource languages.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY
To reproduce the fine-tuning of our “expert” models, we describe the process in Section 3.1 and pro-
vide further details on the data and fine-tuning hyperparameters in Appendix A.1 and A.2. Further
details for our analysis described in Section 3.2 can be found in Appendix A.5. We provide pseu-
docode of the layer swapping algorithm defined in Section 4 in Algorithm 1. All of our experiments
for which results are presented are thoroughly explained in Section 5.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the crucial support provided by Mostafa Elhoushi, Tanmay Parekh, Jiabao
Ji, and Chloe Bi that made this project possible.


R EFERENCES
Aakanksha, Arash Ahmadian, Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant, Beyza Ermis, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara
  Hooker. Mix data or merge models? optimizing for performance and safety in multilingual
  contexts. In Neurips Safe Generative AI Workshop 2024, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=L1Hxp8ktiT.

Samuel Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models mod-
  ulo permutation symmetries. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CQsmMYmlP5T.

Jesujoba Alabi, Marius Mosbach, Matan Eyal, Dietrich Klakow, and Mor Geva. The hidden space of
  transformer language adapters. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 6588–6607, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.356.

Alan Ansell, Edoardo Ponti, Anna Korhonen, and Ivan Vulić. Composable sparse fine-tuning for
  cross-lingual transfer. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 1778–1796, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.125. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.125.

Alan Ansell, Ivan Vulić, Hannah Sterz, Anna Korhonen, and Edoardo M. Ponti. Scaling sparse fine-
  tuning to large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16405.

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.

Lucas Bandarkar, Davis Liang, Benjamin Muller, Mikel Artetxe, Satya Narayan Shukla, Donald
  Husa, Naman Goyal, Abhinandan Krishnan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Madian Khabsa. The bele-
  bele benchmark: a parallel reading comprehension dataset in 122 language variants. In Lun-
  Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 749–775,
  Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.44.

L. Breiman. Bagging predictors. Machine Learning, 24:123–140, 1996. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:47328136.

Linzheng Chai, Jian Yang, Tao Sun, Hongcheng Guo, Jiaheng Liu, Bing Wang, Xiannian Liang,
  Jiaqi Bai, Tongliang Li, Qiyao Peng, and Zhoujun Li. xcot: Cross-lingual instruction tuning for
  cross-lingual chain-of-thought reasoning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.
  07037.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tyler Chang, Zhuowen Tu, and Benjamin Bergen. The geometry of multilingual language model
  representations. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 119–136,
  Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.9. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  emnlp-main.9.

Rochelle Choenni, Dan Garrette, and Ekaterina Shutova. How do languages influence each other?
  studying cross-lingual data sharing during LM fine-tuning. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and
  Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing, pp. 13244–13257, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.818. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.emnlp-main.818.

Rochelle Choenni, Ekaterina Shutova, and Dan Garrette. Examining modularity in multilingual LMs
  via language-specialized subnetworks. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.),
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pp. 287–301, Mexico
  City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  findings-naacl.21. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-naacl.21.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2110.14168,
  2021.

Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek,
  Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Un-
  supervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie
  Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8440–8451, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.747. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.acl-main.747.

John Dang, Arash Ahmadian, Kelly Marchisio, Julia Kreutzer, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Rlhf
  can speak many languages: Unlocking multilingual preference optimization for llms, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.02552.

MohammadReza Davari and Eugene Belilovsky. Model breadcrumbs: Scalable upcycling of fine-
 tuned foundation models via sparse task vectors merging. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Foundation
 Models in the Wild, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vuyP3tupig.

Thomas G. Dietterich. Multiple classifier systems. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2000.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:56776745.

Mostafa Elhoushi, Akshat Shrivastava, Diana Liskovich, Basil Hosmer, Bram Wasti, Liangzhen
 Lai, Anas Mahmoud, Bilge Acun, Saurabh Agarwal, Ahmed Roman, Ahmed Aly, Beidi Chen,
 and Carole-Jean Wu. Layerskip: Enabling early exit inference and self-speculative decod-
 ing. Meta Research, 2024. URL https://ai.meta.com/research/publications/
 layerskip-enabling-early-exit-inference-and-self-speculative-decoding/.

William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: scaling to trillion parameter
 models with simple and efficient sparsity. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1),
 January 2022. ISSN 1532-4435.

Felix Gaschi, Patricio Cerda, Parisa Rastin, and Yannick Toussaint. Exploring the relationship be-
  tween alignment and cross-lingual transfer in multilingual transformers. In Anna Rogers, Jordan
  Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics: ACL 2023, pp. 3020–3042, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.189. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.findings-acl.189.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Demi Guo, Alexander Rush, and Yoon Kim. Parameter-efficient transfer learning with diff pruning.
  In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 4884–4896, Online,
  August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.378.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.378.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Ja-
  cob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  d7KBjmI3GmQ.
Masanori Hirano, Masahiro Suzuki, and Hiroki Sakaji. llm-japanese-dataset v0: Construction of
 japanese chat dataset for large language models and its methodology, 2023. URL https://
 arxiv.org/abs/2305.12720.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Gabriel Ilharco, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Mitchell Wortsman, Ludwig Schmidt, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  and Ali Farhadi. Editing models with task arithmetic. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  6t0Kwf8-jrj.
Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, T. Garipov, Dmitry P. Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Av-
  eraging weights leads to wider optima and better generalization. In Conference on Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  3833416.
Nihal Jain, Dejiao Zhang, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Zijian Wang, Feng Nan, Xiaopeng Li, Ming Tan,
  Ramesh Nallapati, Baishakhi Ray, Parminder Bhatia, Xiaofei Ma, and Bing Xiang. Contra-
  CLM: Contrastive learning for causal language model. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber,
  and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6436–6459, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.355. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.355.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-
  lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril,
  Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.
Mohammed Safi Ur Rahman Khan, Priyam Mehta, Ananth Sankar, Umashankar Kumaravelan,
 Sumanth Doddapaneni, Suriyaprasaad G, Varun Balan G, Sparsh Jain, Anoop Kunchukuttan,
 Pratyush Kumar, Raj Dabre, and Mitesh M. Khapra. Indicllmsuite: A blueprint for creating pre-
 training and fine-tuning datasets for indian languages. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2403.06350, 2024.
Simran Khanuja, Srinivas Gowriraj, Lucio Dery, and Graham Neubig. DeMuX: Data-efficient
  multilingual learning. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7423–7436, Mexico
  City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  naacl-long.412. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.412.
Takeshi Kojima, Itsuki Okimura, Yusuke Iwasawa, Hitomi Yanaka, and Yutaka Matsuo. On the mul-
  tilingual ability of decoder-based pre-trained language models: Finding and controlling language-
  specific neurons. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the
  2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6919–6971, Mexico


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  naacl-long.384. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.384.

Wen Lai, Mohsen Mesgar, and Alexander Fraser. LLMs beyond English: Scaling the multilingual
 capability of LLMs with cross-lingual feedback. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Sriku-
 mar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 8186–8213,
 Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.488.

Davis Liang, Hila Gonen, Yuning Mao, Rui Hou, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Luke Zettle-
  moyer, and Madian Khabsa. XLM-V: Overcoming the vocabulary bottleneck in multilingual
  masked language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 13142–13152,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  emnlp-main.813. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.813.

Meizhen Liu, Xu Guo, He Jiakai, Jianye Chen, Fengyu Zhou, and Siu Hui. InteMATs: Integrating
 granularity-specific multilingual adapters for cross-lingual transfer. In Houda Bouamor, Juan
 Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
 2023, pp. 5035–5049, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.335. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
 findings-emnlp.335.

Team Llama, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian andAhmad
  Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, and et al. The
  llama 3 herd of models. Meta Research, 2024.

Michael S Matena and Colin A Raffel. Merging models with fisher-weighted averaging. In
 S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 17703–17716. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
 file/70c26937fbf3d4600b69a129031b66ec-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Arindam Mitra, Hamed Khanpour, Corby Rosset, and Ahmed Awadallah. Orca-math: Unlocking
  the potential of slms in grade school math, 2024.

Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le
  Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, Xiangru Tang, Dragomir
  Radev, Alham Fikri Aji, Khalid Almubarak, Samuel Albanie, Zaid Alyafeai, Albert Webson,
  Edward Raff, and Colin Raffel. Crosslingual generalization through multitask finetuning, 2022.

Benjamin Muller, Yanai Elazar, Benoı̂t Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. First align, then predict:
  Understanding the cross-lingual ability of multilingual BERT. In Paola Merlo, Jorg Tiede-
  mann, and Reut Tsarfaty (eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pp. 2214–2231, Online, April
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.189. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.eacl-main.189.

Team NLLB, Marta R. Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield,
  Kevin Heffernan, Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, Anna Sun, Skyler
  Wang, Guillaume Wenzek, Al Youngblood, Bapi Akula, Loic Barrault, Gabriel Mejia Gonzalez,
  Prangthip Hansanti, John Hoffman, Semarley Jarrett, Kaushik Ram Sadagopan, Dirk Rowe, Shan-
  non Spruit, Chau Tran, Pierre Andrews, Necip Fazil Ayan, Shruti Bhosale, Sergey Edunov, Angela
  Fan, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Francisco Guzmán, Philipp Koehn, Alexandre Mourachko,
  Christophe Ropers, Safiyyah Saleem, Holger Schwenk, and Jeff Wang. No language left behind:
  Scaling human-centered machine translation. Meta Research, 2022.

Guillermo Ortiz-Jimenez, Alessandro Favero, and Pascal Frossard. Task arithmetic in the tan-
  gent space: Improved editing of pre-trained models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  0A9f2jZDGW.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xuan Ouyang, Shuohuan Wang, Chao Pang, Yu Sun, Hao Tian, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang.
  ERNIE-M: Enhanced multilingual representation by aligning cross-lingual semantics with mono-
  lingual corpora. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau
  Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 27–38, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.3. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.3.
Barun Patra, Saksham Singhal, Shaohan Huang, Zewen Chi, Li Dong, Furu Wei, Vishrav Chaud-
  hary, and Xia Song. Beyond English-centric bitexts for better multilingual language represen-
  tation learning. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 15354–15373, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.856. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.856.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Ivan Vulić, Iryna Gurevych, and Sebastian Ruder. MAD-X: An Adapter-Based
  Framework for Multi-Task Cross-Lingual Transfer. In Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He,
  and Yang Liu (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7654–7673, Online, November 2020. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.617. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2020.emnlp-main.617.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Naman Goyal, Xi Lin, Xian Li, James Cross, Sebastian Riedel, and Mikel Artetxe.
  Lifting the curse of multilinguality by pre-training modular transformers. In Marine Carpuat,
  Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir Meza Ruiz (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 3479–3495, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.255. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.255.
Fred Philippy, Siwen Guo, and Shohreh Haddadan. Towards a common understanding of contribut-
  ing factors for cross-lingual transfer in multilingual language models: A review. In Anna Rogers,
  Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5877–5891, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.
  323. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.323.
Libo Qin, Qiguang Chen, Fuxuan Wei, Shijue Huang, and Wanxiang Che. Cross-lingual prompt-
  ing: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning across languages. In Houda Bouamor,
  Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2695–2709, Singapore, December 2023. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.163. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.163.
Alexandre Ramé, Kartik Ahuja, Jianyu Zhang, Matthieu Cord, Léon Bottou, and David Lopez-Paz.
  Model ratatouille: Recycling diverse models for out-of-distribution generalization. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:254877458.
Shuaijie She, Wei Zou, Shujian Huang, Wenhao Zhu, Xiang Liu, Xiang Geng, and Jiajun Chen.
  MAPO: Advancing multilingual reasoning through multilingual-alignment-as-preference opti-
  mization. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 10015–10027, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.539.
Freda Shi, Mirac Suzgun, Markus Freitag, Xuezhi Wang, Suraj Srivats, Soroush Vosoughi,
  Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Sebastian Ruder, Denny Zhou, Dipanjan Das, and Jason Wei. Lan-
  guage models are multilingual chain-of-thought reasoners. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  fR3wGCk-IXp.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shivalika Singh, Freddie Vargus, Daniel D’souza, Börje Karlsson, Abinaya Mahendiran, Wei-Yin
  Ko, Herumb Shandilya, Jay Patel, Deividas Mataciunas, Laura O’Mahony, Mike Zhang, Ramith
  Hettiarachchi, Joseph Wilson, Marina Machado, Luisa Moura, Dominik Krzemiński, Hakimeh
  Fadaei, Irem Ergun, Ifeoma Okoh, Aisha Alaagib, Oshan Mudannayake, Zaid Alyafeai, Vu Chien,
  Sebastian Ruder, Surya Guthikonda, Emad Alghamdi, Sebastian Gehrmann, Niklas Muennighoff,
  Max Bartolo, Julia Kreutzer, Ahmet Üstün, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara Hooker. Aya dataset: An
  open-access collection for multilingual instruction tuning. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
  Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 11521–11567, Bangkok, Thailand, August
  2024a. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2024.acl-long.620.
Shivalika Singh, Freddie Vargus, Daniel Dsouza, Börje F. Karlsson, Abinaya Mahendiran, Wei-Yin
  Ko, Herumb Shandilya, Jay Patel, Deividas Mataciunas, Laura OMahony, Mike Zhang, Ramith
  Hettiarachchi, Joseph Wilson, Marina Machado, Luisa Souza Moura, Dominik Krzemiński,
  Hakimeh Fadaei, Irem Ergün, Ifeoma Okoh, Aisha Alaagib, Oshan Mudannayake, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Vu Minh Chien, Sebastian Ruder, Surya Guthikonda, Emad A. Alghamdi, Sebastian Gehrmann,
  Niklas Muennighoff, Max Bartolo, Julia Kreutzer, Ahmet Üstün, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara
  Hooker. Aya dataset: An open-access collection for multilingual instruction tuning, 2024b.
Yi-Lin Sung, Varun Nair, and Colin Raffel. Training neural networks with fixed sparse masks.
  In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  Uwh-v1HSw-x.
Tianyi Tang, Wenyang Luo, Haoyang Huang, Dongdong Zhang, Xiaolei Wang, Xin Zhao, Furu
  Wei, and Ji-Rong Wen. Language-specific neurons: The key to multilingual capabilities in large
  language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the
  62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 5701–5715, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.309.
Atnafu Lambebo Tonja, Bonaventure FP Dossou, Jessica Ojo, Jenalea Rajab, Fadel Thior, Eric Pe-
  ter Wairagala, Aremu Anuoluwapo, Pelonomi Moiloa, Jade Abbott, Vukosi Marivate, et al.
  Inkubalm: A small language model for low-resource african languages. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.17024, 2024.
Zirui Wang, Zachary C. Lipton, and Yulia Tsvetkov. On negative interference in multilingual mod-
  els: Findings and a meta-learning treatment. In Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and
  Yang Liu (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 4438–4450, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.359. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.emnlp-main.359.
Chris Wendler, Veniamin Veselovsky, Giovanni Monea, and Robert West. Do llamas work in En-
  glish? on the latent language of multilingual transformers. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
  Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15366–15394, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.820.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Ya Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes,
 Ari S Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, and Ludwig
 Schmidt. Model soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy
 without increasing inference time. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
 Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Confer-
 ence on Machine Learning, volume 162, pp. 23965–23998. PMLR, 9 2022. URL https:
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wortsman22a.html.
Runxin Xu, Fuli Luo, Zhiyuan Zhang, Chuanqi Tan, Baobao Chang, Songfang Huang, and Fei
  Huang. Raise a child in large language model: Towards effective and generalizable fine-
  tuning. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 9514–9528, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.749. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.749.
Prateek Yadav, Derek Tam, Leshem Choshen, Colin Raffel, and Mohit Bansal. Ties-merging: Re-
  solving interference when merging models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=xtaX3WyCj1.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang,
  Jialin Wang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Ma, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, Jinze Bai,
  Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Chen, Kexin Yang, Mei Li, Mingfeng
  Xue, Na Ni, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Ru Peng, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Runji Lin, Shijie Wang, Shuai
  Bai, Sinan Tan, Tianhang Zhu, Tianhao Li, Tianyu Liu, Wenbin Ge, Xiaodong Deng, Xiaohuan
  Zhou, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Zhang, Xipin Wei, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Yao, Yichang
  Zhang, Yu Wan, Yunfei Chu, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zhihao Fan. Qwen2
  technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10671, 2024a.
Enneng Yang, Li Shen, Guibing Guo, Xingwei Wang, Xiaochun Cao, Jie Zhang, and Dacheng Tao.
  Model merging in llms, mllms, and beyond: Methods, theories, applications and opportunities,
  2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07666.
Le Yu, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Language models are super mario:
  Absorbing abilities from homologous models as a free lunch. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024.
Jinghan Zhang, Shiqi Chen, Junteng Liu, and Junxian He. Composing parameter-efficient mod-
   ules with arithmetic operation. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5r3e27I9Gy.
Jun Zhang, Jue Wang, Huan Li, Lidan Shou, Ke Chen, Gang Chen, and Sharad Mehrotra. Draft&
  verify: Lossless large language model acceleration via self-speculative decoding. In Lun-
  Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 11263–
  11282, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024a. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.607.
Zhihan Zhang, Dong-Ho Lee, Yuwei Fang, Wenhao Yu, Mengzhao Jia, Meng Jiang, and Francesco
  Barbieri. PLUG: Leveraging pivot language in cross-lingual instruction tuning. In Lun-
  Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7025–
  7046, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024b. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.379.
Zhihao Zhang, Jun Zhao, Qi Zhang, Tao Gui, and Xuanjing Huang. Unveiling linguistic regions
  in large language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 6228–6247, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024c. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.338.
Bo Zheng, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Saksham Singhal, Wanxiang Che, Ting Liu, Xia Song,
  and Furu Wei. Allocating large vocabulary capacity for cross-lingual language model pre-
  training. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 3203–3215, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.257. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.257.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    F INE - TUNING DATASETS

              Table 3: Datasets used for supervised-fine-tuning (SFT) in this project

 Category     Datasets                                      URL
     Math     Orca Math word problems dataset from          https://huggingface.
              Microsoft (Mitra et al., 2024)                co/datasets/microsoft/
                                                            orca-math-word-problems-200k
              Aya Dataset from Cohere for AI (Singh         https://huggingface.co/datasets/
    Telugu    et al., 2024a)                                CohereForAI/aya_dataset
              NLLB English-Telugu translation data          https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              from FAIR (NLLB et al., 2022)                 allenai/nllb
              English instruction dataset, machine trans-
              lated to Telugu
              Aya Dataset by Cohere for AI (Singh et al.,   https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              2024a)                                        CohereForAI/aya_dataset
    Bengali   English-Bengali translation data from         https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              NLLB (NLLB et al., 2022)                      allenai/nllb
              IndicShareLlama dataset from AI4Bharat        https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              (Khan et al., 2024)                           ai4bharat/indic-align
              BongChat dataset from Lumatic AI              https://huggingface.co/datasets/
                                                            lumatic-ai/BongChat-v1-253k
              Aya Dataset by Cohere for AI (Singh et al.,   https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              2024a)                                        CohereForAI/aya_dataset
    Swahili   English-Swahili translation data from         https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              NLLB (NLLB et al., 2022)                      allenai/nllb
              Inkuba dataset from Lelapa (Tonja et al.,     https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              2024)                                         lelapa/Inkuba-instruct
              xP3 MT dataset from BigScience, with          https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              FL O R ES samples removed (Muennighoff        bigscience/xP3mt
              et al., 2022)
              Aya Dataset by Cohere for AI (Singh et al.,   https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              2024a)                                        CohereForAI/aya_dataset

 Japanese     English-Japanese translation data from        https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              NLLB (NLLB et al., 2022)                      allenai/nllb
              LLM-Japanese dataset from Izumi Lab           https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              (Hirano et al., 2023)                         izumi-lab/llm-japanese-dataset
              Ichikara dataset from RIKEN AIP               https://huggingface.co/datasets/
                                                            p1atdev/ichikara-instruction
              Dolly dataset from Databricks, machine        https://huggingface.co/datasets/
              translated to Japanese                        kunishou/databricks-dolly-15k-ja


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2   S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING D ETAILS

While many hyperparameters were tried, below is listed the hyperparameter configurations that led
to the three best checkpoints (the “experts”) for each category. Note that in all runs, we do check-
pointing every 5000 samples and use a different random seed for data sampling.

          Table 4: Hyperparameters for the training runs that led to each of our “experts”

        Expert    Learn     Batch     Seq.   weight clip,         sched.    warmup β2
                  Rate      Size      Length decay max                      steps
                                                    norm
       math #1    2.0 ×     4         2048     0.1       1.0      Linear    1000      0.99
                  10−8
       math #2    1.0 ×     4         2048     0.01      0.5      Linear    1000      0.99
                  10−7
       math #3    4.0 ×     4         2048     0.1       1.0      Linear    500       0.999
                  10−8
        jpn #1    1.0 ×     8         1024     0.1       0.5      WSD       1000      0.995
                  10−7
        jpn #2    1.0 ×     8         1024     0.1       0.5      WSD       1000      0.99
                  10−7
        jpn #3    2.0 ×     8         1024     0.01      0.5      WSD       1000      0.99
                  10−7
        swh #1    7.0 ×     8         1024     0.1       0.5      WSD       1000      0.99
                  10−8
        swh #2    2.0 ×     8         1024     0.05      0.5      WSD       1000      0.99
                  10−7
        swh #3    1.0 ×     8         1024     0.1       1.0      WSD       1000      0.999
                  10−7
        tel #1    7.0 ×     8         1024     0.1       0.5      WSD       1000      0.99
                  10−8
        tel #2    5.0 ×     8         1024     0.05      0.5      WSD       300       0.99
                  10−8
        tel #3    1.0 ×     4         2048     0.1       0.5      WSD       1000      0.99
                  10−7
        ben #1    7.0 ×     8         1024     0.1       0.5      WSD       1000      0.99
                  10−8
        ben #2    5.0 ×     8         1024     0.05      0.5      WSD       300       0.99
                  10−8
        ben #3    1.0 ×     4         2048     0.1       0.5      WSD       1000      0.99
                  10−7


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   P ERFORMANCE OF INDIVIDUAL EXPERTS

Table 5: Comprehensive results for each of the set of experts on tasks in the target language. Each
number represents an average over the 3 selected experts. The “10-lang avg” column presents the re-
sults across 10 languages (English, German, French, simplified Chinese, Russian, Spanish, Japanese,
Bengali, Swahili, Telugu).

                                                                       Average across 3-experts
 Task                   Language       L LAMA 3.1 8b
                                                          Math     Japanese     Bengali    Swahili    Telugu
 MGSM                   English        0.560              0.663    0.561        0.563      0.557      0.561
 em@maj1, 8-shot        Japanese       0.336              0.427    0.359
                        Bengali        0.292              0.383                 0.335
                        Swahili        0.248              0.295                            0.247
                        Telugu         0.120              0.201                                       0.200
                        10-lang avg    0.311              0.454
 B ELEBELE results      English        0.871              0.877
 accuracy, 5-shot       Japanese       0.760              0.754    0.766
                        Bengali        0.649              0.654                 0.683
                        Swahili        0.553              0.557                            0.584
                        Telugu         0.546              0.557                                       0.602
 FL O R ES results      Eng-Jpn        20.6               20.5     20.5
 BLEU, 0-shot           Jpn-Eng        28.5               28.5     28.9
                        Eng-Ben        18.8               18.8                  17.9
                        Ben-Eng        30.5               29.7                  29.0
                        Eng-Swh        12.5               12.9                             13.0
                        Swh-Eng        31.5               31.5                             30.2
                        Eng-Tel        15.7               15.2                                        16.5
                        Tel-Eng        29.2               29.0                                        27.6
 MBPP result            Japanese       0.464              0.470    0.462
 pass @ 1, 0-shot       Bengali        0.438              0.436                 0.462
                        Swahili        0.402              0.407                            0.407
                        Telugu         0.410              0.412                                       0.437
 MMLU result            Japanese       0.520              0.518    0.518
 accuracy, 5-shot       Bengali        0.422              0.420                 0.436
                        Swahili        0.419              0.420                            0.425
                        Telugu         0.415              0.412                                       0.427


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4   R ESULTS FROM COMBINING WITH SOUPING

Table 6: MGSM 8-shot results when combining layer swapping with model souping of the 3 experts
for each category. ”Multilingual soup” refers to the uniform soup of all 12 language experts.

 Setting              model soup,        layer swap,         layer swap,           layer swap,
                      pairwise           pairwise            language soup w/      multilingual soup
                                                             math soup             w/ math soup
 Details              default config,    default config,     default config,   1   default config,   1
                      avg of 9 pairs     avg of 9 pairs      version               version
 Swahili              29.3               32.4                32.8                  29.6
 Telugu               20.9               22.7                22.0                  21.2
 Bengali              36.8               37.1                40.4                  36.0
 Japanese             38.7               38.5                39.2                  41.6



A.5   PARAMETER -L EVEL V ISUALIZATIONS OF THE E XPERT V ECTORS

Larger parameter-level visualizations for a number of the experts, each visualization is the same as
described in Figure 2


       Figure 4: Visualization of the magnitude of change during SFT for “math expert #1”


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Figure 5: Visualization of the magnitude of change during SFT for “math expert #2”


     Figure 6: Visualization of the magnitude of change during SFT for “Swahili expert #1”



                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Figure 7: Visualization of the magnitude of change during SFT for “Japanese expert #1”


      Figure 8: Visualization of the magnitude of change during SFT for “Telugu expert #1”



                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Figure 9: Visualization of the magnitude of change during SFT for “Bengali expert #1”


                                               24
