Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RANSFORMER E NCODER S ATISFIABILITY: C OM -
PLEXITY AND I MPACT ON F ORMAL R EASONING

 Marco Sälzer                                    Eric Alsmann
 University of Kaiserslautern-Landau, RPTU        Theoretical Computer Science / Formal Methods
 Kaiserslautern, Germany                          University of Kassel, Germany
 marco.saelzer@rptu.de                            eric.alsmann@uni-kassel.de

 Martin Lange
 Theoretical Computer Science / Formal Methods
 University of Kassel, Germany
 martin.lange@uni-kassel.de



                                            A BSTRACT

         We analyse the complexity of the satisfiability problem, or similarly feasibility
         problem, (trSAT) for transformer encoders (TE), which naturally occurs in formal
         verification or interpretation, collectively referred to as formal reasoning. We find
         that trSAT is undecidable when considering TE as they are commonly studied
         in the expressiveness community. Furthermore, we identify practical scenarios
         where trSAT is decidable and establish corresponding complexity bounds. Be-
         yond trivial cases, we find that quantized TE, those restricted by fixed-width arith-
         metic, lead to the decidability of trSAT due to their limited attention capabilities.
         However, the problem remains difficult, as we establish scenarios where trSAT
         is NEXPTIME-hard and others where it is solvable in NEXPTIME for quantized
         TE. To complement our complexity results, we place our findings and their impli-
         cations in the broader context of formal reasoning.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Natural language processing (NLP) models, processing and computing human language, are gate-
ways for modern applications aiming to interact with human users in a natural way. Although NLP
is a traditional field of research, the use of deep learning techniques has undoubtedly revolutionised
the field in recent years (Otter et al. (2021)). In this revolution, models such as Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNN) or more specific Long Short-term Memory Networks (LSTM) (Yu et al. (2019))
have long been the driving force, but for a few years now NLP has a new figurehead: transformers
(Vaswani et al. (2017)).
Transformers are a deep learning model using (multiple) self-attention mechanisms to process se-
quential input data, usually natural language. The efficient trainability of transformers, for example
in contrast to LSTM, while achieving top-tier performance led to numerous heavy-impact implemen-
tations such as BERT (Devlin et al. (2019)), GPT-3 (Brown et al. (2020)) or GPT-4 (OpenAI (2023)),
sparking widespread use of the transformer architecture. However, the foreseeable omnipresence of
transformer-based applications leads to serious security concerns.
In general, there are two approaches to establishing trustworthiness of learning-based models: first,
certifying specific, application-dependent safety properties, called verification, and second, inter-
preting the behaviour of such models and giving explanations for it, called interpretation. In both
approaches, the holy grail is to develop automatic methods that are sound and complete: algorithm A
given some model T and (verification or interpretation) specification φ outputs true if T satisfies φ
(soundness) and for every given pair T, φ where T satisfies φ algorithm A outputs true (complete-
ness). We refer to such sound and complete methods and tasks for verification and interpretation
collectively using the term formal reasoning.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We lay out a framework for the possibilities and challenges of formal reasoning for transformers by
establishing fundamental complexity (and computability) results in this work. Thereby, we focus
on the so-called satisfiability (TR S AT) problem of sequence-classifying transformers: given a trans-
former T , decide whether there is some input word w such that T (w) = 1, which can be interpreted
as T accepts w. Although this may seem like an artificial problem at first glance, it is a natural
abstraction of problems that commonly occur in almost all non-trivial formal reasoning tasks. Ad-
ditionally, since it is detached from the specifics of particular reasoning specifications like safety
properties for instance, uncomputability results and complexity-theoretic hardness results immedi-
ately transfer to more complex formal reasoning tasks. This also keeps the focus on the transformer
architecture under consideration. Here, we exclusively consider transformer encoders (TE), which
are encoder-only. This is mainly due to the fact that the known high expressive power of encoder-
decoder transformers (Pérez et al. (2021)) makes formal reasoning trivially impossible.
Our work is structured as follows. We define necessary preliminaries in Section 2. In Section 3, we
give an overview on our complexity results and take a comprehensive look at their implications for
formal reasoning for transformers. In Section 4 and Section 5 we present our theoretical results: we
show that TR S AT is undecidable for classes of TE commonly considered in research on transformer
expressiveness, we show that a bounded version BTR S AT of the satisfiability problem is decidable,
for any class of (computable) TE, and give corresponding complexity bounds and we show that
considering quantized TE, meaning TE whose parameters and computations are carried out in a
fixed-width arithmetic, leads to decidability of TR S AT and give corresponding complexity bounds.
Finally, we discuss limitations, open problems and future research in Section 6.

Related work. We establish basic computability and complexity results about transformer-related
formal reasoning problems, like formal verification or interpretation. This places our work in the
intersection between research on verification and interpretation of transformers and transformer
expressiveness.
There is a limited amount of work concerned with methods for the verification of safety properties of
transformers (Hsieh et al. (2019); Shi et al. (2020); Bonaert et al. (2021); Dong et al. (2021)). How-
ever, all those methods do not fall in the category of formal reasoning, as they are non-complete.
This means, the rigorous computability and complexity bound established in this work cannot be ap-
plied without further considerations. The same applies for so far considered interpretability methods
(Zhao et al. (2024)). We remark that a lot of these approaches are not sound methods either.
In contrast, there is an uprise in theoretical investigations of transformer expressiveness. Initial work
dealt with encoder-decoder models and showed that such models are Turing-complete (Pérez et al.
(2021); Bhattamishra et al. (2020)). Note that these are different models than the ones we consider,
which are encoder-only. Encoder-only models have so far been analysed in connection with circuit
complexity (Hahn (2020); Hao et al. (2022); Merrill et al. (2022); Merrill & Sabharwal (2023b)),
logics (Chiang et al. (2023); Merrill & Sabharwal (2023a)) and programming languages (Weiss
et al. (2021)). A recently published survey (Strobl et al. (2024)) provides an overview of these
results. This work is adjacent as some of the here considered classes of TE, mainly those considered
in Section 4, are motivated by these results and some of the constructions we use in corresponding
proofs are similar.


2   F UNDAMENTALS

Mathematical basics. Let Σ be a finite set of symbols, called alphabet. A (finite) word w over Σ
is a finite sequence a1 · · · ak where ai ∈ Σ. We define |w| = k. As usual, we denote the set of all
non-empty words by Σ+ . A language is a set of words. We also extend the notion of an alphabet to
vectors xi ∈ Rd , meaning that a sequence x1 · · · xk is a word over some subset of Rd . Usually, we
denote vectors using bold symbols like x, y or z.

Transformer encoders (TE). We consider the transformer encoders (TE), based on the trans-
former architecture originally introduced in (Vaswani et al. (2017)). We take a look at TE from a
computability and complexity perspective, making a formal definition of the considered architecture
necessary. Thereby, we follow the lines of works concerned with formal aspects of transformers like


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Hahn (2020); Pérez et al. (2021); Hao et al. (2022)). From a syntax point of view, our definition is
most near to (Hao et al. (2022)).1
An TE T with L layers and hi attention heads in layer i is a tuple (emb, {att i,j | 1 ≤ i ≤ L, 1 ≤
j ≤ hi }, {comb i | 1 ≤ i ≤ L}, out) where

         • emb : Σ × N → Rd0 for some d0 ∈ N is the positional embedding,
         • each attention head is a tuple att i,j = (score i,j , pool i,j ) where score i,j : Rdi−1 ×Rdi−1 →
           R is a function called scoring and pool i,j : (Rdi−1 )+ ×R+ → Rdi is a function called pool-
                                                                 Pn
           ing, computing (x1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . , sn ) 7→ i′ =1 norm(i′ , s1 , . . . , sn )(W xi′ ) where W
           is a linear map represented by a matrix and norm : N × R+ → R is a normalisation,
         • each comb i : Rdi,1 × · · · × Rdi,h1 +1 → Rdi is called a combination and out : RdL → R is
           called the output.

For given i ≤ L we call the tuple (att i,1 , . . . , att i,hi , comb i ) the i-th layer of T . The TE
T computes a function Σ+ → R as follows, also schematically depicted in Figure 1. Let
w = a1 , . . . , an ∈ Σ+ be a word. First, T computes an embedding of w by emb(w) =
x01 · · · x0n where x0i = emb(ai , i). Next, each layer 1 ≤ i ≤ L computes a sequence
xi1 · · · xin as follows: for each input xi−1   m
                                                                                                    i
                                                     and attention head att i,j , layer i computes ym,j =
             i−1         i−1               i−1   i−1                  i−1  i−1               i
pool i,j (x1 , . . . , xn , score i,j (xm , x1 ), . . . , score i,j (xm , xn )). Then, xm is given by
comb i (xi−1       i             i                                                             k
             m , ym,1 , . . . , ym,hi ). In the end, the output T (w) is computed by out(xn ), thus the
value of the output function for the last symbol of w after being transformed by the embedding and
L layers of T . We say that T accepts w if T (w) = 1, and we say that T rejects w otherwise. We call
L the depth of T and the maximal hi the (maximum) width of T . Furthermore, we call the maximal
di the (maximum) dimensionality of T . Let T , T ′ be some classes of TE. We sometimes say that T ′
is at least as expressive as T or T is at most as expressive as T ′ , meaning that for each T ∈ T there
is T ′ ∈ T ′ such that T and T ′ compute the same function. The decision problem TR S AT[T ] is given
T ∈ T over alphabet Σ, decide whether there is w ∈ Σ+ such that T (w) = 1. We refer to this as
the satisfiability problem of T . 2

Fixed-width arithmetics. We consider commonly used fixed-width arithmetics (FA) that repre-
sent numbers using a fixed amount of bits, like floating- or fixed-point arithmetic in this work. See
(Baranowski et al. (2020)) (fixed-point) or (Constantinides et al. (2021)) (floating-point) for rigor-
ous mathematical definitions of such FA. In this work, however, we only make use of a high-level
view on different FA. Namely, given some FA F we assume that all values are represented in binary
using b ∈ N bits for representing its numbers. Thus, there are 2b different rational numbers repre-
sentable in F . Furthermore, we assume that the considered FA can handle overflow situations using
either saturation or wrap-around and rounding situations by rounding up or off. We consider TE in
the context of F . We say that T works over F , assuming that all computations as well as values
occurring in a computation T (w) are carried out in the arithmetic defined by F .

3       OVERVIEW OF COMPLEXITY RESULTS AND CONNECTION TO FORMAL
        REASONING

We address elementary problems arising in formal reasoning for transformers in this work. In doing
so, we pursue the goal of establishing basic computability and complexity results for corresponding
problems in order to frame possibilities and challenges.
We want our results to be detached from any intricacies of specific transformer architectures: first,
we focus on transformer encoders (TE), so leaving any decoder mechanism unconsidered. The
primary reason for this is that encoder-decoder architectures are of such high expressive power
    1
      As of now, no single definition of Transformer encoders (TE) has been universally adopted in research on
their formal aspects, particularly concerning syntax (see the recent survey (Strobl et al. (2024)) for an overview
of different notions of TE). The definition we use here is sufficiently general and provides a parameterized
template for the classes of TE considered in our main results.
    2
      We observe that we can equivalently define TR S AT as requiring T (w) ≥ c for arbitrary c ∈ Q without
changing any of the results detailed in this work.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         out

                                 xim                                      lL

                                comb1
                                                                          li
                    att i,1                 att i,hi


                                                                          l1
                  xi−1
                   1                xi−1
                                     m
                                                i−1
                                               xn

                                                                        emb

                                                                  a1             an

Figure 1: Schematic depiction of an TE T with embedding emb and k (encoder) layers li . Each layer
li consists of some hi attention heads att i,j , whose output is combined by comb i . Additionally, for
some layer li , the computational flow of T regarding input position m is schematically depicted in
detail.


(Pérez et al. (2021)) that almost all formal reasoning problems are easily seen to be undecidable. The
secondary reason for this is that encoder-decoder architectures subsume encoder-only architectures.
So any lower complexity bound, established in this work, is also a lower bound for encoder-decoder
transformers.

S ATISFIABILITY AS A BASELINE FORMAL RESONING PROBLEM

To achieve widespread implications of our results, we focus our considerations on a fundamental
problem arising in formal verification and interpretation tasks: given a TE T , decide whether there is
some input w leading to some specific output T (w), as defined formally in terms of the satisfiability
problem TR S AT[T ] for a class T of specific TE, see Section 2.
To see that this captures the essence of formal reasoning problems occurring in practice, consider
the following formal verification task: Given a TE T , verify that T only accepts inputs where every
occurrence of a specific key from a set K is accompanied by a particular pattern—for example, a
key from K must be immediately followed by a value from a set V . Such tasks are important to
ensure syntactic correctness or adherence to some protocol specification. Formally, this is called a
robustness property (Shi et al. (2020); Huang et al. (2023)). We can phrase this example task as a
satisfiability problem by considering the property’s negation, namely, to verify that there exists some
input w in which a key from K is not properly followed by a value from V , yet we have T (w) = 1.
Similarly, consider a formal interpretation task where we aim to find the minimal subset E ′ ⊆ E
of some set of error symbols E such that all inputs w containing all errors in E ′ are rejected by T .
For instance, in a spam detection system powered by a transformer encoder, E could represent a set
of spam indicators or malicious keywords. We might want to determine the minimal combination
of these indicators that will cause the system to classify an input as spam. This is understood as
an abductive explanation in formal explainable AI (Marques-Silva & Ignatiev (2022)). Given a
candidate subset E ′ , we can certify this by checking that there is some w which contains all errors
E ′ , but is accepted by T . This scenario is a special case of the satisfiability problem TR S AT[T ] for
some transformer class T .

OVERVIEW OF RESULTS ON THE COMPLEXITY OF TRANSFORMER ENCODER SATISFIABILITY

We start by considering the class Tudec of TE, motivated by commonly considered architectures
in the theoretical expressiveness community (Pérez et al. (2021); Hao et al. (2022); Hahn (2020)):
Tudec consists of those TE that use a positional embedding, expressive enough to compute a sum,


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           undecidable



                                                                                 TR S AT[Tudec ]       (Theorem 1)
                                            decidable


 (Theorem 2) TR S AT[T log ]
                      udec



                                           NEXPTIME
                                                                                 BTR S ATbin [T ]
                                                                                                       (Theorem 3)
                                                                                 BTR S ATun [T ]


 (Theorem 4) TR S AT[T◦fix ]
                                               NP



                                                                                             fix       (Theorem 5)
                                                                                 TR S AT[T         ]


Figure 2: Schematic overview of the computability and complexity results, established in this work.
The classes of TE are described in the pretext of the respective theorem. Note that T refers to an
arbitrary class of (computable) TE. The small subset in the classes NP and NEXPTIME refers to the
complete problems. The NEXPTIME-hardness result of TR S AT[T FIX ] is not visualized



hardmax hardmax as normalisation functions and a scalar-product based scoring, enriched with a
nonlinear map represented by an FNN.
Theorem 1 (Section 4). The satisfiability problem TR S AT[Tudec ] is undecidable.

Essentially, this result implies that even for TE the combination of hardmax normalizations and
expressive scoring is enough to make satisfiability undecidable. Generally, this makes formal rea-
soning, like verifying robustness properties or giving formal explanations, impossible for classes
of TE that subsume Tudec . Specifically, no such methods exist that are fully automatic, sound and
complete. Theorem 1 does not preclude the existence of incomplete methods for instance.
Recently, so-called log-precision transformers have been studied (Merrill & Sabharwal (2023a)).
These transformers are defined as usual, but given a word length n it is assumed that a log-precision
transformer T uses at most O(log(n)) bits in its internal computations. To complement these the-
oretical considerations, we consider the class Tudec
                                                  LOG
                                                      of TE from Tudec that work with log-precision.
Unfortunately, this restriction is not enough to circumvent general undecidability.
                                                            LOG
Theorem 2 (Section 4). The satisfiability problem TR S AT[Tudec ] is undecidable.

Given such impossibility results, we turn our attention to the search for decidable cases. We make
the reasonable assumption that all considered TE are computable, meaning that their components
like scoring, normalisation, pooling, combination and output functions are computable functions.
Moreover, we assume that each TE T computes its output T (w) for a given input w within polyno-
mial time relative to the size of T and the length of w. This is reasonable, as the output is computed
layer-wise where each layer involves a quadratic amount of calculations per attention head. There-
fore, the computation depends polynomially on the depth and width of T and the length of w.
First, we consider a natural restriction of the satisfiability problem by bounding the length of valid
inputs. Then satisfiability becomes decidable, regardless of the respective class of TE, but it is
difficult from a complexity-theoretic perspective. To formalize this, we introduce the bounded sat-
isfiability problem BTR S AT[T ] for a class T : given an TE T ∈ T and a bound n ∈ N on its input
length, decide whether there is word w with |w| ≤ n s.t. T (w) = 1.
Theorem 3 (Section 5, informal restatement). The bounded satisfiability problem BTR S AT[T ] is
decidable for all classes T of (computable) TE. Depending on whether n is given in binary or unary
coding, BTR S AT[T ] is NEXPTIME-, resp. NP-complete assuming T ⊇ Tudec .


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Informally, this result implies that bounding the word length is a method to enable formal reasoning.
However, it does not change the fact that satisfiability is an essentially hard problem. As hardness is
a lower bound, this also translates to subsuming formal reasoning tasks.
Imposing a bound on the input length may not be a viable restriction for various formal reasoning
tasks. We therefore study other ways of obtaining decidability. We address the unbounded satisfia-
bility problem for practically motivated classes of TE. We consider the class T◦FIX of TE that use a
positional embedding with some periodicity in their positional encoding, commonly seen in practice
(Vaswani et al. (2017); Dufter et al. (2022)), use softmax or hardmax as normalisation and which
work over some fixed-width arithmetic (FA). This last restriction is motivated by recent popular
ways to handle ever increasing TE sizes, for example via quantization or using low-bit arithmetics
(Bondarenko et al. (2021)). From a complexity-theoretic perspective, the use of fixed-width arith-
metic has a similar effect to bounding the input length.
Theorem 4 (Section 5). The satisfiability problem TR S AT[T◦FIX ] is in NEXPTIME.

So automatic, sound and complete formal reasoning for periodical TE in a fixed-width arithmetic
environment is generally possible with potentially high complexity. Note that formal reasoning tasks
with more complex safety or interpretability specifications than simple satisfiability may even lead
to higher complexities.
We then aim to show that this is optimal by providing a matching lower bound. However, we need
to relax these restrictions again, namely considering the class T FIX allowing for TE that use arbitrary
embeddings and work over some fixed-width arithmetic. However, due to the fixed-witdth arith-
metic assumption, which consequently applies to positional informations as well, every embedding
must necessarily witness a periodic behaviour. Thus, decidability is implied by the same arguments
as used in Theorem 4. Additionally, we show that high complexity is unavoidable, making sound
and complete automatic formal reasoning for fixed-width arithmetic transformers with arbitrary po-
sitional embeddings practically intractable.
Theorem 5 (Section 5). The satisfiability problem TR S AT[T FIX ] is decidable and NEXPTIME-hard.

Figure 2 provides a schematic illustration of the computability and complexity results summarized
in this section. This figure is intended purely for technical clarity, summarizing our findings without
delving into the formal reasoning implications discussed earlier.

4    T RANSFORMER ENCODER SATISFIABILITY IS GENERALLY UNDECIDABLE
We consider a class of TE, denoted by Tudec , which we design with the aim of minimising its
expressive power, but having an undecidable satisfiability problem. We define Tudec by giving min-
imum requirements: positional-embeddings can be of the form emb(ak , 0) = (1, 1, 0, 0, k) and
                       Pi
emb(ak , i) = (0, 1, i, j=0 j, k) where we assume some order on the alphabet symbols a1 , a2 , . . . .
For scoring functions we allow for N (⟨Qx, Ky⟩) where N is a classical Feedforward Neural Net-
work (FNN) with relu activations, Q and K are linear maps and ⟨· · · ⟩ denotes the usual scalar
                                                                                   1
product, for normalisations we allow for hardmax hardmax(i, x1 , . . . , xn ) = m    if xi ≥ xj for
all j ≤ n and there are m distinct xj such that xi = xj otherwise hardmax(i, x1 , . . . , xn ) = 0.
Combinations as well as output functions can be classical FNN with relu activation. Aside from
technical reasons, we motivate the choice of Tudec in Section 3. To ease our notation, we exploit the
fact that using hardmax as normalisation implies a clearly defined subset of positions M that are
effective in the computation of some attention head att given some position i, namely those that are
weighted non-zero. In this case, we say that att attends to M given position i.
We prove that TR S AT[Tudec ] is undecidable by establishing a reduction from the (unbounded)
octant tiling-word problem (OTWP∗ ). For details on tiling problems, see Appendix A. The
OTWP∗ is defined as follows: given a tiling system S = (S, H, V, tI , tF ) where S is some fi-
nite set of tiles, H, V ⊆ S 2 and tI , tF ∈ S we have to decide whether there is a word (a)
t0,0 , t1,0 , t1,1 , t2,0 , t2,1 , t2,2 , t3,0 , . . . , tk,k ∈ S + such that (b) t0,0 = tI , tk,k = tF , (c) for all i ≤ k
and 0 ≤ j < i holds (ti,j , ti,j+1 ) ∈ H and (d) for all i ≤ k − 1 and j ≤ i holds (ti,j , ti+1,j ) ∈ V .
We call a word w which satisfies (a) an encoded tiling and if (b)-(d) are satisfied as well then we call
w a valid encoded tiling. Our proof strategy is easily described: given a tiling system S, we build an
TE TS ∈ Tudec which accepts a word w if it fulfils conditions (a) to (d) and otherwise TS rejects w.


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  2   d       c       d

            a    a    b     d    c    d                 Lemma 1
                                                                      a       b
                                                                  1

                                                                                          Lemma 2

                                                                  0   a

                                                                      0       1       2



Figure 3: Schematic depiction of the expressive capabilities of TE from Tudec in context of the
OTWP∗ proven in Lemma 1 and Lemma 2.


We derive most technical proofs of the following lemmas and theorems to Appendix B and instead
provide intuitions and proof sketches in this section.
We start with the first observation: the expressiveness of TE in Tudec is sufficient to decode the octant
tiling potentially represented by a given word w, as depicted by the arrows in Figure 3. In detail,
two encoder layers in combination with a positional embedding definable in Tudec are expressive
enough to compute for a given symbol t in w to which position in an octant tiling it corresponds, if
we interpret w as an encoded tiling.
Lemma 1. Let S be a tiling system with tiles S = {a1 , . . . , ak }. There is an embed-
ding function emb and there are encoder layers l1 and l2 definable in Tudec such that for
each word w = t0,0 t1,0 t1,1 t2,0 · · · tm,n ∈ S + holds that l2 (l1 (emb(w))) = x21 . . . x2|w|
where x2i = (1, i, r(i), c(i), ki ) such that aki is equal to the symbol at position i in w and
(r(1), c(1)), (r(2), c(2)), . . . , (r(|w|), c(|w|)) is equal to (0, 0), (1, 0) . . . , (m, n).

Assume that w ∈ S + . Lemma 1 implies that a TE T ∈ Tudec is generally able to recognize whether
w is an encoded tiling as soon as T is able to check whether r(|w|) and c(|w|) of the last symbol of
w processed by l2 (l1 (emb(· · · ))) are equal. Therefore, property (a) and also (b) can be checked by
TE in Tudec using the residual connection and FNN.
Property (c) can be ensured if it is possible to build an attention head that is able to attend to position
k + 1 given position k. Let w = t0,0 t1,0 t1,1 t2,0 · · · tm,m with ti,j ∈ S. To verify whether property
(d) holds, a TE must be able to attend to position k + (i + 1) given position k corresponding to
symbol ti,j . This is depicted in Figure 3 by the bold lines between horizontal and vertical tiles. In
summary, to check properties (a) – (d) it is left to argue that there are attention heads in Tudec that
can attend to positions depending linearly on the values of the currently considered position.
Lemma 2. Let f (x1 , . . . , xk ) = a1 x1 +· · ·+ak xk +b with ai , b ∈ R be some linear function. There
is attention head att f in Tudec such that for all sequences x1 , . . . , xm where all xi = (1, i, yi ) for
some yi ∈ Rk−2 attention head att f attends to {xj , xj+1 } given position i if f (xi ) = j + 12 with
j ≤ m − 1 and otherwise to {xj } where j is the value nearest to f (xi ).

In combination, the previous lemmas indicate that TE from Tudec are able to verify whether a given
word is a valid encoded tiling. This expressive power is enough, to lead to an undecidable satisfia-
bility problem for TE from Tudec .
Theorem 1. The decision problem TR S AT[Tudec ] is undecidable.

Proof Sketch. We establish a reduction from OTWP∗ to TR S AT[Tudec ] by constructing for each
instance S = (S, H, V, tI , tF ) of OTWP∗ an TE TS accepting exactly those w corresponding to a
valid encoded-tiling for S.
TS uses the positional embedding described in the beginning of Section 4 and has four layers. Layers
l1 and l2 are given by Lemma 1 and are used to decode the row and column indexes corresponding to
a potential octant tiling for each symbol in a given word w. Layer l3 uses the informations encoded
by the embedding and the decoded row and column indexes to check whether properties (a) to (d)


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


described above hold for w. The necessary informations are aggregated using three attention heads
att prev , att next and att step , each built according to Lemma 2.Thereby, att prev attends each position
to its predecessor, but the first position attends to itself. This allows to clearly identify the vector
corresponding to the first position in w and check whether this is equal to tile tI . Attention head
att next attends each position to its successor, but the last position attends to itself. This allows to
clearly identify the vector corresponding to the last position in w, in order to check whether this is
equal to tF , and to check conditions given by H. Attention head att step attends each position to the
position with the same column index but the successive row index. If there is no such successive row
it attends to the last position. This allows to check whether conditions given by V holds. Each of
these conditions is checked in the combination function of l3 , using specifically built feed-forward
neural networks outputting 0 to some predefined vector dimension if and only if the condition is
met. Finally, layer l4 aggregates the information of all positions in the vector corresponding to the
last position using attention head att leq , again given by Lemma 2. The correctness of this reduction
follows from the detailed construction of TS , given in Appendix B.

Next, we consider the class Tudec
                              LOG
                                  which is defined exactly like Tudec but for all T ∈ Tudec
                                                                                        LOG
                                                                                            working
over alphabet Σ and all words w with |w| = n we assume that T (w) is carried out in some fixed-
width arithmetic F using O(log(max(|Σ|, n))) bits.
                                             LOG
Theorem 2. The decision problem TR S AT[Tudec    ] is undecidable.

Proof sketch. This proof follows the exact same line as the proof of Theorem 1. Additionally, we
need to argue that TS works as intended, despite the fact that it is limited by some log-precision F .
Looking at the proof of Theorem 1, it is imminent that the magnitude and precision of all values
used and produced in the computation TS (w) depend polynomially on n and, thus, we can choose
the representation of F to be linear in log(n), which avoids any overflow or rounding situations and
ensures that TS works as intended. A formal proof is given in Appendix B.

5    H OW TO MAKE TRANSFORMER ENCODER SATISFIABILITY DECIDABLE
In this section we investigate classes of TE leading to decidable TR S AT problems or decidable re-
strictions of it. Additionally, we establish corresponding complexity bounds.
In order to establish clearly delineated upper complexity bounds, we need to bound the represen-
tation size of a TE T . Instead of tediously analyzing the space needed to represent embedding,
scoring, pooling, combination and normalisation functions, we note that it suffices to estimate the
size up to polynomials only. The complexity of a TE T with L layers and hi attention heads in layer
i, working on inputs over alphabet Σ, is |T | := |Σ| + L + H + D where H := max{hi | 1 ≤ i ≤ L}
and D is the maximal dimensionality of vectors occurring in a computation of T . Note that one can
reasonably assume the size of a syntactic representation of T to be polynomial in |T |, and that TE
have the polynomial evaluation property: given a word w ∈ Σ+ , T (w) can be computed in time that
is polynomial in |T | + |w|. Section 3 discusses why this assumption is reasonable.
We start with a natural restriction: bounding the word length. Let T be a class of TE. The bounded
satisfiability problem, denoted by BTR S AT[T ] is: given T ∈ T and some n ∈ N, decide whether
there is a word w with |w| ≤ n such that T (w) = 1. It is not hard to see that BTR S AT[T ] is decidable.
However, its complexity depends on the value of n, and we therefore distinguish whether n is rep-
resented in binary or unary encoding. We denote the problems as BTR S ATbin [T ] and BTR S ATun [T ].
Theorem 3. Let T be a class of TE. Then

      1. BTR S ATun [T ] is in NP; if Tudec ⊆ T then BTR S ATun [T ] is NP-complete,
      2. BTR S ATbin [T ] is in NEXPTIME; if Tudec ⊆ T then BTR S ATbin [T ] is NEXPTIME-complete.


Proof Sketch. The decidability result of statement (1) can be shown using a simple guess-and-check
argument: given n ∈ N, guess a word w ∈ Σ+ with |w| ≤ n, compute T (w) and check that
the result is 1. This is possible in time polynomial in |T | + n using the polynomial evaluation
property. Note that |T | depends on |Σ|, thus this also respects the actual representation size of w.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Moreover, the value of |T | + n is polynomial in the size needed to represent n in unary encoding.
The decidability result of statement (2) is shown along the same lines. However, if the value n is
encoded binarily then this part of the input is of size log n, and |T | + n becomes exponential in this.
Hence, the guess-and-check procedure only proves that BTR S ATbin [T ] ∈ NEXPTIME.
For the completeness result in (1) it suffices to argue that the problem is NP-hard. We use that TE in
Tudec are expressive enough to accept a given word w if and only if it is a valid encoded tiling, cf.
Section 4 for details. It is possible to establish NP-hardness of a restriction of the octant word-tiling
problem, namely the bounded octant word-tiling problem (for unarily encoded input values). See
Appendix A for details on tiling problems. It remains to observe that the construction in Theorem 1
is in fact a polynomial-time reduction, and that it reduces the bounded octant word-tiling problem to
the bounded satisfiability problem. The argument for NEXPTIME-hardness in statement (2) works
the same with, again, the bounded octant-word tiling problem shown to be NEXPTIME-hard when
the input parameter n is encoded binary. A full proof for Theorem 3 is in Appendix C.

We turn our attention to classes of TE that naturally arise in practical contexts. We consider TE that
work over some fixed-width arithmetic, like fixed- or floating-point numbers, and which have an em-
bedding relying on a periodical encoding of positions. We start with establishing a scenario where
TR S AT is decidable in NEXPTIME. Regardless of the underlying TE class T , our proof strategy
always relies on a certifier-based understanding of NEXPTIME: given T ∈ T , we nondeterministi-
cally guess a word w, followed by a deterministic certification whether T (w) = 1 holds. For this to
show TR S AT[T ] ∈ NEXPTIME, we need to argue that the overall running time of such a procedure
is at most exponential, in particular that whenever there is a word w with T (w) = 1 then there is
also some w′ with T (w′ ) = 1 and |w′ | ≤ 2poly(|T |) . Again, we rely on the polynomial evaluation
property of TE in T , i.e. the fact that T (w′ ) can be computed in time polynomial in |T | + |w′ |.
We consider the class of TE T◦FIX , defined by placing restrictions on the positional embedding of
an TE T to be additive-periodical which means that emb(a, i) = emb ′ (a) + pos(i) where pos
is periodical, i.e. there is p ≥ 1 such that pos(i) = pos(i + p) for all i ∈ N. Additionally, all
normalisation functions are realised by either the softmax function softmax or the hardmax func-
tion hardmax. Moreover, we assume that all computations occurring in T are carried out in some
fixed-width arithmetic, encoding values in binary using a fixed number b ∈ N of bits. Aside from
technical reasons, we motivate the choice of T◦FIX in Section 3. Given these restrictions, we ad-
just the definition of the complexity of T ∈ T◦FIX as a measure of the size (up to polynomials) as
|T | := |Σ| + L + H + D + p + b.
Lemma 3. There is a polynomial function poly : N → N such that for all T ∈ T◦FIX and all words
w with T (w) = 1 there is word w′ with T (w′ ) = 1 and |w′ | ≤ 2poly(|T |) .

Proof Sketch. The polynomial poly can be chosen uniformly for all T ∈ T◦FIX because for all po-
sitional embeddings of TE in T◦FIX there is an upper bound on the period and on the bit-width in
the underlying arithmetic. The small-word property stated by the lemma is then shown by arguing,
given polynomial poly, TE T and |w| > 2poly(|T |) , that w contains unnecessary subwords u that can
be cut out without changing the output in T . Here, we exploit the fact T has some periodicity p and
only consider those u whose length is a multitude of p. This ensures that the resulting word w′ , given
by w without u, is embedded the same way as w by the positional embedding of T . The existence of
such subwords follows from T ’s limited distinguishing capabilities, especially in its normalisations,
due to the bounded representation size of numerical values possible in the underlying fixed-width
arithmetic. A formal proof relies on basic combinatorial arguments and given in Appendix C.
Theorem 4. TR S AT[T◦FIX ] for additive-periodical TE over fixed-width arithmetic is in NEXPTIME.

Proof. Let T ∈ T◦FIX working over alphabet Σ. We use a certifier-based understanding of a nonde-
terministic exponential-time algorithm as follows: We (a) guess an input w ∈ Σ+ and (b) compute
T (w) to check whether T (w) = 1. For correctness, we need to argue that the length of w is at most
exponential in |T |. This argument is given by Lemma 3. Note that via assumption we have that
T (w) can be computed in polynomial time regarding |T | and |w|.

Next, we address the goal of obtaining a matching lower bound, i.e. NEXPTIME-hardness. An
obvious way to do so would be to follow Theorem 3.2 and form a reduction from the bounded


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


octant word-tiling problem. Hence, given a tiling system S and n ∈ N encoded binarily, we would
have to construct – in time polynomial in |S| + log n – an TE TS,n ∈ T◦FIX such that TS,n (w) = 1
for some w ∈ Σ+ iff there is a word w = t1,1 , t2,1 , t2,2 , t3,1 , . . . , tn,n representing a valid S-tiling.
In particular, TS,n would have to be able to recognise the correct word length and reject input that is
longer than |w| = n(n+1)2  . This poses a problem for TE with periodical embeddings. To recognize
whether a word is too long, an TE T must ultimately rely on its positional embedding, which seems
to make a periodicity of p ≥ n(n+1)
                                  2   necessary. Since the size of periodical TE is linear in p, we get
an exponential blow-up in a potential reduction of OTWPbin to TR S AT[T◦FIX ], given that the values
of n(n+1)
       2     and already n are exponential in the size of a binary representation of n. This problem
vanishes when the requirement of the underyling positional embedding to be periodical is lifted:
allowing for arbitrary TE, working over some fixed-width arithmetic, leads to an NEXPTIME-hard
satisfiability problem. Let T FIX be defined similar to T◦FIX , but we allow for arbitrary embeddings.
Furthermore, we assume that the considered fixed-width arithmetics can handle overflow situations
using saturation.
Theorem 5. TR S AT[T FIX ] for TE over fixed-width arithmetic is decidable and NEXPTIME-hard.

Proof sketch. The decidability follows from the same arguments as in Theorem 4, with the insight
that even though T ∈ T FIX uses an arbitrary embedding, a fixed-width setting with b bits enforces
a periodicity of size at most 2b , assuming overflow is handled by wrap-around, or a periodicity
of size 1 after a finite prefix of length up to 2b , assuming overflow is handled by saturation, in the
embedding. For the hardness, we establish a reduction from OTPbin to TR S AT[T FIX ] by constructing,
for each instance (S, n) of OTPbin , an TE TS,n working over some fixed-width arithmetic F , which
accepts exactly those w with |w| = n(n+1) 2    corresponding to a valid word-encoded tiling for S. See
Appendix A for details on tiling problems. The construction is similar to the one given for TS in the
proof of Theorem 4, but we need to enable TS,n to reject words that are too long corresponding a
polynomial bound dependent on n. This implies that TS,n , based on the positional embedding emb
specified in Section 4, is able to check for all symbols if their respective position is less than or equal
to a predefined bound. This can be achieved with similar tools as used in Lemma 2. Furthermore, we
need to ensure that TS,n works as intended, despite the fact that it is limited by F . The arguments
follow the same line as the proof of Theorem 2. A formal proof is given in Appendix C.

6    S UMMARY, LIMITATIONS AND OUTLOOK
We investigated the satisfiability problem of transformer encoders (TE). In particular, we consid-
ered the computational complexity of the satisfiability problem TR S AT of TE in context of different
classes of TE, forming a baseline for understanding possibilities and challenges of formal reasoning
of transformers. We showed that TR S AT is undecidable for classes of TE recently considered in
research on the expressiveness of different transformer models (Theorem 1 and Theorem 2). This
implies that formal reasoning is impossible as soon as we consider classes of TE that are at least as
expressive as the classes considered in these results. Additionally, we identified two ways to enable
formal reasoning for TE: by bounding the length of inputs (Theorem 3) or by considering quantized
TE, where computations and parameters are limited by fixed-width arithmetic (Theorem 4). These
imply that formal reasoning is possible for TE classes that are at most as expressive as those in our
results. Thereby, we assume that TE expressiveness is the primary factor influencing computability
or complexity bounds, rather than specific safety or interpretability assumptions. However, in both
cases, TR S AT remains computationally difficult (Theorems 3 and 5). Again, these results apply only
to TE classes at least as expressive as those we considered. While our results provide an initial
framework for understanding the possibilities and challenges of formal reasoning for transformers,
there is room for more detailed investigations. Our undecidability and hardness results rely on nor-
malizations realized by the hardmax function, and it’s unclear whether similar results hold when
using the commonly employed softmax function. Additionally, further exploration of the interplay
between the embedding function and the internal structure of the TE is of interest. We expect that
less expressive embeddings require a richer attention mechanism, but it’s unclear where the limits
lie regarding the undecidability of the satisfiability problem. Regarding our decidability and upper
complexity bounds, examining the specifics of particular fixed-width arithmetics could be practically
beneficial. While this wouldn’t change our overall results, it could provide tighter time-complexity
estimates valuable for certain formal reasoning applications.


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Marek S. Baranowski, Shaobo He, Mathias Lechner, Thanh Son Nguyen, and Zvonimir Rakamaric.
 An SMT theory of fixed-point arithmetic. In Nicolas Peltier and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans
 (eds.), Automated Reasoning - 10th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2020, Paris, France,
 July 1-4, 2020, Proceedings, Part I, volume 12166 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp.
 13–31. Springer, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-51074-9\ 2.
Robert Berger. The undecidability of the domino problem. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 66:72, 1966.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Arkil Patel, and Navin Goyal. On the computational power of transformers
  and its implications in sequence modeling. In Raquel Fernández and Tal Linzen (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 24th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, CoNLL 2020,
  Online, November 19-20, 2020, pp. 455–475. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
  doi: 10.18653/V1/2020.CONLL-1.37.
Gregory Bonaert, Dimitar I. Dimitrov, Maximilian Baader, and Martin Vechev. Fast and precise cer-
  tification of transformers. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference
  on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2021, pp. 466–481. Association
  for Computing Machinery, 2021. ISBN 978-1-4503-8391-2. doi: 10.1145/3453483.3454056.
Yelysei Bondarenko, Markus Nagel, and Tijmen Blankevoort. Understanding and overcoming the
  challenges of efficient transformer quantization. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang,
  Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Domini-
  can Republic, 7-11 November, 2021, pp. 7947–7969. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2021. doi: 10.18653/V1/2021.EMNLP-MAIN.627.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
  Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-
  shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
David Chiang, Peter Cholak, and Anand Pillay. Tighter bounds on the expressivity of transformer
  encoders. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
  Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023,
  23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 5544–5562. PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
  chiang23a.html.
George A. Constantinides, Fredrik Dahlqvist, Zvonimir Rakamaric, and Rocco Salvia. Rigorous
  roundoff error analysis of probabilistic floating-point computations. In Alexandra Silva and
  K. Rustan M. Leino (eds.), Computer Aided Verification - 33rd International Conference, CAV
  2021, Virtual Event, July 20-23, 2021, Proceedings, Part II, volume 12760 of Lecture Notes in
  Computer Science, pp. 626–650. Springer, 2021. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-81688-9\ 29.
S. Demri, V. Goranko, and M. Lange. Temporal Logics in Computer Science. Cambridge Tracts in
   Theoretical Computer Science. Cambridge University Press, 2016. ISBN 9781107028364. URL
   http://www.cambridge.org/core_title/gb/434611.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and
  Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/
  V1/N19-1423.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xinshuai Dong, Anh Tuan Luu, Rongrong Ji, and Hong Liu. Towards robustness against natu-
  ral language word substitutions. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ks5nebunVn_.
Philipp Dufter, Martin Schmitt, and Hinrich Schütze. Position information in transformers: An
  overview. Comput. Linguistics, 48(3):733–763, 2022. doi: 10.1162/COLI\ A\ 00445.
Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Trans. Assoc.
 Comput. Linguistics, 8:156–171, 2020. doi: 10.1162/TACL\ A\ 00306.
Yiding Hao, Dana Angluin, and Robert Frank. Formal language recognition by hard attention
  transformers: Perspectives from circuit complexity. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 10:800–
  810, 2022. URL https://transacl.org/ojs/index.php/tacl/article/view/
  3765.
Yu-Lun Hsieh, Minhao Cheng, Da-Cheng Juan, Wei Wei, Wen-Lian Hsu, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. On
  the robustness of self-attentive models. In Anna Korhonen, David R. Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
  2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, pp. 1520–1529. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/V1/P19-1147.
Xiaowei Huang, Wenjie Ruan, Wei Huang, Gaojie Jin, Yi Dong, Changshun Wu, Saddek Bensalem,
  Ronghui Mu, Yi Qi, Xingyu Zhao, Kaiwen Cai, Yanghao Zhang, Sihao Wu, Peipei Xu, Dengyu
  Wu, André Freitas, and Mustafa A. Mustafa. A survey of safety and trustworthiness of large
  language models through the lens of verification and validation. CoRR, abs/2305.11391, 2023.
  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2305.11391.
João Marques-Silva and Alexey Ignatiev. Delivering trustworthy AI through formal XAI. In Thirty-
   Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2022, Thirty-Fourth Conference on Inno-
   vative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2022, The Twelveth Symposium on Educational
   Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2022 Virtual Event, February 22 - March 1, 2022, pp.
   12342–12350. AAAI Press, 2022. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.V36I11.21499.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. A logic for expressing log-precision transformers. In Alice
 Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.),
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Infor-
 mation Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
 2023, 2023a. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
 a48e5877c7bf86a513950ab23b360498-Abstract-Conference.html.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-precision trans-
 formers. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:531–545, 2023b. doi:
 10.1162/tacl a 00562.
William Merrill, Ashish Sabharwal, and Noah A. Smith. Saturated transformers are constant-
 depth threshold circuits. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 10:843–856, 2022. URL https:
 //transacl.org/ojs/index.php/tacl/article/view/3465.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Daniel W. Otter, Julian R. Medina, and Jugal K. Kalita. A survey of the usages of deep learning for
  natural language processing. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn. Syst., 32(2):604–624, 2021.
  doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2979670.
Jorge Pérez, Pablo Barceló, and Javier Marinkovic. Attention is turing-complete. J. Mach. Learn.
  Res., 22:75:1–75:35, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-302.html.
Marco Sälzer and Martin Lange. Fundamental limits in formal verification of message-passing
 neural networks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.
 net/pdf?id=WlbG820mRH-.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhouxing Shi, Huan Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, Minlie Huang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Robustness
  verification for transformers. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=BJxwPJHFwS.
Lena Strobl, William Merrill, Gail Weiss, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. What Formal Lan-
  guages Can Transformers Express? A Survey. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 12:543–561, 05 2024. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00663.
P. van Emde Boas. The convenience of tilings. In A. Sorbi (ed.), Complexity, Logic, and Recursion
   Theory, volume 187 of Lecture notes in pure and applied mathematics, pp. 331–363. Marcel
   Dekker, Inc., 1997.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
  Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
  Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp.
  5998–6008, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.
Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
  2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 11080–11090. PMLR, 2021. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/
  weiss21a.html.
Yong Yu, Xiaosheng Si, Changhua Hu, and Jianxun Zhang. A review of recurrent neural networks:
  LSTM cells and network architectures. Neural Comput., 31(7):1235–1270, 2019. doi: 10.1162/
  NECO\ A\ 01199.
Haiyan Zhao, Hanjie Chen, Fan Yang, Ninghao Liu, Huiqi Deng, Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang,
  Dawei Yin, and Mengnan Du. Explainability for large language models: A survey. ACM Trans.
  Intell. Syst. Technol., 15(2):20:1–20:38, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3639372.


A    T ILING P ROBLEMS
We make use of particular tiling problems in order to prove lower bounds on the complexity and
decidability of TR S AT[T ] for different classes T .
A tiling system is an S = (S, H, V, tI , tF ) where S is a finite set; its elements are called tiles.
H, V ⊆ S × S define a horizontal, resp. vertical matching relation between tiles, and tI , tF are two
designated initial, resp. final tiles in S.
Problems associated with tiling systems are typically of the following form: given a discrete convex
plain consisting of cells with horizontal and vertical neighbors, is it possible to cover the plane with
tiles from S in a way that horizontally adjacent tiles respect the relation H and vertically adjacent
tiles respect the relation V , together with some additional constraints about where to put the initial
and final tile tI , tF . Such tiling problems, in particular for rectangular planes, have proved to be
extremely useful in computational complexity, cf. (Berger (1966); van Emde Boas (1997)), since
they can be seen as abstract versions of halting problems.
We need a variant in which the plane to be tiled is of triangular shape. The n-th triangle is On =
{(i, j) ∈ N × N | j ≤ i ≤ n} for n > 0. An (S)-tiling of On is a function τ : On → S s.t.

       • (τ (i, j), τ (i, j + 1)) ∈ H for all (i, j) ∈ O with j < i ≤ n,
       • (τ (i, j), τ (i + 1, j)) ∈ V for all (i, j) ∈ O with j ≤ i < n.

Such a tiling a successful, if additionally τ (0, 0) = tI and τ (i, i) = tF for some (i, i) ∈ On .
The unbounded octant tiling problem (OTP∗ ) is: given a tiling system S, decide whether a success-
ful S-tiling of On exists for some n ∈ N. The bounded octant tiling problem (OTP) is: given a


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tiling system S and an n ≥ 1, decide whether a successful S-tiling of On exists. Note that here,
n is part of the input, and that it can be represented differently, for example in binary or in unary
encoding. We distinguish these two cases by referring to OTPbin and OTPun .
It is well-known that OTP∗ is undecidable (van Emde Boas (1997)). It is also not hard to imagine
that OTPun is NP-complete while OTPun is NEXPTIME-complete. In fact, this is well-known for
the variants in which the underlying plane is not a triangle of height n but a square of height n (van
Emde Boas (1997)). The exponential difference incurred by the more compact binary representation
of the input parameter n is best seen when regarding the upper complexity bound for these problems:
given n, a nondeterministic algorithm can simply guess all the n2 many tiles of the underlying square
and verify the horizontal and vertical matchings in time O(n2 ). If n is encoded unarily, i.e. the space
needed to write it down is s := n, then the time needed for this is polynomial in the input size s; if
n is encoded binarily with space s := ⌈log n⌉ then the time needed for this is exponential in s.
It then remains to argue that the tiling problems based on triangular planes are also NP- resp.
NEXPTIME-complete. Clearly, the upper bounds can be established with the same guess-and-check
procedure. For the lower bounds it suffices to observe that hardness of the tiling problems for the
squares is established by a reduction from the halting problem for Turing machines (TM) such that
a square of size n × n represents a run of the TM of length n as a sequence of rows, and each row
represents a configuration of the TM using at most n tape cells. This makes use of the observation
that the space consumption of a TM can never exceed the time consumption. Likewise, assuming
that a TM always starts a computation with its head on the very left end of a tape, one can easily
observe that after i time steps, it can change at most the i leftmost tape cells. Hence, a run of a TM
can therefore also be represented as a triangle with its first configuration of length 1 in row 1, the
second of length 2 in row 2 etc.
At last, we consider two slight modifications of these two problems which are easily seen to
preserve undecidability resp. NP- and NEXPTIME-completeness. The unbounded octant tiling-
word problem (OTWP∗ ) is: given some S = (S, H, V, tI , tF ), decide whether there is a word
t0,0 , t1,0 , t1,1 , t2,0 , t2,1 , t2,2 , . . . , tn,n ∈ S ∗ for some n ∈ N, s.t. the tiling τ defined by τ (i, j) := ti,j
comprises a successful tiling of On . The two variants of the bounded octant tiling-word problem
are both: given some S as above and n, decide whether such a word exists. Note that, again, here n
is an input parameter, and so its representation may affect the complexity of the problem, leading to
the distinction between OTWPbin with binary encoding and OTWPun with unary encoding.
Theorem 6.

      a) OTWP∗ is undecidable (Σ10 -complete).
      b) OTWPbin is NEXPTIME-complete.
       c) OTWPun is NP-complete.

Proof. (a) It should be clear that a tiling problem and its tiling-word variant (like OTP∗ and
OTWP∗ ) are interreducible since they only differ in the formulation of how the witness for a suc-
cessful tiling should be presented. So they are essentially the same problems. Undecidability of
OTP∗ and, thus, OTWP∗ is known from (van Emde Boas (1997)), the Σ10 -upper bound can be ob-
tained through a semi-decision procedure that searches through the infinite space of On -tiling for
any n > 1. This justifies the statement in part (a) of Thm. 6.
(b) With the same argument as in (a) t suffices to consider OTPbin instead of OTWPbin . The upper
bound is easy to see: a nondeterministic procedure can easily guess a tiling for On and verify
the horizontal and vertical matching conditions, as well as the use of the initial and final tile in
appropriate places. This is possible in time O(n2 ), resp. O(22 log n ) which is therefore exponential
in the input size ⌈log n⌉ for binarily encoded parameters n. This shows inclusion in NEXPTIME.
For the lower bound we argue that the halting problem for nondeterministic, exponentially-time
bounded TM can be reduced to OTPbin : given a nondeterministic TM M over input alphabet Σ
and tape alphabet Γ that halts after at most time 2p(n) steps on input words of length n for some
polynomial n, and a word w ∈ Σ∗ , we first construct a TM Mw that is started in on the empty tape
and begins by writing w onto the tape and then simulates M on it. This is a standard construction
in complexity theory, and it is easy to see that the running time of Mw is bounded by a function


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    ′
2p (|w|) for some polynomial p′ . With the observation made above, a computation of Mw can be
seen as a sequence of configurations C1 , . . . , Cp′ (|w|) , with |Ci | = i. This does not directly define
a tiling system, instead and again by a standard trick, cf. (van Emde Boas (1997)) or (Demri et al.,
2016, Chp. 11), one compresses three adjacent tape cells into one tile in order to naturally derive
a horizontal matching relation from overlaps between such triples and a vertical matching relation
from the TM’s transition function. At last, let n′ := p′ (|w|). It is then a simple exercise to verify
that a valid tiling of the triangle ∆n′ corresponds to an accepting run of M on w and vice-versa,
which establishes NEXPTIME-hardness.
(c) This is down exactly along the same lines as part (b), but instead making use of the fact that, when
n is given in unary encoding, p(n) is polynomial in the size of the representation of n, and hence,
the time needed for the guess-and-check procedure in the upper bound is only polynomial, and for
the lower bound we need to assume that the running time of the TM is polynomially bounded. Thus,
we get NP-completeness instead of NEXPTIME-completeness.

B       P ROOFS OF S ECTION 4
In the following, we give formal proof for the undecidability results of Section 4. To do so, we make
use of classical Feed-Forward Neural Networks.

Feed-Forward Neural NetworkP A neuron v is a computational unit computing a function Rm →
                                      m
R by v(x1 , . . . , xm ) = σ(b + i=1 wi xi ) where σ is a function called activation and b, wi are
parameters called bias resp. weight. A layer l is a tuple of nodes (v1 , . . . , vn ) where we assume that
all nodes have the same input dimensionality m. Therefore, l computes a function Rm → Rn . We
call n the size of layer l. Let l1 be a layer with input dimensionality m and lk a layer of size n. A
Feed-Forward Neural Network (FNN) N is a tuple (l1 , . . . , lk ) of layers where we assume that for
all i ≤ k − 1 holds that the size of li equals the input dimensionality of li+1 . Therefore, N computes
a function Rm → Rn by processing an input layer by layer.
In particular, we use specific FNN with relu(x) = max(0, x) activations, called gadgets, to derive
lower bounds in connection with the expressibility of transformers. We denote the class of all FNN
with relu activations by N (relu).
Lemma 4. Let k ∈ R>0 . There are basic gadgets

        1. N|·| ∈ N (relu) computing N|·| (x) = |x|,

        2. N< ∈ N (relu) computing a function R2 → R such that N< (x1 , x2 ) = 0 if (x1 +1)−x2 ≤
           0, N< (x1 , x2 ) = (x1 + 1) − x2 if (x1 + 1) − x2 ∈ (0; 1) and N< (x1 , x2 ) = 1 otherwise,
        3. N= ∈ N (relu) computing a function R2 → R such that N= (x1 , x2 ) = 0 if x1 − x2 = 0,
           N= (x1 , x2 ) = |x2 − x1 | if |x2 − x1 | ∈ (0; 1) and N= (x1 , x2 ) = 1 otherwise,
        4. N→ ∈ N (relu) computing a function R2 → R such for all inputs x1 , x2 with x1 ∈ {0, 1}
           and x2 ∈ [0; k] holds N→ (x1 , x2 ) = 0 if x1 = x2 = 0 or x1 = 1 and N→ (x1 , x2 ) =
           relu(x2 ) otherwise.

Proof. Let N|·| be the minimal FNN computing relu(relu(−x) + relu(x)), let N< be the minimal
FNN computing relu(f< (x1 , x2 )−f< (x1 , x2 +1)) where f< (y1 , y2 ) = relu(y1 −y2 +1) and let N=
be the minimal FNN computing relu(f= (x1 , x2 ) − f= (x1 + 1, x2 ) + f= (x2 , x1 ) − f= (x2 + 1, x1 ))
where f= (y1 , y2 ) = relu(y2 − y1 ). The claims of the lemma regarding these gadgets are straight-
forward given their functional form. Let N→ be the minimal FNN computing relu(relu(x2 ) − k ·
relu(x1 )). As stated in the lemma, we assume that x1 ∈ {0, 1} and x2 ∈ [0; k]. Then, −k · relu(x1 )
is −k if x1 = 1 and 0 if x1 = 0. Thus, N→ is guaranteed to be 0 if x1 = 1 and otherwise it depends
on x2 . This gives the claim regarding gadget N→ .

We will combine gadgets in different ways. Let N1 and N2 be FNN with the same input di-
mensionality m and output dimensionality n1 respectively n2 . We extend the computation of
                   ′
N1 to functions Rm → Rn1 with m < m′ by weighting additional dimensions with 0 in the
input layer. Given a set of input dimensions x1 , . . . , xm′ , we denote the effective dimensions


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      x   ,...,x
xi1 , . . . , xim with pairwise different ij ∈ {1, . . . , m′ } by N1 i1          im
                                                                                     . Formally, this means that
  xi1 ,...,xim
N1               (x1 , . . . , xm′ ) = N1 (xi1 , . . . , xim ) for all inputs. We denote the FNN consisting of
N1 and N2 placed next to each other by N1 ||N2 . Formally, this is done by combining N1 and N2
layer by layer using 0 weights in intersecting connections. Then, N1 ||N2 computes Rm → Rn1 +n2
given by N1 ||N2 (x) = (N1 (x), N2 (x)). We generalize this operation to k FNN N1 || · · · ||Nk in the
obvious sense. Let N3 be an FNN with input dimensionality n1 and output dimensionality n3 . We
denote the FNN consisting of N1 and N3 placed sequentially by N3 ◦ N1 . Formally, this is done by
connecting the output layer of N1 with the input layer of N3 . Then, N3 ◦ N1 computes Rm → Rn3
given by N3 ◦ N1 (x) = N3 (N1 (x)).
We also consider specific gadgets needed in the context of tiling problems.
Lemma 5. Let S ⊆ N be a finite set and R ⊆ S 2 . There is FNN NR ∈ N (relu) computing R2 → R
such that NR (x1 , x2 ) ∈ {0, 1} if (x1 , x2 ) ∈ S 2 and NR (x1 , x2 ) = 0 iff (x1 , x2 ) ∈ R and there is
N=t ∈ N (relu) for each t ∈ S computing R → R such that N=t (x) ∈ {0, 1} for each x ∈ N and
N=t (x) = 0 iff x = t.

Proof. Let S ⊆ N be finite, R ⊆ S 2 and t ∈ S. First, consider N=t . Let Nt be the minimal
FNN computing relu(0 · x + t) and Nid be the minimal FNN computing (relu(x), −relu(−x)).
Obviously, Nt computes the constant t function and Nid computes the identity in the form of two
dimensional vectors. Let N=t be given by the minimal FNN computing N= ◦ (Nid ||Nt ) with the
slight alteration that the two output dimensions of Nid are connected to the first dimension of N= .
Then, the claim of the lemma regarding N=t follows from Lemma 4 and the operations on FNN
described in Appendix B.
Now, consider NR . Given some s ∈ S let R[s] = {r | (s, r) ∈ R}. Let N∧k be the mini-
mal FNN computing relu(x1 + · · · + xk ). Furthermore, let N∈T for some set T ⊆ S be the
minimal FNN such that N∈T (x) = 0 if x ∈ T and N∈T (x) = 1 if x ∈ S \ T . A con-
struction for N∈T is given in Theorem 4 in (Sälzer & Lange (2023)). According to this con-
struction, N∈T consists of three layers and is polynomial in T . In the case that T = ∅ we as-
sume that N∈∅ is the constant 1 function represented by a suitable FNN. Then, NR is given by
   |S|
N∧ ◦((N→ ◦(N=s1 ||N∈R[s1 ] ))|| · · · ||(N→ ◦(N=s|S| ||N∈R[s|S| ] ))) for some arbitrary order on S with
the slight alteration that NR has two input dimensions, meaning that each subnet (N=si ||N∈R[si ] ) is
connected to the same two input dimensions. Again, the claim of the lemma regarding NR follows
from Lemma 4 and the operations on FNN described in Appendix B.

Given these understandings of gadgets, we are set to formally prove the results of Section 4.

Proof of Lemma 1. Let w = t0,0 t1,0 t1,1 t2,0 · · · tm,n ∈ S + as stated in the lemma and assume some
                                                                                                     Pj
order ai on S. Furthermore, let emb(ai , 1) = (1, 1, 1, 1, i) and emb(ai , j) = (0, 1, j, h=0 h, i)
if j > 1. Let emb(w) = x01 · · · x0k . In the following, we build two layers l1 and l2 using com-
ponents allowed in Tudec , satisfying the statement of the lemma. Layer l1 consists of a single
attention head att 1,1 = (score 1,1 , pool 1,1 ). The scoring function is given by score 1,1 (x0i , x0j ) =
N1,1 (⟨Q1,1 x0i , K1,1 x0j ⟩) where Q1,1 = [(0, 0, −1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0, 0, 0)] and K1,1 =
[(0, 1, 0, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0, 0, 0), (0, 0, 0, 1, 0)] and N (x) = −relu(x). We have that score 1,1 (x0i , x0j ) =
          Pj                                                                             Pj
−relu(( h=0 h) − (i − 1)) and it follows that score 1,1 (x0i , x0j ) = 0 if h=0 h ≤ i − 1 and
otherwise we have that score 1,1 (x0i , x0j ) < 0. The pooling function is specified by the matrix
W1,1 = [(1, 0, 0, 0, 0)] and uses hardmax as normalisation function. The combination comb 1 func-
tion is given by the FNN N1 (x1 , . . . , x5 , y) = relu(x2 )|| · · · ||relu(x5 )||relu(y). Given a position x0i ,
                                                                        Pj
the attention head att 1,1 attends to all positions x0j satisfying h=0 h ≤ i−1. This is due to the way
score 1,1 is build. Then, att 1,1 computes 1l using pool 1,1 where l is the number of positions att 1,1
attends to. Here, we exploit the fact that only the first position x01 has a non-zero entry in the its first
dimension and that for all i head att 1,1 attends to x01 . Finally, comb 1 simply stacks the old vector
x0i onto the value 1l , but leaves out the first dimension of x0i . Let l1 (emb(w)) = x11 · · · x1k . Layer
l2 consists of a single attention head att 2,1 = (score 2,1 , pool 2,1 ). The scoring function score 2,1
is given by N2,1 (⟨Q2,1 x1i , K2,1 x1j ⟩) where Q2,1 = [(0, 0, 0, 0, 1)], K2,1 = [(0, 1, 0, 0, 0)] and
N2,1 (x) = −relu(relu(x − 1) + relu(1 − x)). We have that score 2,1 (x1i , x1j ) = 0 if 1l · j = 1 where


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1                            1                           1    1
l is the fifth dimension of xi and otherwise score 2,1 (xi , xj ) < 0. The pooling function pool 2,1 is
specified by W2,1 = [(0, 1, 0, 0, 0), (0, 0, 1, 0, 0)] and uses hardmax as normalisation. The combi-
nation comb 2 is given by the FNN N2 (x1 , . . . , x5 , y1 , y2 ) = relu(x1 )||relu(x2 )||relu(y1 )||relu(x2 −
y2 − 1)||relu(x4 ). Given a position x1i , the attention head att 2,1 attends to the position j, where
1
 l · j =P
        1. Relying on our arguments regarding the computation of l1 , this is the position j satisfying
          j
maxj ( h=0 h ≤ i − 1). However, this j is equal to the row index r(i) of the decomposition of i
based on the inversion of Cantor’s pairing function. Thus, we have that r(i) = j. Furthermore, we
                             Pj
have that c(i) = (i − 1) − ( h=0 h), which is computed by relu(x2 − y2 − 1) in the combination
function comb 2 . Overall, we see that l2 (l1 (emb(w))) gives the desired result.

Proof of Lemma 2. Let f be as stated in the lemma. By definition of Tudec , the scoring func-
tion of att f is of the form N (⟨Qxi , Kxj ⟩) and the normalisation is hardmax. Let Q =
[(a1 , . . . , ak ), (b, 0, . . . , 0), (1, 0, . . . , 0)], K = [(1, 0, . . . , 0), (1, 0, . . . , 0), (0, −1, 0, . . . , 0)] and N
be the minimal FNN computing N (x) = −relu(N|·| (x)) = −|x| where N|·| is given by Lemma 4.
Overall, this ensures that the scoring is given by score(xi , xj ) = −|f (xi ) − j|. Then, the statement
of the lemma follows from the fact that hardmax attends to the maximum, which is 0 given this
scoring, and that j ∈ N is unique for each xj .
Lemma 6. There is attention head att ≤ in Tudec such that for all sequences x1 , . . . , xm where all
xi = (1, i, yi ) the head att ≤ attends to {x1 , . . . , xi } given i.

Proof. By definition of Tudec , the scoring function of att f is of the form N (⟨Qxi , Kxj ⟩) and
the normalisation is hardmax. Let Q = [(0, 1, 0, . . . , 0), (1, 0, . . . , 0)] and let K be equal to
[(1, 0 . . . , 0), (0, −1, 0, . . . , 0)]. Furthermore, let N (x) = −relu(x). We observe that N outputs
0 if j ≤ i and otherwise N (x) < 0. In combination with hardmax, this ensures that att ≤ behaves
as stated by the lemma.

Proof of Theorem 1. We prove the statement via reduction from OTWP∗ . Let S = (S, H, V, tI , tF )
be an instance of OTWP∗ with |S| = k. W.l.o.g we assume that S ⊆ N. Let TS ∈ Tudec be built
the following way. TS uses the embedding emb of transformer in Tudec specified in the beginning
of Section 4. Furthermore, it has four layers. Layers l1 , l2 are as in Lemma 1. Layer l3 is given
by l3 = (att prev , att next , att step , comb 3 ) where att prev , att next and att step are of Lemma 2 whereby
prev (x1 , . . . , x5 ) = x2 − 1, next(x1 , . . . , x5 ) = x2 + 1 and step(x1 , . . . , x5 ) = x2 + x3 + 1. We
assume that all three attention heads use the identity matrix as linear maps in their respective pooling
function. comb 3 is given by an FNN N3 computing R4·5 → R. Let the input dimensions of N3 be
x1,1 , . . . , x1,5 , x2,1 , . . . , x4,5 . Then, N3 is equal to
                                     relu(x1,1 )||relu(x1,2 )||Na ||Nb1 ||Nb2 ||Nc ||Nd
                                 x    ,x        x    ,x                                x    ,x        x
where Na = N→ ◦ (N=1,2 3,2 ||N=1,3 1,4 ), Nb1 = N→ ◦ (N=1,2 2,2 ||N=t1,5                   I
                                                                                             ), Nb2 = N→ ◦
   x ,x        x                        x1,4 ,x1,3     x1,5 ,x3,5                     x1,3 ,x4,3    x ,x
(N=1,2 3,2 ||N=t1,5
                 F
                    ), N c = N→   ◦ (N  <          ||N H          ) and N d = N→ ◦ (N <          ||NV 1,5 4,5 ) us-
ing the gadgets and constructions described in Appendix B. Layer l4 is given by l4 = (att leq , comb 4 )
where att leq attends to {x1 , . . . , xi } given i and comb 4 is given by the minimal FNN N4 com-
puting relu(x3 + · · · + x7 ). A formal proof for the existence of att leq in Tudec is given in
Lemma 6. Furthermore, the output function out of TS is given by the minimal FNN Nout com-
puting N (x1 ) = relu(1 − x1 ).
Let w = t1 · · · tl ∈ S ∗ be some word over alphabet S. As defined above, we have that emb(ti , i) =
      Pi
(1, i, j=0 j, ki ) where ki ∈ {1, . . . , |S|}. Consider x21 · · · x2m , namely the sequence of vectors
after propagating w through the embedding emb and layers l1 , l2 of TS . As stated by Lemma 1, we
have that x2i = (1, i, r(i), c(i), ki ) where r(i) and c(i) are the row respectively column of tile ti if
we interpret w as an encoded tiling. Note that all vectors x3i are non-negative due to the way N3 is
built. In the following, we argue that all x3i = 0 if and only if w is a valid encoded tiling. Given this
equivalence, the statement of the lemma follows immediately as l4 simply sums up all vectors and
dimensions (except for the first and second) of x31 , . . . , x3m in x4m and the output of N4 indicates
whether there was some non-zero value. We fix some arbitrary x2i = (1, i, r(i), c(i), ki ). Then,
x3i = N3 (x2i , x2iprev , x2inext , x2istep ) where inext = i + 1 if i < m and m otherwise, iprev = i − 1 if
i > 1 and 1 otherwise and istep = i + r(i) + 1 if i < m − r(i) − 1 and m otherwise.


                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                      x   ,x
Consider property (a) and subnetwork Na . With the understanding gained in Appendix B, N=1,2 3,2
outputs 0 iff x1,2 = x3,2 . These dimensions correspond to positions i and inext , which are only equal
if i = m (Lemma 2). Furthermore, the property of N→ stated by Lemma 4 is given as the output
of N= is guaranteed to be in [0; 1] and the values of x1,2 and x3,2 are guaranteed to be in N. In
summary, this ensures that the third dimension of x3m is 0 iff r(m) = c(m). For other positions
                                                                                               x ,x
the third dimension is always 0 since N→ outputs 0 in these cases due to the fact that N=1,2 3,2
equals 1. Analogously, Nb1 and Nb2 ensure that t1 = tI and tm = tF and, thus, property (b) iff the
fourth and fifth dimensions in all positions are equal to 0. Consider properties (c) and (d) described
above and assume that property (a) holds. These two properties are non-local in the sense that they
depend on at least two positions in x21 · · · x2m . Consider the subnet Nc . By construction and the
gadgets described in Appendix B, we have that Nc outputs 0 if c(i) < r(i) and (ti , ti+1 ) ∈ H or
if c(i) = r(i), which means that tile ti is rightmost in its corresponding row. Otherwise the value
computed by Nc is greater than 0. Analogously, subnet Nd checks whether vertically stacked tiles
do match. In summary, this ensures that the sixth and seventh dimension of each x3i is equal to 0 if
and only if properties (c) and (d) hold.


Proof of Theorem 2. In the same manner as in the proof of Theorem 1, we prove the statement via
reduction from OTWP∗ . The reduction is exactly the same, namely given an OTWP∗ instance
S = (S, H, V, tI , tF ) we build TE TS which recognizes exactly those words w representing a valid
encoded tiling of S. For details, see the proof of Theorem 1.
Given the correctness arguments for TS in Theorem 1, it is left to argue that TS works as intended,
despite the fact that it works over some FA F using at most O(log(max(|S|, n))) bits where n is the
length of an input word. We choose F such that overflow situations do not occur in any computation
TS (w) and rounding is handled such that TS works as intended. Throughout this proof, we use
log(n) Namely, given a word w with |w| = n assume that F uses m = ⌊4 log(max(|S|, n))⌋ + 2
bits and rounds values off to the nearest representable number. We denote the value resulting from
rounding x off in arithmetic F by ⌊x⌋F . We assume that there is an extra bit that is used as a sign
bit and that at least ⌊3 log(n)⌋ + 1 bits can be used to represent integer and at least ⌊log(n)⌋ + 1
bits can be used to represent fractional parts. Note that this is a reasonable assumption for all
common FA, like fixed-point or floating-point arithmetic. Furthermore, it is clearly the case that
m ∈ O(log(max(|S|, n))). To ease our arguments and notation from here on, we assume w.l.o.g.
that we represent n using log(n) instead of ⌊log(n)⌋ + 1.
Per definition, TS uses the embedding function emb(ak , 0) = (1, 1, 0, 0, k) and emb(ak , i) =
         Pi
(0, 1, i, j=0 j, k). First, we assume that each k, namely the value representing a specific tile from
S, is a unique, positive value. This is possible as F uses m > log(|S|) bits. Furthermore, we see
                               Pi
that emb, especially the sum j=0 j = i(i+1)   2   ≤ i2 , works as intended up to i = n due to the fact
that F uses more than m > 2 log(n) bits to represent integer parts. Next, consider layer l1 and l2
of Lemma 1. Layer l1 consists of a single attention head att 1,1 . Here, the only crucial parts are the
computation of value 1l in pool 1,1 for a position i. Per definition, l corresponds to the number of
                       Pj
positions j such that h=0 h√≤ i − 1. As i is bounded by n, this inequality can only be satisfied
by positions j for which j ≤ n holds. As TS uses hardmax to count the positions for which this
                                   √                                            ⌊2log(n) 1 ⌋   ⌊n⌋
inequality holds, l is bounded by n. Next, we observe that ⌊ 1l ⌋F = 2log(n)l = nl , namely the
general understanding of rounding√ off where we use log(n) bits to represent           fractions. However,√
                                                                                                          this
gives that for all 1 ≤ l1 < l2 ≤ n that ⌊ l11 ⌋F ̸= ⌊ l12 ⌋F as ⌊ ln1 ⌋ =
                                                                        ̸ ⌊ ln2 ⌋ holds for all l1 < l2 ≤ n.
This means, that it is ensured by F that 1l is uniquely representable.
Next, the only crucial part in l2 is the computation of the product 1l · j, which is used to determine
the position j for which 1l · j = 1 in score 2,1 , which is obviously given by position l. This equality is
no longer guaranteed to exist if we consider ⌊ 1l ⌋F · j. However, due to the monotonicity of ⌊ 1l ⌋F for
    √                                                            1
l ≤ n and that the maximum round of error is given by 2log(n)         , we have that the j = l produces the
                                   1
value closest to 1 in the product l · j. Taking a look at score 2,1 , this ensures that l is still the position
that att 2,1 attends to. Therefore, the statement of Lemma 1 is still valid for TS working over F .
We observe that all values of some vector x2j after layer l2 are positive integers whose magnitude is
bounded by n2 .


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, consider layer l3 and l4 . From the proof of Theorem 1 we see that the gadgets at most sum
up two values or compute a fraction of the form i+j            i−j
                                                       2 and 2 (in gadgets NH or NV ). Both can
safely be done with at least 3 log(n) bits for integer and log(n) for fractional parts, as all previously
computed values, up to layer l2 , in a computation of TS (w) are representable using 2 log(n) bits.
We observe that the values of the third to seventh dimension of some x3j are either 0 or 1. This is
due to the fact that all values after layer l2 are guaranteed to be integers. Next, consider layer l4 .
The computation done by att ≤ is safe (see Lemma 6) and the crucial step here is the computation
of comb 4 given by relu(x3 + · · · + x7 ). The values xi are all of the form ji where i is guaranteed to
be 0 or 1 and j is the normalisation induced by att ≤ from perspective of position j. However, this
means j is bounded by n and, thus, ⌊ ji ⌋F > 0 if and only if i = 1 for all j due to the fact that F
allows for log(n) bits to represent fractional parts. Finally, out is trivially computable in F , which
finishes the proof.


C     P ROOFS OF S ECTION 5

Proof of Theorem 3. The decidability and membership results of statements (1) and (2 )are suffi-
ciently argued in the proof sketch given in Section 5.
To prove the hardness results of statements (1) and (2), we establish a reduction from OTWPun re-
spectively OTWPbin : given some bounded word-tiling instance (S, n) we build an instance (TS , n)
of BTR S ATun respectively BTR S ATbin where TS is build as described in Theorem 1. The only miss-
ing argument is that these reductions are polynomial. In particular, this means that TS must be built
in polynomial time regarding the size of (S, n). Therefore, we recall the proof of Theorem 1.
First, we see that the embedding function emb and the amount of layers of TS is independent of S
and n. The first two layers l1 and l2 of TS are specified in Lemma 1. Recalling the proof of Lemma 1,
we see that l1 and l2 each consist of a single attention head, whose internal parameters like scoring,
pooling or combination are independent of (S, n) as well. Next, consider layer l3 . This layer
consists of three attention heads att prev , att next and att step each given by the template described in
Lemma 2, which again is independent of (S, n). Additionally, l3 contains the combination function
comb 3 . This combination function is represented by a FNN N3 , using smaller FNN Na , Nb1 , Nb2 ,
Nc and Nd as building blocks. These are dependent on S, as they are built using gadgets N=tI ,
N=tF , NH and NV where tI , tF , H and V are components of S. However, in the proof of Lemma 5
we see that these gadgets are at most polynomial in their respective parameter. Layer l4 and the
output function, specified by FNN Nout , are again independent of (S, n). In summary, the TE TS is
polynomial in (S, n), which makes the reductions from OTWPexp und OTWPpoly polynomial.


Next, we address the proof of Lemma 3. We need some preliminary, rather technical result first. Let
T be an TE and w ∈ Σ+ be a word and consider the computation T (w). Let XT0 (w) = emb(w)
and XTi (w) be the sequence of vectors occurring after the computation of layer li of T . Let x
and x′ be two vectors matching the dimensionality of score i,j of T . Overloading some notation,
let Nw (x, x′ , i, j) = norm i,j (score i,j (x, x′ ), score i,j (x, XTi−1                          i−1
                                                                       (w) )) where score i,j (x, XT (w) ) is the
vector of all scorings of x with sequence XTi−1
                                             (w) . We remark that it is not necessary that x or x
                                                                                                  ′

must occur in XTi−1
                 (w) for this to be well defined. Again overloading some notation, let Pw (x, i, j) =
pool i,j (XTi−1                   i−1
             (w) , score i,j (x, XT (w) )).

Lemma 7. Let T be a additive-periodical TE of depth L, maximum width H and periodicity
p with norm i,j ∈ {softmax, hardmax} for all i ≤ L, j ≤ H, let w = u1 uj1 · · · ujh u2 ∈
Σ+ where u1 , u2 ∈ Σ+ , all uji ∈ Σp and all uji also occur in u1 or u2 and let X be
the set of all vectors occurring in any of the sequences XTi (w) . If there are indexes h1 <
h2 ≤ h such that for all x, x′ ∈ X , i ≤ L, j ≤ H holds that Nu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, x′ , i, j) =
                                                                                              1
Nu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, x′ , i, j) and Pu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, i, j) = Pu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, i, j) then it holds that
              2                                 1                              2
Nu1 uj1 ···ujh ujh +1 ···u2 (x, x′ , i, j) = Nu1 ···u2 (x, x′ , i, j) and Pu1 uj1 ···ujh ujh +1 ···u2 (x, i, j) =
              1     2                                                                   1   2
Pu1 ···u2 (x, i, j).


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Let T , w, X , h1 and h2 be as stated above. We prove the statement via induction
on the layers li . First, consider layer l1 and fix some tuple (x, x′ , 1, j). We first show that
Nu1 uj1 ···ujh ujh +1 ···u2 (x, x′ , 1, j) = Nu1 ···u2 (x, x′ , 1, j). Assume that norm 1,j is given by
             1        2
                                                                                      ′
                                                                      escore 1,j (x,x )
softmax.     Then, norm 1,j computes P                                                       esi′
                                                                                                     for all words w′ .    Obviously, the
                                                                   score 1,j (x,X 0      )
                                                                                 T (w′ )
numerator in Nu1 ···uh1 uh2 +1 ···u2 (x, x′ , 1, j) and Nu1 ···u2 (x, x′ , 1, j) is equal. By definition, we
have that score i,j is local in the sense that it compares vectors pairwise, producing the different
scoring values si′ independent of the overall word. Furthermore, due to the fact that emb is
additive-periodical, we have XT0 (u1 uj ···uj uj                           0
                                                         ···u2 ) and XT (u1 ···u2 ) are equal in the sense
                                                              1      h1    h2 +1
that the vectors corresponding to ujh2 +1 · · · u2 are equal. We refer to this property (*) later on.
Using these observations and that Nu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, x′ , 1, j) = Nu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, x′ , 1, j), we have
                                                  1                             2
that the denominator is equal as well. Now, assume that norm 1,j is given by hardmax. Then,
                                    f (score 1,j (x,x′ ),score 1,j (x,XT
                                                                       0
                                                                         (w′ )
                                                                               ))
norm 1,j computes P                                                               0
                                                            f (si′ ,score 1,j (x,XT       ))
                                                                                                    where f (s, S) = 1 if s is maximal in
                                  score 1,j (x,X 0      )                           (w′ )
                                                T (w′ )
S and 0 otherwise for any word w′ . In contrast to softmax, we have that the values of f (· · · ) are
dependent of the overall context, namely the vector of all scorings score 1,j (x, XT0 (w′ ) ). Compare
XT0 (u1 uj ···uj uj               0
                     ···u2 ) and XT (u1 ···u2 ) , both given by the additive-periodical embedding emb.
         1       h1       h2 +1
Via assumption, we have that each uji block also occurs in u1 or u2 . In particular, this means
every vector that occurs in emb(u1 · · · u2 ) does also occur in emb(u1 uj1 · · · ujh1 ujh2 +1 · · · u2 )
and vice-versa. This implies that f (score 1,j (x, x′ ), score 1,j (x, XT0 (u1 uj ···uj uj ···u2 ) )) =           1   h1   h2 +1

f (score 1,j (x, x′ ), score 1,j (x, XT0 (u1 ···u2 ) )) for any scoring value score 1,j (x, x′ ). In com-
bination with the assumption that Nu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, x′ , 1, j) = Nu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, x′ , 1, j)
                                                              1                                 2
and the observations above, we also get Nu1 uj1 ···ujh ujh +1 ···u2 (x, x′ , 1, j)                     =
                                                                             1  2
               ′
Nu1 ···u2 (x, x , 1, j) in the hardmax case.                      Next, consider the pooling func-
tions.        By definition, we have that pool 1,j (XT0 (w′ ) , score 1,j (x, XT0 (w′ ) )) computes
                                                 0                                ′
P
   X 0 ′ norm 1,j (x, xi , score i,j (x, XT (w′ ) ))(W xi ) for any word w .             Our previous ar-
                            ′                                  ′
    T (w )
guments give that Nu1 uj1 ···ujh ujh +1 ···u2 (x, x′ , 1, j) = Nu1 ···u2 (x, x′ , 1, j). In combina-
                                         1   2
tion with Pu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, i, j) = Pu1 uj1 ···ujh (x, i, j) and (*), we immediately get that
                            1                             2
Pu1 uj1 ···ujh ujh +1 ···u2 (x, i, j) = Pu1 ···u2 (x, i, j) holds as well. Next, consider layer li . The
              1    2
arguments are exactly the same as in the base case. However, we need to rely on the induction
hypothesis. Namely, we assume that all pool i−1,j produce the same output in computation
T (u1 uj1 · · · ujh1 ujh2 +1 · · · u2 ) and computation T (u1 · · · u2 ). This implies that all vectors present
in XTi−1
       (u1 uj ···uj uj
                                                            i−1
                              ···u2 ) are also present in XT (u1 ···u2 ) and vice-versa and that the vectors
             1        h1     h2 +1
corresponding to ujh2 +1 · · · u2 are equal in both computations.

Proof of Lemma 3. Let T ∈ T◦FIX be an additive-periodical TE working over alphabet Σ, having
periodicity p, depth L, maximum width H, maximum dimensionality D and working over an FA
F using b bits for binary encoding. We use V to denote the set of values representable in the fixed
arithmetic that T works over. Note that |V | ≤ 2b . Let w ∈ Σ+ be a word such that T (w) = 1. We
observe that there is m ∈ N such that w = u1 · · · um u where ui ∈ Σp are blocks of symbols of
length p and u ∈ Σ≤p . Our goal is to prove that a not necessarily connected subsequence of at most
       6
2(|T |) many p-blocks ui from u1 · · · um is sufficient to ensure the same computation of T . In the
                          6                                                 6
case that pm + p ≤ 2(|T |) we are done. Therefore, assume that m > 2(|T |) .
Let U be the set of all unique ui . We observe that |U | ≤ |Σ|p . Next, we fix some not necessarily
connected but ordered subsequence S = uj0 uj1 · · · ujn ujn+1 with uj0 = u1 , ji ∈ {2, . . . , m} and
ujn+1 = u of w such that each u′ ∈ U occurs exactly once. For the case that u1 = u we allow
this specific block to occur twice in S. The assumption m > 2poly(|T |) implies that S ̸= w. This
means that there are pairs (ujh , ujh+1 ) in S with some non-empty sequence of p-blocks uj1′ · · · ujl′ in
                                                                                                                                       5
between. W.lo.g. assume uj0 and uj1 is such a pair. Our goal is to argue that there are at most 2(|T |)
blocks from uj1′ · · · ujl′ needed to ensure the same computation of T . Given that this argument works
for all |Σ|p adjacent pairs in S, we are done.


                                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consider the computation T (w).               The additive-periodical embedding emb of T implies
that emb(w) includes at most Σp different vectors.                  Furthermore, from layer to layer
equal vectors are mapped equally, which means that each Xw1 , . . . , XwL contains at most
Σp different vectors as well. This implies that the computation T (w) induces at most
(LΣp)2 × L × H ≤ (ΣpL2 H)2 ≤ (ΣpLH)4 different tuples (x, x′ , i, j) where x, x′ are
vectors induced by T (w) and i ≤ L, j ≤ H. Additionally, we have that for each value
Nw (x, x′ , i, j) and Pw (x, i, j), as defined in the beginning of this section, there are at most
|V D | ≤ 2bD possibilities. Simple combinatorics, namely the pigeon hole principle, states that in the
                                                                                          4          5
increasing sequence uj1′ , uj2′ , . . . there must be points h1 and h2 with h1 ≤ 2bD(ΣpLH) ≤ 2(|T |)
such that for all tuples (x, x′ , i, j) induced by T (w) we have that Nuj0 uj′ ···uj′ (x, x′ , i, j) =
                                                                                                                 1      h1

Nuj0 uj′ ···uj′ (x, x′ , i, j) and Puj0 uj′ ···uj′ (x, i, j) = Puj0 uj′ ···uj′ (x, i, j). Now, Lemma 7
        1    h2                                           1    h1                              1        h2
                                                                                             ′
states that this implies Nuj0 uj′ ···uj′ uj′                                ···uj1 ···u (x, x , i, j)        =       Nw (x, x′ , i, j) and
                                                      1       h1    h2 +1

Puj0 uj′ ···uj′ uj′           ···uj1 ···u (x, i, j)   = Pw (x, i, j). However, this implies that the subsequence
       1     h1       h2 +1
ujh′ +1 · · · ujh′ has no influence in the computation of T on w and, thus, can be left out. As we can
   1              2
                                                                                                                                  5
argue this for every such cycle occurring in uj1′ · · · ujl′ , we get the desired bound of 2(|T |) .


Proof of Theorem 5. First, we argue the decidability of TR S AT[T FIX ]. Assume that T ∈ T FIX with
an arbitrary embedding emb is given that operates in a fixed-width arithmetic using b bits for rep-
resenting numbers and wrap-around to handle overflow. Then, emb is periodic with periodicity
p ≤ 2b , simply due to the fact that positions i in some word w can only be exactly represented up to
magnitude 2b . Therefore, the same arguments as used in Theorem 4 apply here. Note that this does
not imply NEXPTIME-membership of TR S AT[T FIX ], due to the fact that the period is exponential
in b. Analogously, in a saturating scenario, we have that emb has a finite prefix of length at most
2b and is periodic with periodicity 1 afterwards. Here, the small-word property used in Theorem 4
follows the same line of reasoning, with the difference that either the finite prefix is sufficient as a
witness, or the finite prefix followed by an exponentially bounded suffix, whose existence follows
from the same arguments as in Lemma 3 with periodicity p = 1.
Second, we argue the NEXPTIME-hardness. We prove the statement via reduction from OTWPbin .
Let S = (S, H, V, tI , tF ) and n ≥ 1 be an instance of OTWPbin . We construct an TE TS,n ∈ T FIX
working over some FA F with TS,n (w) = 1 if and only if w ∈ S + witnesses the validity of the
OTWPbin instance (S, n).
Next, let TS,n be built exactly like TS in the proof of Theorem 4, but with the following structural
adjustments. In layer l3 we adjust comb 3 to be comb 3 = N3 ||Ne ||Nf where N3 is specified as in
                                          x ,x       x1,3              x
the proof of Theorem 4, Ne = N→ ◦ (N=1,2 3,2 ||N=n        ) and Nf = N 1,2
                                                                         (n+1)((n+1)+1) where N̸=t
                                                                                                        ̸=       2           +1
is analogous to the construction of N=t given in Lemma 5. Furthermore, we adjust comb 4 in layer
l4 to be represented by the FNN relu(x3 + · · · + x8 + x9 ). We refer to the gadgets described in
Lemma 4 and Lemma 5 as well as the proof of Theorem 1 for further details.
Consider the adjustment in l3 . FNN Ne in comb 3 ensures that TS,n (w) = 1 only if the row index
corresponding to the last symbol is equal to n. Note that N3 checks whether row and column
index corresponding to the last symbol are equal. Additionally, Nf checks if there is no id equal to
(n+1)((n+1)+1)
        2        + 1. This corresponds to the position id of the successor of the vector representing
tile (n, n). Furthermore, the adjustment of comb 4 considers the output of Ne and Nf in addition to
the outputs of N3 . In summary, we have that TS,n only outputs 1 given w if the word length is such
that the row index corresponding to the position of the last symbol of w in a respective octant tiling
is equal to n (ensured by Ne ), that w is at most of length (n+1)((n+1)+1)
                                                                   2       (ensured by Nf ) and if w
represents a valid encoded tiling (the remaining parts of TS,n ).
Additionally, we need to argue that TS,n works as intended, despite the fact that it is limited by some
FA F using a representation size that is at most logarithmic in n. These arguments follow the exact
same line as in the proof of Theorem 2, but using FA F that uses m = ⌊6 log(max(|S|, n))⌋ + 2 bits
and handles overflow using saturation. The reason for the larger representation size is that words w
representing a valid encoded tiling ending at position (n, n) are of length |w| = (n+1)((n+1)+1)
                                                                                              2       ≤
                                                                              Pi             i(i+1)
n . Thus, we use ⌊4 log(n)⌋ + 1 integer bits to be able to represent a sum j=0 j = 2 ≤ i2
  2



                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for all i ≤ n2 and ⌊2 log(n)⌋ + 1 fractional bits to uniquely represent fraction 1l for l ≤ n. For
detail see the proof of Theorem 2. Furthermore, the fact that we use ⌊4 log(n)⌋ + 1 bits to encode
integers and that F handles overflow using saturation ensures that Nf works as intended: we have
that (n+1)((n+1)+1)
             2        + 1 < n4 and, thus, we have that the id (n+1)((n+1)+1)
                                                                      2        + 1 occurs at most
once, independent of the length of w as it is not the point where F enforces saturation on the
positional embedding. Thus, att self works for this position as intended and then Nf checks the
property described above correctly.
The argument that TS,n can be built in polynomial time is a straightforward implication from the
arguments for Theorem 3 and the fact that Ne and Nf are a small gadgets with maximum parameter
quadratic in n, which can be represented using a logarithmic amount of bits.


                                               22
