Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RACING R EPRESENTATION P ROGRESSION : A NALYZ -
ING AND E NHANCING L AYER -W ISE S IMILARITY

 Jiachen Jiang, Jinxin Zhou & Zhihui Zhu
 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
 The Ohio State University,
 {jiang.2880, zhou.3820, zhu.3440}@osu.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Analyzing the similarity of internal representations within and across different
         models has been an important technique for understanding the behavior of deep
         neural networks. Most existing methods for analyzing the similarity between rep-
         resentations of high dimensions, such as those based on Centered Kernel Align-
         ment (CKA), rely on statistical properties of the representations for a set of data
         points. In this paper, we focus on transformer models and study the similarity
         of representations between the hidden layers of individual transformers. In this
         context, we show that a simple sample-wise cosine similarity metric is capable of
         capturing the similarity and aligns with the complicated CKA. Our experimental
         results on common transformers reveal that representations across layers are pos-
         itively correlated, with similarity increasing when layers get closer. We provide a
         theoretical justification for this phenomenon under the geodesic curve assumption
         for the learned transformer, a property that may approximately hold for residual
         networks. We then show that an increase in representation similarity implies an
         increase in predicted probability when directly applying the last-layer classifier to
         any hidden layer representation. This offers a justification for saturation events,
         where the model’s top prediction remains unchanged across subsequent layers, in-
         dicating that the shallow layer has already learned the necessary knowledge. We
         then propose an aligned training method to improve the effectiveness of shallow
         layer by enhancing the similarity between internal representations, with trained
         models that enjoy the following properties: (1) more early saturation events, (2)
         layer-wise accuracies monotonically increase and reveal the minimal depth needed
         for the given task, (3) when served as multi-exit models, they achieve on-par per-
         formance with standard multi-exit architectures which consist of additional clas-
         sifiers designed for early exiting in shallow layers. To our knowledge, our work
         is the first to show that one common classifier is sufficient for multi-exit mod-
         els. We conduct experiments on both vision and NLP tasks to demonstrate the
         performance of the proposed aligned training.



1   I NTRODUCTION

As one of the most significant breakthroughs in deep neural network (DNN) architectures developed
in recent years, the transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) has driven recent advances in various
vision and NLP tasks, such as vision transformer for image classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)
and image generation (Yu et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022), BERT (Devlin, 2018),
GPT (Radford et al., 2019), and other various large language models (LLMs) (Zhao et al., 2023)
for natural language understanding and generation. It has been viewed as a promising foundation
model that can be adapted and extended to various applications and domains (Bommasani et al.,
2021). Additionally, researchers have found that increasing the size (by stacking more layers and/or
making them wider) can consistently improve performance, resulting in models of significant size
(e.g., the 175B-parameter GPT-3 and the 540B-parameter PaLM). However, the ever-increasing size
has posed a significant challenge in studying and understanding exactly how these models solve
tasks and in efficiently deploying them.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          (a) Cosine Similarity          (b) Layerwise Accuracy     (c) Cumulative Saturation Events
Figure 1: Illustration of the DeiT-S (Touvron et al., 2021) (pretrained on ImageNet) fine-tuned on
CIFAR-10 with standard method and the proposed aligned training in terms of (a) cosine similarity
of features from shallow and the last-hidden layer, (b) layer-wise testing accuracies by applying the
last-layer classifier to each layer, as well as (c) cumulative saturation events (Geva et al., 2022).
We observe that our proposed aligned training can substantially enhance layer-wise representation
similarity, thereby improving layer-wise accuracies and promoting more early saturate events.
Given the success of deep learning models, attributed to their ability to learn increasingly complex
internal representations as they go deeper through their layers, a promising direction for understand-
ing these models is to study the hierarchical feature learning across layers. Recent work (Papyan
et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021; Thrampoulidis et al., 2022; Tirer et al., 2023)
have uncovered an intriguing phenomenon regarding the last-layer features and classifier of DNNs,
called Neural Collapse (N C), across many different datasets and model architectures. Roughly
speaking, N C refers to a training phenomenon in which the last-layer features from the same class
become nearly identical, while those from different classes become maximally linearly separable.
Beyond the last-layer features, recent studies have also shown that deep classifiers progressively
compress within-class features while enhancing the discrimination of between-class features from
shallow to deep layers (He & Su, 2023; Rangamani et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). Another line
of work attempts to compare the representations within and across DNNs. Various approaches have
been proposed to quantify the representation similarity, such as the Canonical Correlation Anal-
ysis (Thompson, 2000), Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) (Kornblith et al., 2019), Orthogonal
Procrustes Transformation (Hamilton et al., 2016) and Pointwise Normalized Kernel Alignment
(PNKA) (Kolling et al., 2023). Representation similarity analysis has also been widely used in
computational psychology and neuroscience as well (Edelman, 1998; Kriegeskorte et al., 2008).
As these approaches are designed to be invariant to certain transformations (such as orthogonal
transformation) and can be applied to features with possibly different dimensions, they rely on
statistical properties of the representations for entire training data. For instance, the N C analysis
captures the variance of the features from each class, while the widely used CKA for representation
analysis replies on the inter-example structures; see Section 2 for the detailed definition of CKA.
Consequently, it has been observed that CKA is sensitive to outliers and may give unexpected or
counter-intuitive results in certain situations (Davari et al., 2022). In this paper, we are motivated by
the following question: How are the representations of individual inputs progressively transformed
from shallow to deep layers?

Contribution In this work, we focus on transformer models, which have particular properties
compared to other architectures: a transformer contains identical blocks with residual connections
in each block. Thus, the features in a transformer model have the same dimension and may ex-
hibit less rotation difference across layers. Motivated by this observation, we study the layer-wise
representation similarity for transformer models on a per-sample basis, allowing us to directly ap-
ply the last-layer classifier right after any hidden layer for classification or text generation tasks.
This enables an effortless multi-exit model that allows early exit during inference, thereby saving
computation time. Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
• Sample-wise cosine similarity captures representational similarity We introduce a straight-
  forward yet efficient sample-wise cosine similarity metric to examine the similarity of internal
  representations in transformers. Experiments show that the cosine similarity aligns with CKA,
  which is based on statistical properties of all the features, and is sufficient to reflect representa-
  tion similarity. In addition, as illustrated in Figure 1 (a), our experimental results (Standard) on
  common transformers show that representation similarity increases as layers become closer. We


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  provide a theoretical justification for this phenomenon under the geodesic curve assumption for
  the learned transformer, a property that approximately holds for residual networks (Gai & Zhang,
  2021), and hence for transformers.
• Analysis for saturation events The similarity with last-layer representation suggests that the
  last-layer classifier can be directly applied right after any hidden layers for decision-making, also
  known as the logit lens approach. Geva et al. (2022) discover a phenomenon called saturation
  events, where the model’s final prediction becomes the top candidate in a certain shallow layer
  and remains unchanged across all subsequent layers, indicating that the shallow layer has already
  learned the necessary knowledge. We show that an increase in representation similarity implies
  an increase in predicted probability across layers. This offers a justification for saturation events,
  stating that if a sample is correctly predicted at the ℓ-th layer, it will continue to be correctly
  predicted in subsequent layers, as the predicted probability increases progressively across layers.
• Aligned training for enhancing layer-wise representation similarity We propose an aligned
  training method to improve the effectiveness of shallow layers by increasing the similarity of
  internal representations between different layers. Motivated by the N C phenomenon, where fea-
  tures from the last-hidden layers align with the common classifier, our aligned training approach
  deploys the common classifier to each layer and then minimizes the average of the cross-entropy
  losses from all the layers. As shown in Figure 1, the aligned training can substantially enhance
  layer-wise representation similarity, thereby leading to more early saturation events and improving
  layer-wise accuracies. Consequently, the aligned training method can help identify the minimal
  number of layers needed by unleashing the power of shallow layers to transform features faster
  towards classifier across layers and push the redundancy behind.
• Multi-exit models with a single classifier Another important application of the proposed aligned
  training is to improve the inference efficiency of large models. During inference, the model al-
  lows early exit to save computation time. Previous works (Xin et al., 2020; Geng et al., 2021;
  Xin et al., 2021) design multi-exit models by introducing different classifiers to each layer, which
  may substantially increase the model size for a large number of classes, such as ImageNet with
  1000 classes and GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) with a vocabulary of 50, 257 tokens. Instead of using
  separate classifiers for each exit, our multi-exit model employs a common classifier, which to our
  knowledge is the first of its kind, maintaining the early exit capability and achieving performance
  on par with models that use multiple classifiers. We demonstrate the performance of the proposed
  aligned training method in both pretraining ViT and fine-tuning LLMs in NLP tasks, including
  fine-tuning BERT (Devlin, 2018) for text classification tasks on the General Language Under-
  standing Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark (Wang et al., 2018) , and GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019)
  model for text generation on the Wikitext-103 dataset (Merity et al., 2016).
The MatFormer (Kudugunta et al., 2023) introduces a nested structure into the Transformer by
jointly training all submodels of different widths. In contrast, our method jointly trains submodels
with varying layers. Exploring the potential integration of these approaches will be a focus of future
research. While we mainly focus on transformer models, the proposed aligned training can be
applied to other deep architectures, provided they have the same dimensions in each layer. Extending
this approach to accommodate varied feature dimensions is the subject of future work.

2   M EASURING L AYER - WISE R EPRESENTATIONAL S IMILARITY
In a transformer f with L layers, the representations gradually evolve across layers, with the pro-
gression from one layer (say ℓ-th layer) to the next following a residual update pattern:
                                   H (ℓ+1) = H (ℓ) + fθ(ℓ) (H (ℓ) ),                                (1)
          (ℓ)      d×s
where H       ∈ R        are input feature sequence of length s with hidden dimension of d. The
residual block fθ(ℓ) (·) : Rd×s → Rd×s describe the sequence-to-sequence function mapping with
parameters θ(ℓ) that mainly comprises two complementary stages of data transformation: the Multi-
head Self-Attention across tokens and the MultiLayer Perceptron layer across features. Predictions
are typically based on a specific token of last layer representation H (L) . For instance, ViT uses
the representation of a class token [CLS] to classify the image, while auto-regressive based lan-
guage model (such as GPT) uses the representation of the previous tokens to predict the next word.
Consequently, we will focus on the feature (or representation) of this particular token in H (ℓ) , de-
noted by h(ℓ) ∈ Rd at the ℓ-th layer. A linear classifier g(·) is applied to the last layer feature


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


h(L) to make predications as1 g(h(L) ) = arg maxj [SoftMax(W h(L) )]j , where [·]j denotes the j-th
entry and W ∈ RK×d maps the d dimensional features to K dimensional logits. We may also
directly apply the last layer classifier g(·) to the hidden layer features h(ℓ) to make predictions via
g(h(ℓ) ) = arg maxj [SoftMax(W h(ℓ) )]j . Given data samples S := {xk,i }, where xk,i represents
the i-th sample of class k with i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n} and k ∈ [K], we define layer-wise accuracy as
                                                              K       n
                                                           1 XX
                                     AccS :=
                                            (ℓ)
                                                                  1[g(h(ℓ)
                                                                       k,i ) = k].                           (2)
                                                          Kn  i=1
                                                             k=1


Existing work on measuring representational similarity Similarity analysis is widely applied
in the literature, including research on learning dynamics (Morcos et al., 2018; Mehrer et al., 2018),
effects of width and depth (Nguyen et al., 2020), differences between supervised and unsupervised
models (Gwilliam & Shrivastava, 2022), robustness (Jones et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2022), eval-
uating knowledge distillation (Stanton et al., 2021), language representation (Kudugunta et al.,
2019; Shi et al., 2022), and generalizability (McCoy et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2022; Pagliardini
et al., 2022). To enable measuring the similarity of features from from different architectures or
layers that have different dimension, most existing methods for analyzing the similarity between
representations of high dimensions, such as those based on Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA)
and widely used Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) (Kornblith et al., 2019) , rely on statistical
properties
        h of the representations
                            i      for a set of data points. For instance, given input feature sequence
Z ℓ = h(ℓ) 1,1 · · ·
                        (ℓ)
                       hK,n   ∈ R d×N
                                       denoting the features of N = Kn training samples, the widely-
                                                                                                    ′
used CKA with a linear kernel quantifies similarities between features Z ℓ and Z ℓ as
                                      ′           ′                                         ′   ′
                   CKA = Tr((Z ℓ )⊤ Z ℓ · (Z ℓ )⊤ Z ℓ )/( Z ℓ (Z ℓ )⊤ F Z ℓ (Z ℓ )⊤ F ).                     (3)

CKA relies on the similarity of inter-example structures since the gram matrix (Z ℓ )⊤ Z ℓ ∈ RN ×N
captures the pair-wise similarity of different samples, focusing on the consistency of relative po-
sitions among features. Consequently, the CKA is invariant to orthogonal transformations and
                                                                     ′
isotropic scaling, and can be applied for the case where h(ℓ) and h(ℓ ) have different dimensions.

2.1      S AMPLE - WISE LAYER - WISE REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY IN TRANSFORMERS

In this work, we specifically focus on transformer architectures that obey the following particular
properties of features across layers: (i) the features have the same dimension across layers since
transformers are generally constructed by stacking identical blocks; (ii) the features may have no
or less rotation ambiguity due to the residual connection (1). Based on these observations, for each
sample xk,i we propose to simply measure the cosine similarity of the corresponding feature vectors
              ′                 ′
h(ℓ) and h(ℓ ) at layers ℓ and ℓ as2
                                          (ℓ)     (ℓ′ )        (ℓ)        (ℓ′ )   (ℓ)   (ℓ′ )
                              COS(hk,i , hk,i ) = ⟨hk,i , hk,i ⟩/∥hk,i ∥2 ∥hk,i ∥2 .
The above COsine Similarity (COS) measures the angle between feature vectors, providing a clear
geometric interpretation of feature alignment and similarity at the layer level. Unlike CKA (3), COS
is not invariant to all transformations except for isotropic scaling. Furthermore, COS is computed
for each individual sample and does not rely on inter-example structures. In the experiments, we
compute the average COS over all the training samples.
To verify whether the proposed sample-wise COS is a good indicator of similarity structure within
transformers, we train the DeiT-S model (Touvron et al., 2021) (a data-efficient vision transform)
from scratch on both the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet-1K datasets. The feature dimension is set to 384
for both tasks across all layers. In Figure 2(a, b), we compute CKA and average cosine similarity
between the features in each layer and the last layer. Additionally, we plot average COS between
all pairs of layers and display the results as a heatmap in Figure 2(c, d). Based on these results, we
make several observations.
   1
       There is also a bias term b in classification layer, but we omit it for simplicity of presentation.
   2
       The features in each layer are centered by reducing the global mean of all the samples.


                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       (a) CIFAR10               (b) ImageNet1K               (c) CIFAR10              (d) ImageNet1K

Figure 2: Illustration of a DeiT-S model trained with standard training on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet
in terms of (a-b) similarity of features from shallow layers and the last-hidden layer measured by
CKA and COS, as well as layerwise validation accuracy, and (c-d) cosine similarities between all
pairs of layers. For both datasets, cosine similarity can reflect the trend of layerwise accuracy.
Observation 1: Simple-wise COS is sufficient and reflects CKA to measure layer-wise repre-
sentation similarity We observe from Figure 2(a, b) that COS aligns with CKA and is sufficient to
reflect the layer-wise representation similarity in transformer models. In other words, since CKA
is invariant to orthogonal transformations while COS is not, there is little or no rotation difference
among the features from different layers. This is attributed to the residual connections in (1), which
create smoother transitions between layers and potentially lead to more stable feature representa-
tions throughout the network. In the Appendix B.2, we design additional experiments on multi-
layer perceptrons (MLPs) with and without skip connections to verify the effect of skip connections
in eliminating rotation ambiguity.
Observation 2: Progressively increasing layer-wise representation similarity. For models
trained on small datasets, we observe a ridge-to-plateau pattern in the heatmap plot in Figure 2(c):
the initial layers undergo significant transformations, suggesting that lower layers rapidly refine the
features to extract the most relevant information for classification tasks; in contrast, the higher layers
exhibit a plateau in similarity scores, indicating that feature transformations stabilize and converge
toward an optimal representation. This plateau also suggests redundancy in the higher layers, imply-
ing that removing these redundant layers could improve efficiency without significantly sacrificing
performance.3 On the other hand, for models trained on large datasets, Figure 2(d) shows a con-
sistent ridge pattern, characterized by a rapid decay in similarity between adjacent layers. This
indicates a dynamic and continuous refinement process throughout the network. Nevertheless, for
both Figure 2(c, d), we observe almost all nonnegative average cosine similarity between different
layers, albeit the features are almost orthogonal when the layers are far apart. Moreover, in both
Figure 2(c, d), we observe a progressive increase in representation similarity as the two layers get
closer; across each row or column, the cosine similarity increases as it approaches the diagonals. In
appendix D, we observe similar phenomena on multi-modality models (CLIP).
To understand this phenomenon, we utilize the connection between residual network (ResNet) and
dynamic system, viewing the residual update (1) as a discretization of a dynamic system (Haber
& Ruthotto, 2017; Gai & Zhang, 2021). Specifically, Gai & Zhang (2021) proved that ResNet
trained with weight decay attempts to learn the geodesic curve in the Wasserstein space. Since
transformer is a ResNet and weight decay is commonly applied in real-world training—for example,
DeiT (Touvron et al., 2021) models are trained using the AdamW optimizer with a weight decay of
0.05—we use the following geodesic curve assumption (Wang et al., 2024).
Assumption 1. (Geodesic curve assumption) At the terminal phase of training, the transformer with
weight decay has learned the geodesic curve in Wasserstein space P(Rd ), which is induced by the
optimal transport map.
Based on this assumption, the following result shows a monotonic increase in representation simi-
larity as the layers get closer. Proofs are given in the Appendix A.
Theorem 1. (Representation similarity increases monotonically across layers) Under Assumption 1,
                                                (ℓ )   (ℓ )          (ℓ ) (ℓ )
for any layers ℓ1 < ℓ2 < ℓ3 , we have COS(hk,i1 , hk,i3 ) < COS(hk,i2 , hk,i3 ).
   3
     We notice concurrent work (Men et al., 2024; Gromov et al., 2024; Jaiswal et al., 2024) that exploits
representation similarity across layers for pruning redundant layers. For instance, Figure 2(c, d) show hidden
layers obey large similarity, indicating that some of the layers can be skipped (Jaiswal et al., 2024).


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 1 provides a theoretical justification for the phenomenon observed in Figure 2—for in-
stance, the similarity to the last layer features progressively increases from shallow to deep layers.
However, we note that in practice, the geodesic curve assumption may not hold precisely by a prac-
tical network, so some samples may not exhibit a strictly monotonic increase.

2.2   A NALYSIS FOR S ATURATION E VENTS

We now use the layer-wise representation similarity to analyze the phenomenon of saturation
events (Geva et al., 2022). To that goal, we first briefly introduce the neural collapse (N C) phe-
nomenon (Papyan et al., 2020) and its connection to layer-wise representation similarity.

Neural Collapse (N C) Roughly speaking, N C concerns the terminal phase of training deep net-
works and states that (i) within-class variable collapse (N C 1 ): the last-layer features from the same
                                      (L)      (L)     P (L)
class become nearly identical, i.e., hk,i → hk = n1 i hk,i , (ii) maximal distance (N C 2 ): those
from different classes become maximally linearly separable, and (iii) self-duality (N C 3 ): the last-
                                                                   (L)
layer linear classifiers wk align with the class-mean features hk . To achieve this, deep classifiers
progressively compress within-class features while enhancing the discrimination of between-class
features from shallow to deep layers (He & Su, 2023; Rangamani et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023).
Our results show that transformer models achieve progressive compression and separation by pro-
gressively aligning the features with the last-layer classifier from shallow to deep layers.
Alignment between layer-wise cosine similarity and accuracy. Motivated by the similarity be-
tween features in shallow and deep layers, we apply the classifier to each hidden layer to obtain the
layer-wise validation accuracy, which is plotted in Figure 2(a, b). We observe a high correlation be-
tween the layer-wise accuracy and the cosine similarity, with layer-wise accuracy also exhibiting a
monotonic increase across layers. Our following result provides a justification for this phenomenon,
demonstrating that an increase in representation similarity implies an increase in predicted probabil-
ity across layers.
Theorem 2. (Predicted probability increases monotonically across layers) Assume that Theorem 1
                            (ℓ+1)   (L)              (ℓ)  (L)
holds at hk,i , i.e., COS(hk,i , hk,i ) > COS(hk,i , hk,i ), and that the last-layer features and
                                                                           (ℓ)
classifers satisfy N C. Then, the predicted probability [SoftMax(W hk,i )]k increases across layers:
                                          (ℓ+1)                          (ℓ)
                           [SoftMax(W hk,i        )]k > [SoftMax(W hk,i )]k .                       (4)

Saturation events The approach of applying last-layer
classification to intermediate representation is also called
logit lens (nostalgebraist). Recent studies (Belrose et al.,
2023; Pal et al., 2023) use this method to decode hid-
den states into probability distributions over the vocab-
ulary, offering mechanistic interpretability of transform-
ers. (Geva et al., 2022) discover a phenomenon called
saturation events, where the model’s final predicted token
becomes the top candidate in a certain shallow layer and
remains unchanged across all subsequent layers. Specifi-
cally, given an input sample xk,i , the saturation layer ℓk,i Figure 3: The DeiT-S models are
for xk,i is defined as the smallest layer ℓ such that          trained on CIFAR10 and Imagenet-1K
             (1)                 (ℓ)                (L)
         g(hk,i ) ̸= . . . ̸= g(hk,i ) = · · · = g(hk,i ).     dataset from scratch. We measure the
                                                               number of saturate event at each layer
Results in Appendix C.1 show saturate events also happen and their average cosine similarity with
on recently developed LLMs such as LLaMA3 (Dubey last hidden states. More saturate events
et al., 2024). Our Theorem 2 offers a justification for satu- at early layer indicates higher cosine
ration events, stating that if a sample is correctly predicted similarity.
at the ℓ-th layer, it will continue to be correctly predicted
in subsequent layers, as the predicted probability increases progressively across layers. To further
illustrate the relation between representation similarity and saturate events, we train a DeiT-S model
on both CIFAR-10 and ImageNet-1K and plot the results in Figure 3. For the same model across
different datasets, we observed that higher layer-wise representation similarity COS correlates with
more early saturation events, suggesting COS is a valuable metric for reflecting saturation events.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison of the number of parameters across different architectures between multi-exit
models with multiple classifiers (different classifiers at each layer) and a single classifier (ours). The
last column shows that the percentage of saved parameters using single classifier.
Models                           Hidden Dim   # of Classes   # of Layers       Multiple Classifiers (#Params)   Single Classifier (#Params)   #Param Saving
DeiT-S(Touvron et al., 2021)         384         1,000           12                       26.27M                          22.05M                 16.07%
DeiT-B(Touvron et al., 2021)         768         1,000           12                       95.02M                          86.57M                 8.89%
GPT-2(Radford et al., 2019)          768        50,257           12                      541.57M                         117.35M                 78.39%
GPT-3(Brown et al., 2020)          12,288       50,257           96                      233.67B                         175.63B                 25.10%
LLAMA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023)      4,096       32,000           40                       75.11B                          70.35B                 6.81%



3     A LIGNED T RAINING FOR E NHANCING R EPRESENTATIONAL S IMILARITY

In the previous section, we observed that representations across layers within transformer models
are positively correlated, resulting in saturation events when the last-layer classifier is directly ap-
plied after any hidden layer for early prediction and enabling a multi-exit model that shares a single
classifier. In this section, we propose an aligned training method to enhance the effectiveness of
shallow layers by improving layer-wise feature similarity. This, in turn, promotes more early sat-
uration events, determines the minimal effective depth, and enhances performance when used as a
multi-exit model. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to show that one common clas-
sifier is sufficient for multi-exit models. Table 1 shows a single classifier can significantly reduce
the number of parameters and the computational complexity for multi-exit models, particularly for
tasks with a large number of classes and large feature dimensions. Examples include ImageNet, with
1000 classes, and LLMs, where the number of classes equals the vocabulary size, i.e., the number
of all possible tokens—for instance, the Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023) model has a vocabulary of
32, 000 tokens while the GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) has 50, 257 tokens.

3.1      A LIGNED T RAINING FOR E NHANCING S HALLOW L AYER P ERFORMANCE

The ability to capture the layer-wise similarity of representations for each sample enables us to
develop efficient methods for enhancing this similarity during training. A first approach is to directly
add the cosine similarity between h(ℓ) and h(L) for all ℓ < L as a regularization term during the
training process. However, as shown in the appendix (see Figure 14), this approach can only slightly
improve layer-wise similarity and accuracy. We conjecture this is due to the imbalance between
the cross-entropy loss and the cosine similarity. Instead, motivated by the self-duality between the
class-mean features and the linear classifiers, as observed in the N C phenomenon, we propose a
simple yet efficient method, named aligned training, to enhance the layer-wise similarity by jointly
optimizing the following aligned loss that is the weighted average of the CE loss from all the layers
                                                                      L
                                                                      X
                                            Laligned (x, y) =                  λℓ LCE (W h(ℓ) , y),                                                   (5)
                                                                      ℓ=1

where y denotes the corresponding label for x, λℓ > 0 is the weight for the ℓ-th layer. During
the experiments, considering that shallow layers tend to have larger losses compared to deep layers,
we set the weight to linearly increase with layers to put more emphasis on the deeper layers4 , i.e.,
λℓ = 2ℓ/(L(L + 1)). Roughly speaking, the aligned loss (5) introduces CE loss for intermediate
layers and would encourage each layer features h(ℓ) to align with the common classifier W —as
implied by the N C phenomenon—hence improving the representation similarity across layers.
Figure 4 displays the layer-wise representation similarity and accuracy by the proposed aligned
training. We can observe that aligned training can significantly increase the layer-wise repre-
sentation similarity and accuracy by aligning all the features to the common classifier. Results in
Appendix B.3 also show that aligned training can enhance progressive separation and compression
from shallow to deep layers. To further illustrate the benefit of aligned training, we define the notion
of ϵ-effective depth that modifies the notion exploited in Galanti et al. (2022) by replacing nearest
neighbor classifier accuracy with our layer-wise accuracy in (2).
   4
     Such a strategy of increasing weights is also employed in (Schuster et al., 2022). Uniformly weighting all
layers (i.e., λℓ = 1/L) may diminish the importance of the deeper layers. We provide an ablation study for the
comparison of linear increasing weights and uniform weights in Appendix B.3.


                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     (a) Cos Similarity        (b) Layerwise Acc              (c) Aligned         (d) Multi-exit/classifiers

Figure 4: Comparison of ViT for ImageNet by standard training, proposed aligned training, and
the multi-exit/classifiers, in terms of (a) cosine similarity, (b) layer-wise testing accuracy and (c-d)
cosine similarities between all pairs of layers.


                            (a) Train Accuracy               (b) Training Curve

Figure 5: Comparison of standard training of 6, 9, 12-layer DeiT-small model with aligned training
of 12-layer model on CIFAR-10 in terms of (a) layer-wise train accuracy, and (b) convergence.

Definition 1. (ϵ-effective depth). We define the ϵ-effective depth dϵ (S, f ) of an L-layer transformer
                                                          (ℓ)
f over dataset S as the minimal layer ℓ such that AccS ≥ 1 − ϵ. Set dϵ (S, f ) = L if such ℓ is
non-existent.


Minimal ϵ-effective depth Denote the transformers learned by standard training and aligned train-
ing as fstandard and faligned , respectively. We observe that the aligned training yields a model with a
much smaller ϵ-effective depth compared to standard training, i.e., dϵ (S, faligned ) < dϵ (S, fstandard ).
Specifically, Figure 5(a) displays the layer-wise training accuracy of three transformers with differ-
ent number of layers ℓ ∈ [6, 9, 12] with standard training and a 12-layer transformer with aligned
training. For the standard training models, the train accuracy curves increase until the last layer with-
out plateauing, even for the model with 12 layers, giving dϵ (SCIFAR10 , fstandard ) = 12. While aligned
training models unleash the power of shallow layers to transform features faster towards classifier
across layers and push the redundancy behind, giving dϵ (SCIFAR10 , faligned ) ≈ 7, which is smaller
than ϵ-effective depth of fstandard . On the other hand, the effective depth dϵ (S, faligned ) increases with
the complexity of the task, as demonstrated by comparing the results from CIFAR10 (Figure 5(a))
and ImageNet (Figure 4(b)). Thus, the effective depth, independent of the network’s depth, can be
leveraged to derive generalization bounds. This can be achieved by applying the approach from
Galanti et al. (2022), which offers non-trivial estimates of generalization based on effective depth.
Models faligned with small effective depth also offer several advantages in practical deployment.
First, the layers beyond effective depth dϵ (SCIFAR10 , faligned ) are redundant, as they do not contribute
to accuracy improvements and can be pruned, leading to more efficient inference. Second, aligned
training helps determine the minimal number of layers required for a task. While more complex
tasks typically demand more layers, identifying the exact number can be challenging. In standard
training, multiple models of different sizes must be trained to determine the minimal layer count.
In contrast, with aligned models, retraining is unnecessary—one can simply apply the last-layer
linear classifier to intermediate layers. Third, models trained using aligned method not only achieve
slightly higher accuracy when truncated to 6 or 9 layers compared to models of the same size trained
with standard methods (Figure 5(a)), but they also accelerate model convergence (Figure 5(b)) by
providing immediate feedback to each layer, resulting in more effective parameter adjustments.

                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (a) DeiT on CIFAR10            (b) DeiT on ImageNet1K          (c) GPT2 on WikiText103
Figure 6: Illustration of the effect of aligned training versus standard training on cosine similarity
and the number of saturation events across vision (a,b) and NLP (c) models. Aligned training leads
to more early saturation events by increasing the cosine similarity with the last hidden states.
Saturation events and multi-exit model with a single classifier Another important application
of the proposed aligned training is to improve the inference efficiency of large models. Figure 6
illustrates saturation events in both vision and NLP models (see the AlignedGPT setup in the ap-
pendix). We observe that aligned training encourages earlier saturation events by increasing the
cosine similarity with the final hidden states. This demonstrates that faligned has greater potential for
supporting early exits, commonly referred to as multi-exits in the literature (Xin et al., 2020; Geng
et al., 2021; Xin et al., 2021). In previous work, multi-exit models typically use separate classifiers
for each layer, which can significantly increase the overall model size. As shown in Table 1, this
issue becomes more pronounced when dealing with a large number of classes, as dense linear classi-
fiers require a substantial number of parameters. To our knowledge, by exploiting the representation
similarity within the transformer, our proposed multi-exit model is the first to use a single classifier
for all the layers. In addition, when training multi-exit models, previous work (Geng et al., 2021)
often uses additional KL-divergence terms to guide the logits of shallow layers by those of deep lay-
ers. In contrast, by using a common classifier to align shallow representations with deep ones, our
aligned training does not require KL-divergence or other such terms. For comparison, we implement
the multi-exit training with multiple classifiers (Xin et al., 2021), denoted by “multi-exit/classifiers”,
and display the results in Figure 4. On one hand, we observe that the proposed aligned training with
a shared classifeir achieves higher layer-wise representation similarity than multi-exit/classifiers. On
the other hand, the aligned training exhibits on-par performance as multi-exit/classifiers in terms of
layer-wise accuracy, which is remarkable as the former only uses a single classifier.
To further show the performance of the proposed multi-exit mod-
els with a single classifier, we allow exit at shallow layers if the
confidence level (max of softmax logits) exceeds a set thresh-
old for each sample. On ImageNet dataset, Figure 7 displays
the number of samples that exit at each layer. We observe that
most samples exit at the last layer for standard training, while
most exit at early layers for aligned training. We then calculate
the classification accuracy
                     PL
                             along with the ratio of speed improve-
                            L×mi
ment measured by PL i×mi where mi is the number of sam-
                       i=1
                        i=1                                          Figure 7: Number of samples
ples that exit at the i-th layer of DeiT. The model trained with exit at each layer.
standard training achieves 80.28% accuracy, while the model
trained with aligned training achieves 77.96% accuracy with a 1.36× speedup, which is compa-
rable to those trained by multi-exit/classifiers with 78.32 % accuracy and 1.42× speedup.

Effects on Transferability Concerns arise about whether aligning shallow layer features with
deep layer features could diminish the transferability of shallow layers. To answer this question,
we conduct experiments on (1) distribution shift and (2) task transfer. The results show that aligned
training improves layer-wise accuracy for both pre-trained and downstream datasets while maintain-
ing transferability. This indicates that the trained model can be effectively transferred without losing
the universal patterns learned in shallow layers. Further details are provided in Appendix B.4.

3.2   A PPLICATIONS ON L ANGUAGE M ODELS

We extend our aligned training approach to NLP tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness in fine-tuning
Language Models. For text classification tasks, we get AlignedBERT by finetuning a pretrained 12-


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          (a) SST-2              (b) MRPC                  (c) QNLI                 (d) MNLI
Figure 8: Layerwise accuracy for AlignedBERT and BERT and on SST-2, MRPC, QNLI and MNLI
datasets of the GLUE benchmark. (See more results on RTE and QQP in Figure 21).


    (a) Prediction Accuracy     (b) Perplexity           (c) Coherence             (d) Diversity

Figure 9: Evaluation of AlignedGPT and GPT2 on Wikitext-103 dataset in terms of (a) prediction
accuracy, (b) perplexity, (c) coherence, and (d) diversity. See Appendix C.2 for detailed definitions.

layer BERTBase model (Devlin, 2018) using aligned training method on GLUE benchmark (Wang
et al., 2018) tasks. This includes single-sentence tasks-SST-2, similarity and paraphrasing tasks-
MRPC and QQP, as well as natural language inference tasks-MNLI, QNLI and RTE. For compar-
ison, we also finetune a BERTBase model using standard training. Then we evaluate the layerwise
accuracy(or F-1 score) of both finetuned models using their last layer classifier. Figure 8 shows that
AlignedBERT achieves better performance than the standard BERT across all layers.
For text generation task, we get AlignedGPT by finetuning a pretrained 12-layer GPT2 model (Rad-
ford et al., 2019) using aligned training method on Wikitext-103 dataset (Merity et al., 2016) . For
comparison, we also finetune a GPT2 model using standard training. Then we evaluate the two fine-
tuned models from two perspectives(following (Su et al., 2022; Su & Collier, 2023)), (1) language
modeling quality, which assesses the intrinsic quality of the model and is measured by prediction
accuracy and perplexity, and (2) generation quality, which measures the quality of the text produced
by the model using coherence and diversity. Coherence is a measurement of relevance between
prefix text and generated text, while diversity considers the recurrence of generation at varying n-
gram levels. All evaluation metrics mentioned above can be found in Appendix C.2. Results show
that AlignedGPT outperforms the standard one in prediction accuracy and exhibits lower perplexity
across intermediate layers(Figure 9(a,b)). Moreover, AlignedGPT can also generate text with higher
coherence and diversity using shallower layers(Figure 9(c,d)), which improves the the inference
efficiency. More experimental setup and results can be found in Appendix C.2.


4     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we demonstrate that a simple sample-wise cosine similarity metric effectively captures
layer-wise representation similarity in transformer models, aligning with the more complex CKA
metric. Our findings reveal that representations become more similar as layers get closer and show
that increased representation similarity correlates with higher prediction accuracy, leading to satura-
tion events where shallow layers can already make correct predictions. To enhance this, we proposed
an aligned training method that improves shallow layer effectiveness, resulting in more early satura-
tion events and much higher layer-wise accuracies. Remarkably, when served as multi-exit models
with a common classifier, which to our knowledge is the first of its kind, they maintain the early exit
capability and achieve performance on par with models that use multiple classifiers. Experiments
on both vision and NLP tasks demonstrate the performance of the proposed aligned training.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We acknowledge support from NSF grants CCF-2240708, IIS-2312840, and IIS-2402952, as well
as the ORAU Ralph E. Powe Junior Faculty Enhancement Award. We are grateful to Beidi Chen
(Carnegie Mellon University) and Chong You (Google Research) for many valuable discussions and
for helpful comments on the manuscript.

R EFERENCES
Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella
  Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned
  lens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08112, 2023.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
  Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European conference on
  computer vision, pp. 213–229. Springer, 2020.
MohammadReza Davari, Stefan Horoi, Amine Natik, Guillaume Lajoie, Guy Wolf, and Eu-
 gene Belilovsky. Reliability of cka as a similarity measure in deep learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2210.16156, 2022.
Jacob Devlin. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Shimon Edelman. Representation is representation of similarities. Behavioral and brain sciences,
  21(4):449–467, 1998.
Cong Fang, Hangfeng He, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. Exploring deep neural networks via layer-
  peeled model: Minority collapse in imbalanced training. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 118(43):e2103091118, 2021.
Kuo Gai and Shihua Zhang. A mathematical principle of deep learning: Learn the geodesic curve
  in the wasserstein space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09235, 2021.
Tomer Galanti, Liane Galanti, and Ido Ben-Shaul. On the implicit bias towards minimal depth of
  deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09028, 2022.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08821, 2021.
Shijie Geng, Peng Gao, Zuohui Fu, and Yongfeng Zhang. Romebert: Robust training of multi-exit
  bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09755, 2021.
Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers build
 predictions by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space. In Proceedings of the 2022 Confer-
 ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 30–45, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrey Gromov, Kushal Tirumala, Hassan Shapourian, Paolo Glorioso, and Daniel A Roberts. The
  unreasonable ineffectiveness of the deeper layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17887, 2024.
Matthew Gwilliam and Abhinav Shrivastava. Beyond supervised vs. unsupervised: Representative
 benchmarking and analysis of image representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9642–9652, 2022.
Eldad Haber and Lars Ruthotto. Stable architectures for deep neural networks. Inverse problems,
  34(1):014004, 2017.
William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky. Diachronic word embeddings reveal statis-
 tical laws of semantic change. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09096, 2016.
Hangfeng He and Weijie J Su. A law of data separation in deep learning. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 120(36):e2221704120, 2023.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.
Ajay Jaiswal, Bodun Hu, Lu Yin, Yeonju Ro, Shiwei Liu, Tianlong Chen, and Aditya Akella. Ffn-
  skipllm: A hidden gem for autoregressive decoding with adaptive feed forward skipping. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.03865, 2024.
Haydn T Jones, Jacob M Springer, Garrett T Kenyon, and Juston S Moore. If you’ve trained one
  you’ve trained them all: inter-architecture similarity increases with robustness. In Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 928–937. PMLR, 2022.
Camila Kolling, Till Speicher, Vedant Nanda, Mariya Toneva, and Krishna P Gummadi. Pointwise
  representational similarity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19294, 2023.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3519–
  3529. PMLR, 2019.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 2:249, 2008.
Sneha Kudugunta, Aditya Kusupati, Tim Dettmers, Kaifeng Chen, Inderjit Dhillon, Yulia Tsvetkov,
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Sham Kakade, Ali Farhadi, Prateek Jain, et al. Matformer: Nested trans-
  former for elastic inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07707, 2023.
Sneha Reddy Kudugunta, Ankur Bapna, Isaac Caswell, Naveen Arivazhagan, and Orhan Firat. In-
  vestigating multilingual nmt representations at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.02197, 2019.
Yoonho Lee, Huaxiu Yao, and Chelsea Finn. Diversify and disambiguate: Out-of-distribution ro-
  bustness via disagreement. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2022.
Victor Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Yongchan Kwon, Serena Yeung, and James Y Zou. Mind the
  gap: Understanding the modality gap in multi-modal contrastive representation learning. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17612–17625, 2022.
Shangyun Lu, Bradley Nott, Aaron Olson, Alberto Todeschini, Hossein Vahabi, Yair Carmon, and
  Ludwig Schmidt. Harder or different? a closer look at distribution shift in dataset reproduction.
  In ICML Workshop on Uncertainty and Robustness in Deep Learning, volume 5, pp. 15, 2020.
R Thomas McCoy, Junghyun Min, and Tal Linzen. Berts of a feather do not generalize together:
  Large variability in generalization across models with similar test set performance. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1911.02969, 2019.
Johannes Mehrer, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, and Tim Kietzmann. Beware of the beginnings: inter-
  mediate and higherlevel representations in deep neural networks are strongly affected by weight
  initialization. In Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience, 2018.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xin Men, Mingyu Xu, Qingyu Zhang, Bingning Wang, Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, Xianpei Han, and
  Weipeng Chen. Shortgpt: Layers in large language models are more redundant than you expect.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03853, 2024.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843, 2016.
Ari Morcos, Maithra Raghu, and Samy Bengio. Insights on representational similarity in neural
  networks with canonical correlation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.
Vedant Nanda, Till Speicher, Camila Kolling, John P Dickerson, Krishna Gummadi, and Adrian
  Weller. Measuring representational robustness of neural networks through shared invariances. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16368–16382. PMLR, 2022.
Thao Nguyen, Maithra Raghu, and Simon Kornblith. Do wide and deep networks learn the same
  things? uncovering how neural network representations vary with width and depth. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.15327, 2020.
nostalgebraist. interpreting gpt: the logit lens. https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
  AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Matteo Pagliardini, Martin Jaggi, François Fleuret, and Sai Praneeth Karimireddy. Agree to dis-
 agree: Diversity through disagreement for better transferability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04414,
 2022.
Koyena Pal, Jiuding Sun, Andrew Yuan, Byron C Wallace, and David Bau. Future lens: Anticipating
  subsequent tokens from a single hidden state. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04897, 2023.
Vardan Papyan, XY Han, and David L Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
  phase of deep learning training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(40):
  24652–24663, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 8821–8831. Pmlr, 2021.
Akshay Rangamani, Marius Lindegaard, Tomer Galanti, and Tomaso A Poggio. Feature learning
  in deep classifiers through intermediate neural collapse. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 28729–28745. PMLR, 2023.
Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Jai Gupta, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, Vinh Tran, Yi Tay, and Donald
  Metzler. Confident adaptive language modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:17456–17472, 2022.
Han Shi, Jiahui Gao, Hang Xu, Xiaodan Liang, Zhenguo Li, Lingpeng Kong, Stephen Lee, and
  James T Kwok. Revisiting over-smoothing in bert from the perspective of graph. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.08625, 2022.
Samuel Stanton, Pavel Izmailov, Polina Kirichenko, Alexander A Alemi, and Andrew G Wilson.
  Does knowledge distillation really work? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:6906–6919, 2021.
Yixuan Su and Nigel Collier. Contrastive search is what you need for neural text genera-
  tion. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=GbkWw3jwL9.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yixuan Su, Tian Lan, Yan Wang, Dani Yogatama, Lingpeng Kong, and Nigel Collier. A con-
  trastive framework for neural text generation. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=V88BafmH9Pj.
Bruce Thompson. Canonical correlation analysis. 2000.
Christos Thrampoulidis, Ganesh Ramachandra Kini, Vala Vakilian, and Tina Behnia. Imbalance
  trouble: Revisiting neural-collapse geometry. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 35:27225–27238, 2022.
Tom Tirer, Haoxiang Huang, and Jonathan Niles-Weed. Perturbation analysis of neural collapse. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 34301–34329. PMLR, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and
  Hervé Jégou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 10347–10357. PMLR, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman.
  Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.
Peng Wang, Xiao Li, Can Yaras, Zhihui Zhu, Laura Balzano, Wei Hu, and Qing Qu. Understanding
  deep representation learning via layerwise feature compression and discrimination. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.02960, 2023.
Sicong Wang, Kuo Gai, and Shihua Zhang. Progressive feedforward collapse of resnet training.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00985, 2024.
Ji Xin, Raphael Tang, Jaejun Lee, Yaoliang Yu, and Jimmy Lin. Deebert: Dynamic early exiting for
   accelerating bert inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12993, 2020.
Ji Xin, Raphael Tang, Yaoliang Yu, and Jimmy Lin. Berxit: Early exiting for bert with better fine-
   tuning and extension to regression. In Proceedings of the 16th conference of the European chapter
   of the association for computational linguistics: Main Volume, pp. 91–104, 2021.
Jiahui Yu, Xin Li, Jing Yu Koh, Han Zhang, Ruoming Pang, James Qin, Alexander Ku, Yuanzhong
   Xu, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Vector-quantized image modeling with improved vqgan.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04627, 2021.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2(3):5, 2022.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
 Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A ge-
  ometric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:29820–29834, 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Appendix
Notations and Organizations. The appendix provides theorem proofs as well as additional ex-
perimental results on both vision and language models. It is organized as follows: First, we present
the proofs for the theorems in Appendix A. Next, we provide additional experiment results on vision
models(Appendix B), language models(Appendix C) and multi-modality models(Appendix D).

A     P ROOF F OR T HEOREMS
In this section, we provide proof for the theorem 1 and 2.

A.1    P ROOF F OR T HEOREMS 1

As a result of the geodesic curve assumption, the forward propagation of transformer is along a
                                                               (ℓ)                                 (ℓ)
straight line in the feature space Rd . Formally, the feature hk,i , ℓ ∈ [0, L] is along the line hk,i =
          (0)         (L)
(1 − Lℓ )hk,i + Lℓ hk,i . In the following proof, we drop the subscript k, i in h.

Let x = Lℓ , so x ∈ [0, 1]. Suppose the feature of the first layer is h(0) and feature of the last layer is
h(1) . Then:
                                     h(x) = (1 − x)h(0) + xh(1)                                        (6)

The cosine of the angle between intermediate layer feature h(x) and last layer feature h(1) is,
                                                                     ⟨h(x) , h(1) ⟩
                               C(x) = cos(h(x) , h(1) ) =                                              (7)
                                                                     ∥h(x) ∥∥h(1) ∥
Since ∥h(1) ∥ is fixed, we can treat ∥h(1) ∥ as constant. For simplicity, define N (x) = ⟨h(x) , h(1) ⟩
and D(x) = ∥h(x) ∥. Thus, we can get,
                                             ⟨h(x) , h(1) ⟩               N (x)
                                  C(x) =       (x)         (1)
                                                                     =K                                (8)
                                            ∥h       ∥∥h         ∥        D(x)
            1
where K = ∥h(1) ∥
                  is a positive constant. Note that

                N (x) = ⟨h(x) , h(1) ⟩ = (1 − x)⟨h(0) , h(1) ⟩ + x∥h1 ∥2
                                   q
                D(x) = ∥h(x) ∥ = (1 − x)2 ∥h0 ∥2 + 2x(1 − x)⟨h(0) , h(1) ⟩ + x2 ∥h1 ∥2

To prove C(x) monotonically increase within x ∈ [0, 1], we can take derivative of C(x) with respect
to x and show dC(x)
               dx > 0 for x ∈ [0, 1]. The derivative is given by
                                              dN (x)      dD(x)
                                dC(x)          dx D(x) − dx N (x)
                                      =K                                                               (9)
                                 dx                  D2 (x)

Assuming h(0) and hL are unit vectors( ∥h(0) ∥ = ∥h(1) ∥ = 1) and defining c = ⟨h(0) , h(1) ⟩ (which
satisfies −1 ≤ c ≤ 1), we have:
                               N (x) = (1 − x)c + x = (1 − c)x + c
                                       p
                               D(x) = (1 − x)2 + 2x(1 − x)c + x2
Taking derivative of both N (x) and D(x) with respect to x gives
                                      dN (x)
                                             = (1 − c)
                                       dx
                                      dD(x)    (2x − 1)(1 − x)
                                             =
                                       dx            D(x)


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we only need to check the sign of dNdx(x) D(x) − dD(x)
                                                       dx N (x) term,

      dN (x)        dD(x)                        (2x − 1)(1 − x)
             D(x) −       N (x) = (1 − c)D(x) −                  ((1 − c)x + c)
       dx            dx                                D(x)
                                    1
                                =       ((1 − c)D2 (x) − (2x − 1)(1 − x)((1 − c)x + c))
                                  D(x)
                                    1
                                =       (2cx2 − (1 + 3c)x + (1 + c))
                                  D(x)
                                                 1
where x ∈ [0, 1] and c ∈ [−1, 1]. Noticing that D(x) ≥ 0, we define

                                 P (x) = 2cx2 − (1 + 3c)x + (1 + c)                                                 (10)
We have P (0) = 1 + c ∈ [0, 2] and P (1) = 0. If P (x) is negative between [0, 1], for a quadratic
function, there is only one possibility: the axis of symmetry x = 1+3c
                                                                   4c is between 0 and 1, and the
parabola opens upward:
                                                 1+3c
                                          
                                          0 < 4c < 1
                                            c>0                                              (11)
                                            −1 < c < 1
                                          

These conditions are contradictory, and no value of c satisfies all of them simultaneously. Thus,
P (x) ≥ 0 always holds for x ∈ [0, 1]. Consequently, C(x) = cos(h(x) , h(1) ) increases mono-
tonically for x ∈ [0, 1]. Thus, for any layers ℓ1 < ℓ2 < ℓ3 , the relationship cos(h(ℓ1 ) , h(ℓ3 ) ) <
cos(h(ℓ2 ) , h(ℓ3 ) ) holds true.

A.2    P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 2
                                                                                 (ℓ+1)      (L)               (ℓ)   (L)
According to the COsine Similarity (COS) improvement, COS(hk,i                           , hk,i ) > COS(hk,i , hk,i ).
                                   (ℓ+1)     (L)                           (ℓ)     (L)
By N C 1 ,      we have COS(hk             , hk )        >         COS(hk , hk );               by N C 3 ,    we have
        (ℓ+1)    (L)               (ℓ)     (L)                                            (ℓ)         (ℓ+1)
COS(hk      , wk ) > COS(hk , wk ). Assume the norm of hk                                       and hk        are equal,
           (ℓ)     (ℓ+1)
which is ∥hk ∥ = ∥hk     ∥ = h, so we have,
                                                 (ℓ+1)               (ℓ)
                                           wTk hk        > wTk hk                                                   (12)
                (ℓ+1)      (ℓ)
Suppose that hk         = hk + ∆h, so we have,
                                                 wTk ∆h > 0                                                         (13)

                                                                                    (ℓ)              (ℓ)        (ℓ+1)
The logits for class k at layer ℓ and layer ℓ + 1 are denoted by zk                       = wTk hk and zk               =
     (ℓ+1)
wTk hk     , respectively. They satisfy
                                             (ℓ+1)        (ℓ)
                                            zk       = zk + δk                                                      (14)
where δk = wTk ∆h > 0. For the class i ̸= k logit,
                                             (ℓ+1)           (ℓ)
                                            zi       = zi + δi                                                      (15)
where δi = wTi ∆h. To prove that δi < 0, suppose there exist a direction η that wTk η = 0 for all
k ∈ [1, K]. So we have ∆h = δk wk + η and,
                                         δi = wTi ∆h = δk wTi wk                                                    (16)
According to N C 3 , W form a simplex ETF, meaning all weight vectors have unit norm and the
                                                                                           1
same inner product between any two distinct vectors, i.e., for any i ̸= k, wTi wk = α = − K−1 . So
we have
                                                   1
                                 δi = αδk = −            δk < 0                               (17)
                                                 K −1
since δk > 0 and K > 1.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The softmax output for class k at layers ℓ and ℓ + 1 are given by
                                                          (ℓ)                       (ℓ)
                                          ezk                                      ez k
                    [SoftMax(z (ℓ) )]k = PK                      (ℓ)
                                                                     =      (ℓ)    PK           (ℓ)
                                                                                                      ,
                                                          zk               ezk +            zi
                                                    k=1 e                            i̸=k e
                                                          (ℓ+1)                            (ℓ+1)
                                          ezk                                       ezk
                  [SoftMax(z (ℓ+1) )]k = PK                      (ℓ+1)
                                                                       =      (ℓ+1)  PK      (ℓ+1)
                                                                zk          ezk     + i̸=k ezi
                                                    k=1 e
                                                                     (ℓ)
                                                          ezk +δk
                                              =     (ℓ)     PK     (ℓ)
                                                  ezk +δk + i̸=k ezi +δi

                                     (ℓ)
                           PK      z
                            i̸=k e
                                    i
For simplify, define r =        (ℓ)        , then we have,
                             ezi

                                                1
                           [SoftMax(z (ℓ) )]k =
                                             1+r
                                  (ℓ+1)           eδk            1
                       [SoftMax(z       )]k = δ          =
                                             e k + reαδk   1 + re(α−1)δk
                 1           K
Since α − 1 = − K−1 − 1 = − K−1 < 0 and δk > 0, we have e(α−1)δk < 1, and hence

                                [SoftMax(z (ℓ+1) )]k > [SoftMax(z (ℓ) )]k                                 (18)
which proves that
                                                  (ℓ+1)                                   (ℓ)
                           [SoftMax(W hk,i                )]k > [SoftMax(W hk,i )]k                       (19)

B     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS ON V ISION M ODELS
In this section, we first illustrate the box plots of cosine similarity validate in Appendix B.1. Sec-
ondly, we validate that residual connections in transformers resolve feature rotation ambiguity in
Appendix B.2. Then, we describe the setup for the aligned training method in Appendix B.3, and
demonstrate its effects on transferability in Appendix B.4. Finally, we apply the aligned training
methods to the detection transformer in Appendix B.5.

Setup for Vision Experiments. We conduct experiments on both the CIFAR10 and ImageNet1K
datasets. The CIFAR10 dataset includes 60,000 color images in 10 classes, each measuring 32 × 32
pixels. ImageNet1K contains 1.2 million color images distributed in 1000 classes. To increase the
diversity of our training data, we use a data augmentation strategy. This includes random crop and
padding, random horizontal flip with a probability of 0.5, and random rotation within 15 degrees.
For optimization, we employ AdamW with an initial learning rate of 0.1. This rate decays according
to the MultiStepLR at the 100th and 150th epochs, over a total of 200 epochs. We set the weight
decay at 1e-4. The global batch size for both datasets is set at 256. For both vision and NLP tasks,
we used 4 RTX A5000 GPUs with 24GB of memory each.

B.1   B OX P LOTS OF S AMPLE - WISE C OSINE S IMILARITY

There may be some rare samples with negative sample-wise cosine similarity between features from
layers that are far apart.

B.2   R ESIDUAL C ONNECTIONS E LIMINATE ROTATION A MBIGUITY

Section 2 demonstrates a consistent trend between COS and CKA. Additionally, when we compute
the cosine similarity of features from adjacent layers in Figure 11, most samples exhibit high similar-
ity. These findings suggest that transformers do not have orthogonal transformations across layers.
But why does this occur? In this section, we examine the role of skip connections in preventing
orthogonal transformations.


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             (a) CIFAR10                       (b) IN1K

Figure 10: Sample-wise cosine similarity of features from shallow layers and the last-hidden layer.
The DeiT-S model is trained with standard training on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. It shows there are
rare samples with negative sample-wise cosine similarity.


Most transformer architectures include skip connections, which are added after the (i) self-attention
layer and (ii) MLP layer. According to residual transformation (1), we obtain,
           H (ℓ+1) = MLP(LN(MSA(LN(H (ℓ) ) + H (ℓ) )) + MSA(LN(H (ℓ) )) + H (ℓ)
                    = H (ℓ) + fθ(ℓ) (H (ℓ) )


                       (a) COS of adjacent layers           (b) Norm Ratio

Figure 11: Cosine similarity of features from adjacent layers COS(h(ℓ−1) , h(ℓ) ) and norm ratios
∥h(ℓ) ∥/||fθ(ℓ) (h(ℓ) )|| distributions. The DeiT-Small model is trained on Imagenet-1K and evaluated
on its validation dataset.

And the feature h(ℓ) is a special token of H (ℓ) . To investigate the effect of residual connections,
we calculate the norm ratio ∥h(ℓ) ∥/||fθ(ℓ) (h(ℓ) )||, which is the ratio of the norm of skip connection
h(ℓ) to the norm of the long branch fθ(ℓ) (h(ℓ) ). The results are displayed in Figure 11. High norm
ratios suggest that skip connections significantly influence the representational structure of ViT.
To provide further evidence that residual connections resolve the rotation ambiguity, we compared
the MLP model with and without these connections and computed their COS and CKA values. For
the MLP model without residual connections, as shown in Figure 12(a), the CKA value is not con-
sistent with accuracy and cosine similarity. A high CKA value might indicate significant similarity
between features across layers, but it does not necessarily correlate with high classification accuracy.
This inconsistency primarily results from the fact that CKA does not account for rotation in the fea-
ture space, suggesting that features could rotate without the residual connections. In contrast, for
the MLP model with residual connections, as depicted in Figure 12(b), the CKA value aligns with
layerwise accuracy, indicating that residual connections effectively eliminate the rotation ambiguity
of features.

B.3   A LIGNED T RAINING D ETAILS

Illustration of Train Once and Fit all devices. Figure 13 illustrate how aligned training support
train once and fit all devices. After aligned training, one can directly fetch from shallow to deep
layers of transformer according to the device computational resources and memory constrains.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    (a) Without residual connections      (b) With residual connections

Figure 12: Comparison of layerwise accuracy, COS(COsine Similarity), and CKA (Centered Kernel
Alignment) with the last layer of the 9-layer MLP models with and without residual connection on
the MNIST validation dataset. The models are trained from scratch using standard training. In the
left figure, CKA fails to accurately reflect the change in layerwise accuracy for the MLP without
residual connection. In the right figure, the presence of a residual connection is the reason why
CKA works well, as it helps eliminate rotation ambiguity.


Figure 13: Aligned training of transformer using joint CE loss of all layer features with common
classifier and elastic inference for different memory constrains. Once the model is trained using the
aligned method, it can fit all devices. Features from darker layers indicate better performance.


Alternative Approach for Enhancing Layer-wise Representation Similarity. In addition to us-
ing aligned training loss to enhance similarity, another method is to add the cosine similarity as a
regularization term to the loss function.
                                                  L
                                                  X
                          Lsim (h(ℓ) , h(L) ) =         λℓ (1 − cos(h(ℓ) , h(L) ))
                                                  l=1
And the total loss is the sum of this two term:
                       LCE-reg (x, y) = LCE (W h(L) , y) + βLsim (h(ℓ) , h(L) )
where β > 0 is the regularization coefficient. According to Figure 14, the regularization term
contributes minimally to the improvement of cosine similarity and layer-wise accuracy, compared
to aligned training methods.
Using the CE-reg loss results in poor layerwise accuracy and lower cosine similarity compared to
the aligned loss. The likely reason for this is an imbalance between the COS alignment objective
and the primary classification objective. Our intuition is that directly optimizing for high COS
alignment may fail because the COS alignment loss primarily focuses on aligning features across
layers, without necessarily making the features discriminative enough for the classification task. In
contrast, the cross-entropy (CE) loss directly optimizes for classification, and as a consequence, it
naturally improves COS alignment. This suggests that while COS alignment is important, it may
not be sufficient on its own without the robust guidance provided by the CE loss.
Another approach involves adding the CKA term as a regularization term to the CE loss. However,
this approach may not be effective and has several drawbacks. First, CKA is not always reliable in


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (a) Cos Similarity             (b) Layerwise Acc

Figure 14: Cosine similarity with last layer and layerwise accuracy of standard training using
LCE (W h(ℓ) , y), standard-Reg training using LCE-reg (x, y) and Aligned training using Laligned (x, y)
. The 12 layers DeiT model is trained on ImageNet1K dataset. Regularization term helps little for
improving the cosine similarity and layerwise accuracy. But our aligned training improves both a
lot.


representing layer-wise similarity across all settings, particularly in scenarios with rotation ambigu-
ity or when residual connections are absent. Second, it is computationally expensive, as it requires
computing the Gram matrix to evaluate relationships between features. Lastly, CKA might not per-
form better than the COS regularization term and may yield similar results, falling short compared
to the aligned loss. In transformers, both COS and CKA measure feature similarity and tend to
exhibit similar trends. As shown in Figure 14, the COS regularization term contributes minimally
to improving cosine similarity and layer-wise accuracy. Based on this, we infer that using CKA as a
regularization term would similarly have a minimal impact on enhancing these metrics. Therefore,
aligned training approaches may be more effective than relying solely on regularization terms.

Setup for Aligned Training in ViT. It’s reported (Xin et al., 2021) that training only with this
aligned loss would cause the performance drop in the last layer. So following (Xin et al., 2021),
we choose the ”alternating” training approach, which alternates objectives based on the iteration
number. During odd-numbered iterations, we use the CE loss of the final layer LCE (W hL , y). For
even-numbered iterations, the strategy involves using the aligned loss Laligned (x, y).
Note that this training strategy, which uses a common classifier, no longer requires the KL-
divergence term that is commonly used in mutli-exit/classifeirs training. This is because the deep
layers have been trained to capture the abstract and discriminative features of the input data, effec-
tively serving as the teacher model. The KL-divergence term is typically used to guide the shallower
layers. However, when we use a common classifier, our aligned training method becomes a latent
knowledge self-distillation method. The shallow layers can mimic or align their feature representa-
tions with those of the deep layers by aligning with the common classifier. As such, the deep layers,
with their advanced feature representations, act as the teachers, while the shallow layers, in their
quest to improve their feature extraction capabilities, assume the role of students. Therefore, the
KL-divergence term is no longer necessary.



Linear Increasing Weight vs. Uniform Weight for Loss. In (5), we define the layer weights to
increase linearly as λℓ = 2ℓ/(L(L + 1)). For the ablation study, we also consider a uniform weight-
ing strategy, where all layers are assigned the same weight, i.e., λℓ = 1/L. As shown in Figure 15,
using uniform weights in the loss function tends to improve the performance of shallow layers but
degrade the final layer. This occurs because shallow layers, which typically learn general but less
informative features, produce larger losses, while deeper layers achieve smaller losses. Uniformly
weighting all layers disproportionately emphasizes shallow layers and diminishes the importance of
deeper ones. In contrast, linearly increasing the weights places greater emphasis on deeper layers,
resulting in superior accuracy for the final layer. Therefore, linear increasing weight is selected
instead of uniform weight for aligned training.



                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Comparison of linear increasing weight vs. uniform weight for loss function design using
Deit-Small on ImageNet-1K.


Aligned Training Enhance Neural Collapse. The aligned training method aligns features with
the last-layer classifier from shallow to deep layers, enhancing the neural collapse (N C) phe-
nomenon across layers. As shown in Figure 16, aligned training promotes progressive compression
as features move closer to the last layer by noting that aligned results in lower N C1 across layers,
where intermediate layers increasingly exhibit the stronger N C1 than standard model.5


                                 (a) CIFAR10                        (b) ImageNet

Figure 16: Comparison of layerwise neural collapse between standard training and aligned training.



B.4    E FFECTS ON TRANSFER ABILITY

It is often claimed that shallow layers learn universal patterns while deep layers fit to class labels.
Questions arise about whether the proposed aligned training approach is that aligning shallow layer
features with deep layer features could cause the shallow layers to lose their transfer ability. To
resolve this question, we conduct two sets of experiments:
• Distribution shift: we first train a DeiT on CIFAR10 with standard training and align training,
  and then evaluate the layer-wise accuracy on CIFAR10.2 (Lu et al., 2020),
• Transfer to different tasks: we first train a DeiT on ImageNet with standard training and align
  training, and then evaluate the layer-wise accuracy on CIFAR10 by only fine-tune a linear classi-
  fier, with the feature mapping fixed.
The results are plotted in Figure 17. We observe that for both cases, the distribution shift and
transferring to different tasks, layer-wise accuracy curves resemble those on the pre-trained datasets
   5
     Within-class variability collapse (Papyan et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021) for features {hk,i } from each layer
                             Tr(ΣW Σ†B ), where ΣW = nK
                          1                                  1
                                                               PK Pn                                    ⊤
is computed as N C 1 = K                                          k=1      i=1 (hk,i − hk )(hk,i − hk ) captures
                                      1
                                        P  K                      ⊤
the within-class covariance, ΣB = K k=1 (hk − h)(hk − h) represents the between-class covariance, hk
represents the class-mean features, and h represents the global mean of the features.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      (a) CIFAR10 → CIFAR10.2          (b) ImageNet → CIFAR10

Figure 17: The comparison of layer-wise accuracy between a standard model and an aligned model.


shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5, demonstrating that aligned training not only improves layer-wise
accuracy for the pre-trained datasets but also for the downstream datasets. In other words, the
aligned training methods maintain transferability, ensuring that the trained model can be effectively
transferred.

B.5   A LIGNED T RAINING F OR D ETECTION T RANSFORMER

In this section, we demonstrate that aligned training is not only beneficial for classification tasks
but also effective for other tasks such as object detection. Following the DeTr framework (Carion
et al., 2020), which employs an encoder-decoder architecture, the encoder extracts global image
features, while the decoder predicts object classes and their bounding boxes using queries. Aligned
training can be applied to the decoder, where predictions are made using intermediate features from
its layers. This is achieved through auxiliary decoding losses (Carion et al., 2020). We evaluate
the AP50 (average precision at 50% IoU) for predictions exiting from each decoding layer using
aligned training and compare it with predictions from the last layer of standard training, as shown in
Figure 18. As noted in DeTr (Carion et al., 2020), the inclusion of aligned training losses is critical
for performance, and removing them results in a significant drop in accuracy.


Figure 18: Comparison of aligned training (using auxiliary decoding losses) and standard training (
using last layer loss only) of DeTr model.



C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON L ANGUAGE M ODELS

In this section, we first validate that the saturation events described in Section 2.2 are consistently
observed in LLaMA3, as shown in Appendix C.1. Then we show aligned training on BERT and
GPT models in Appendix C.2.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1   S ATURATE E VENTS IN L LAMA 3

In this section, we verify that saturation events, as described in Section 2.2, also occur in large
language models such as LLaMA3 (Dubey et al., 2024). As shown in Figure 19, we compare the
saturation events across two variants of the LLaMA3 model: the 24-layer LLaMA3.2 3B model
and the 32-layer LLaMA3.1 8B model. Both models are given the same prompt to ensure a con-
trolled comparison. The figure demonstrates how saturation events emerge across layers in models
of varying sizes.
Furthermore, as shown in Figure 20, we examine a specific instance of saturation events in the
28-layer LLaMA3.2 3B model. Using the prompt ”Simply put, the theory of relativity states,” the
model generates predictions over 24 decoding steps with greedy decoding. The figure displays the
predicted words at each layer, using the last-layer classifier to obtain outputs. The color gradient
represents the softmax logits of the last-layer predictions, with red indicating a low probability (0)
and blue indicating a high probability (1). Saturation events are observed when the prediction at a
given layer ℓ remains unchanged through subsequent layers until the final output. This visualization
highlights the occurrence of saturation events during the progression of intermediate representations
and their impact on the model’s final predictions.


Figure 19: Saturation events for a 24-layer LLaMA3.2 3B model and a 32-layer LLaMA3.1 8B
model using the same input prompt.


C.2   A LIGNED T RAINING ON L ANGUAGE M ODELS

In this section, we provide more details about the datasets and computational resources used. The
datasets (GLUE, and Wikitext-103) are publicly available under the MIT license. For NLP tasks, we
used a single RTX A5000 GPUs with 24GB of memory. Then, we will introduce the experimental
setup for AlignedBERT and AlignedGPT models.

Setup in AlignedBERT The General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark
comprises nine tasks for assessing natural language understanding. In our AlignedBERT experi-
ments on the GLUE dataset, we used a sequence length of 256. We employed AdamW for optimiza-
tion with an initial learning rate of 2e-5, and a batch size of 32. Each task underwent fine-tuning
for three epochs. The WikiText-103 language modeling dataset consists of over 100 million tokens
extracted from Wikipedia’s verified good and featured articles. For AlignedGPT experiments on the
WikiText-103 dataset, we maintained the sequence length at 256 and used AdamW with an initial
learning rate of 2e-5. In this case, we set the batch size to 8.

Setup in AlignedGPT. Our aligned training method can be used with any transformer-based lan-
guage models. In this study, we evaluated our method using the GPT-2 model. We finetune the
GPT2 models using aligned training methods and then use intermediate layers of GPT2 to generate
the texts.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 20: Specific instance of saturation events for LLaMA3.2 3B model responding to the prompt:
”Simply put, the theory of relativity states ” using greedy decoding. Predicted words are shown for
each layer, with saturation events identified where predictions at layer ℓ remain unchanged until the
final layer.


                               (a) RTE                        (b) QQP

Figure 21: Layerwise accuracy for AlignedBERT and BERT and on RTE and QQP datasets of the
GLUE benchmark.

• Model and Baselines We finetune GPT-2 on the Wikitext-103 dataset with the proposed objective
  Laligned for 40k training steps and generate the text continuation with nucleus sampling (Holtzman
  et al., 2019) with p = 0.95 decoding methods. For the standard baseline model, we finetune the
  model with CE loss LMLE . The model is finetuned using a single 24G RTX A5000 GPU for 70
  hours.
• Evaluations Following (Su & Collier, 2023), we evaluate the model from two perspectives: (1)
  language modeling quality, assessing the inherent quality of the model, and (2) generation quality,
  measuring the quality of the text the model produces. In assessing language modeling quality,
  we calculate the prediction accuracy and perplexity of each layer. When evaluating generation
  quality, we measure the similarity between the prompt text and generated text using coherence.
  We employ generation repetition to gauge the diversity of the generated text. The metrics are
  defined as follows,
     – Prediction Accuracy The accuracy is computed on the Wikitext-103 test set as,
                                          D   n
                                      1 XX
                              Acc =             1[arg max pθ (x|x<i ) = xi ]                    (20)
                                      D i=1 i=1


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      where the D is the number of samples in the test dataset.
    – Perplexity The perplexity is computed on the test set of Wikitext-103. It’s computed as the
      exponential of the test loss.
    – Coherence Coherence measures the relevance between the prefix text and the generated text.
      We apply the advanced sentence embedding method, SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021), to mea-
      sure the semantic coherence or consistency between the prefix and the generated text. The
      coherence score is defined as follows,
                                       Coherence = hTx hx̂ /∥hx ∥∥hx̂ ∥                           (21)
      where x is the prefix text and x̂ is the generated text and hx = SimCSE(x) and hx̂ =
      SimCSE(x̂). Higher coherence means more correlation to the given prompt.
    – Diversity Diversity measures the occurrence of generation at different n-gram levels. It is
      defined as:
                                               4
                                              Y   |unique n-grams(x̂)|
                                Diversity =                                                 (22)
                                              n=2
                                                   |total n-grams(x̂)|
       A higher diversity score suggests fewer repeated words in the generated text.

D    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON M ULTI -M ODALITY M ODELS

In this section, we demonstrate that the observation in Section 2.1 can also extend to multi-modality
models such as the pre-trained CLIP models (Radford et al., 2021). Given that the CLIP model
comprises both a vision encoder and a text encoder, we evaluate the cosine similarity within each
modality (vision or text) and across modalities (between the vision encoder and text encoder). This
comprehensive analysis highlights the robustness of the observed phenomena across diverse com-
ponents of the CLIP architecture.
Specifically, given a pretrained CLIP model with vision encoder fvision and text encoder ftext , we
extract the ℓ-th layer vision feature v̂ (ℓ) ∈ R768 by taking the corresponding [CLS] token outputs of
                                                                          (ℓ)
ℓ-th layer from fvision ; similarly, take the ℓ-th layer vision feature t̂ ∈ R512 from the [EOS] token
outputs of ftext . Since CLIP projects both the vision features and text features to the same embedding
space through a vision projection matrix W vision ∈ R768×512 (followed by a layer normalization LN)
and a text projection matrix W text ∈ R512×512 (also followed by a layer normalization LN), we also
apply these projection matrices to the hidden layer features to obtain
                                                                           (ℓ)
                 v (ℓ) = LN(W vision v̂ (ℓ) ) ∈ R512 ,   t(ℓ) = LN(W text t̂     ) ∈ R512 .       (23)


Figure 22: Illustration of cosine similarity between the hidden layer to the last layer for within and
cross modalities in a 12-layer CLIP-B/32.



                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           ′                               ′                                ′
           (a) COS(v ℓ , v ℓ )              (b) COS(tℓ , tℓ )               (c) COS(v ℓ , tℓ )

Figure 23: Layer-wise cosine similarities within (a) vision encoder, (b) text encoder, and (c) cross
vision and text encoder for a pretrained 12-layers CLIP-B/32.

To measure within-modality cosine similarity, we calculate layer-wise similarity within the vision
                            ′                                                 ′
encoder as COS(v (ℓ) , v (ℓ ) ) and within the text encoder as COS(t(ℓ) , t(ℓ ) ). Similarly, for layer-
wise cross-modality cosine similarity, we evaluate the relationships between the vision encoder and
                                    ′                     ′
text encoder using COS(v (ℓ) , t(ℓ ) ) and COS(t(ℓ) , v (ℓ ) ). Figure 22 plots the layer-wise within-
modality similarity and cross-modality similarity by comparing the hidden-layer features to the last-
layer features, while Figure 23 plots all the pair-wise results. All experiments are conducted on the
CIFAR10 validation dataset, where the text input to the text encoder is: “This is a photo of a {label}”.
From both figures, we observe a clear pattern of progressively increasing layer-wise representational
similarity in both the vision encoder and the text encoder. For cross-modality similarity, we note that
the last-layer vision and text representations are not perfectly aligned (e.g., COS(t(L) , v (L) ) is not
close to 1), a phenomenon commonly referred to as the modality gap, which has been consistently
observed across various multi-modal models (Liang et al., 2022). Despite this, we also observe
a progressive increase in layer-wise representation similarity across modalities. Together, these
results highlight a distinct trend of progressively increasing layer-wise representational similarity
within and across modalities.


                                                   26
