Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IFFERENTIALLY P RIVATE F EDERATED L EARNING
WITH T IME -A DAPTIVE P RIVACY S PENDING

 Shahrzad Kiani1вҲ—, Nupur Kulkarni2 , Adam Dziedzic2 , Stark Draper1 , & Franziska Boenisch2
 1
   Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto
 2
   CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security



                                            A BSTRACT

         Federated learning (FL) with differential privacy (DP) provides a framework for
         collaborative machine learning, enabling clients to train a shared model while ad-
         hering to strict privacy constraints. The framework allows each client to have an
         individual privacy guarantee, e.g., by adding different amounts of noise to each
         clientвҖҷs model updates. One underlying assumption is that all clients spend their
         privacy budgets uniformly over time (learning rounds). However, it has been
         shown in the literature that learning in early rounds typically focuses on more
         coarse-grained features that can be learned at lower signal-to-noise ratios while
         later rounds learn fine-grained features that benefit from higher signal-to-noise ra-
         tios. Building on this intuition, we propose a time-adaptive DP-FL framework
         that expends the privacy budget non-uniformly across both time and clients. Our
         framework enables each client to save privacy budget in early rounds so as to be
         able to spend more in later rounds when additional accuracy is beneficial in learn-
         ing more fine-grained features. We theoretically prove utility improvements in
         the case that clients with stricter privacy budgets spend budgets unevenly across
         rounds, compared to clients with more relaxed budgets, who have sufficient bud-
         gets to distribute their spend more evenly. Our practical experiments on standard
         benchmark datasets support our theoretical results and show that, in practice, our
         algorithms improve the privacy-utility trade-offs compared to baseline schemes.


1   I NTRODUCTION

With machine learning (ML) relying increasingly on usersвҖҷ sensitive data, the development of utility-
driven frameworks that also adhere to usersвҖҷ individual constraints, including privacy preferences,
has become a priority. When federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) was first introduced, it
was perceived as a privacy-preserving distributed learning framework that allows users (also called
clients) to keep their data local and solely exchanging model updates with the server who can ag-
gregate the updates and apply them to the global model for training.
However, it has been shown that data can be leaked through the model gradients (Zhu et al., 2019;
Geiping et al., 2020; Boenisch et al., 2023). Hence, FL was extended to incorporate formal pri-
vacy guarantees (McMahan et al., 2017; Geyer et al., 2017; Wei et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2023; Ra-
maswamy et al., 2020) via the mathematical framework of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork, 2006).
In DP-FL frameworks, one common approach is to protect the entire dataset of each client (вҖңclient-
level DPвҖқ) by clipping local model updates and adding noise before releasing them in each training
round (Truex et al., 2019; 2020). This ensures that an adversary who has access to the aggregated
perturbed updates of a subset of clients cannot confidently infer whether or not any particular client
has participated in the given training round. However, although the DP-FL framework ensures pri-
vacy, it degrades model utility by introducing errors into the model updates. Thus, careful calibration
of the perturbations is necessary to balance privacy and utility.
There are several extensions of the DP-FL framework in the literature that aim to improve privacy-
utility tradeoffs by reducing the effect of perturbation while adhering to the privacy budgets of
   вҲ—
     correspondence to shahrzad.kianidehkordi@mail.utoronto.ca. Part of the work was done while Shahrzad
Kiani visited CISPA.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


clients. Typically, these prior works (Pichapati et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2023; McMahan et al., 2017) consider the inherent heterogeneity in FLвҖ”both in data
and privacyвҖ”to make perturbation more efficient. Yet, they either assume that clientsвҖҷ privacy bud-
gets should be exhausted uniformly over time (Boenisch et al., 2024), or rely on strong assumptions
regarding access to public data (Li et al., 2022) or negligible privacy loss when adjusting privacy
parameters in a time-adaptive manner based on data (Pichapati et al., 2019). As we will see, judi-
ciously expending the budget non-uniformly over time and in a privacy-preserved manner can yield
an improved privacy-utility tradeoff. Hence, a gap exists in the literature.
In this work, we reduce this gap by proposing a novel DP-FL framework with a data-independent
time-adaptive privacy spending method. In our framework, clients can spend their privacy budget
non-uniformly across time (training rounds). This means that clients intentionally allocate less of
their privacy budgets in the early rounds to save them for later rounds. We term these rounds as
вҖңsavingвҖқ. Clients then transit to вҖңspendingвҖқ rounds, wherein they uniformly allocate their remaining
budget across spending rounds. The decisions about when each client transits from saving to spend-
ing and how much they save in each round are made solely based on clientsвҖҷ privacy budgets, and
not their local data. Therefore, we can schedule spending before the start of training, making it free
of privacy loss. We account for each clientвҖҷs privacy spending in each round, formulating privacy
bounds as a function of clientsвҖҷ decisions and budgets.
Two observations that motivate the potential of our framework to improve the privacy-utility tradeoff
are as follows. First, by preserving the privacy budget in early rounds and incrementally spending
later, we are able to adjust the signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio to be uneven across training rounds,
with noise shifting from later rounds to earlier ones. This enables coarse-grained features, which
are typically learned in the early rounds and are more tolerant to noise, still to be learned effec-
tively. Furthermore, the fine-grained features, typically learned in later rounds (Dziedzic et al.,
2019; Raghu et al., 2017; Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017), can be learned in a beneficial higher-SNR
setting. Secondly, in practical scenarios, we note that clients are likely to have different privacy
budgets. We show theoretically that clients with stricter privacy budgets benefit from expending
their privacy budgets more unevenly than those with relaxed (larger) budgets. Intuitively, this allows
less-privacy-sensitive clients, who have often sufficient budgets, to contribute to the learning both
of coarse-grained features in early rounds and of fine-grained features in later rounds. On the other
hand, more-privacy-constrained clients can preserve their budgets and helpfully contribute more to
the learning of fine-grained features.
In summary, we make the following contributions:

       вҖў As part of our framework design (detailed in Sec. 3), we introduce a novel privacy spend-
         ing method, namely вҖңspend-as-you-goвҖқ, where clients spend their privacy budgets incre-
         mentally over time, instead of spending the privacy budget uniformly across time, as in
         traditional DP-FL approaches.
       вҖў Our theoretical analysis (detailed in Sec. 4) provides privacy accounting for the incremental
         spending pattern in our method. Additionally, we show theoretically, that if clients that use
         stricter privacy parameters, such as lower clipping norms, save a larger portion of their
         privacy budget during saving rounds, and can spend more in spending rounds, then, in
         expectation, we can reduce the clipping bias (Das et al., 2023).
       вҖў Based on these theoretical insights, in Sec. 5 we experimentally benchmark our framework
         against the baselines and show that the global test accuracy achieved by our method sur-
         passes that of the baselines for the FMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), MNIST (Deng, 2012),
         Adult Income (Becker & Kohavi, 1996), and CIFAR10 datasets (Krizhevsky et al., 2009).

2   BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Federated Learning. We consider a typical FL system with N clients and a central server. Each
client n вҲҲ [N ] has its own data distribution Pn on X Г— Y, where X вҠҶ Ru denotes the feature
space and Y вҠҶ R denotes the label space. Let Ln : Rv Г— X Г— Y вҶ’ R denote client nвҖҷs loss
function which maps a model parameter Оё вҲҲ Rv and a data sample (x, y) вҲҲ X Г— Y to a cost.
Each client n is assumed to have access to a dataset Dn which consists of |Dn | data points sampled
                                                                                  PN
from Pn . Defining LМ„n (Оё) := |D1n | (x,y)вҲҲDn Ln (Оё; (x, y)) and LМ„(Оё) := N1 n=1 LМ„n (Оё), the
                                     P


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


optimization problem in FL is minОё LМ„(Оё). The Federated Averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al.,
2017) algorithm solves this problem by having clients run local stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
and send updates to the server, which averages them to update the global model. This cycle repeats
until convergence or for a specified number of communication rounds. As the baseline for our
proposed approach (detailed in Sec.3), we consider FedAvg, presented as Alg. 3 in App.A.1. This
algorithm, unconstrained by privacy limitations, represents the ideal utility case.

Differential Privacy. In ML, the mathematical framework of (Пө, Оҙ)-DP (Dwork et al., 2014), en-
sures that two models trained on neighboring datasets, i.e., datasets that differ in one data point,
differ only slightly in their outputs. This can be formalized as Def. 1 in App. A.6.2. In (Пө, Оҙ)-DP,
a smaller privacy budget Пө вҲҲ R+ enforces a stronger privacy guarantee. The Оҙ вҲҲ [0, 1] quantifies
the probability of violating the privacy guarantee and thereby has usually a small value. We discuss
(Оұ, Пө)-ReМҒnyi-DP (Mironov, 2017) as an alternative to relax DP guarantees and get smoother compo-
sition in App. A.6.2. In this paper, we adopt RDP, while as it is shown by (Mironov, 2017), it can
be converted to DP when needed (cf. Lem. 3 in App. A.6.2).

DP-FL. We use the notion of client-level DP-FL which protects the entire clientвҖҷs dataset (McMa-
han et al., 2017; Geyer et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2023). To implement client-level DP in FL, we can rely
on the DP-FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2023) algorithm that first clips clientsвҖҷ
                                                                                                 updates
according to a sensitivity c and then adds Gaussian noise according to N 0, c2 Пғ 2 I . DP-FedAvg
also implements privacy amplification by sub-sampling (Beimel et al., 2014), where clients are sam-
pled independently at random with probability q. As shown by Mironov et al. (2019), the Sampled
Gaussian Mechanism (SGM) tightens the RDP Пө by a quadratic scaling factor q 2 (cf. Lem. 4 in
App. A.6.2). We also use the notion of distributed DP (DDP) (Truex et al., 2019) which com-
bines the advantages of centralized (Ramaswamy et al., 2020) and local DP (Truex et al., 2020).
In DDP, clients  clip their updates and locally add a small amount of noise, distributed according to
N 0, c2 Пғ 2 /N I (Truex et al., 2019). By adding local    noise, clientsвҖҷ privacy is partially protected
against the server, and sufficient noise, N 0, c2 Пғ 2 I , is guaranteed when the server aggregates all
N noisy updates. We consider the DP-FedAvg algorithm that is implemented with client-level and
DDP (presented as Alg. 4 in App.A.1) as a baseline for our approach, detailed in Sec.3.

Personalized DP. DP-FedAvg and most of its variants apply worst-case privacy guarantees to
ensure privacy for the most constrained clients. This leads to over-perturbation and reduced utility
for clients with more relaxed privacy constraints. Some recent literature addresses this by exploring
personalized, or individualized, DP (Yang et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2023; Malekmohammadi et al.,
2024; Boenisch et al., 2024). For example, Boenisch et al. (2024) introduce individualized DP (IDP)
and apply it to the DP-SGD algorithm, a collaboration-free variant of DP-FedAvg. The integration
of IDP into a client-level DP-FL framework is natural. IDP enables individualized privacy budgets
across clients and fine-tunes client-specific privacy parameters, through the use of different clip
norms and/or sampling rates. We name this integrated algorithm IDP-FedAvg and formally present
it as Alg. 5 in App.A.1. We note that IDP-FedAvg and our proposed approach, detailed in Sec.3,
complement each other. In this paper, we consider IDP-FedAvg as another baseline for our approach.

Adaptive DP. Another approach to improve the utility performance of DP learning is parameter
grouping (Yang et al., 2023; McMahan et al., 2017) which clusters the ML parameters with similar
clipping norms and applies a non-uniform clipping across clusters. Similar to the IDP approach,
our approach and parameter grouping are complementary. However, integrating our approach into
parameter grouping optimally, given the increased parameter choices across clusters, requires a study
on cluster-based parameter selection which is beyond the scope of this paper. Another approach used
for utility improvement is adaptive clipping (Pichapati et al., 2019; Andrew et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022) which aims to optimize the clipping norms during training and thereby reduce the noise effect.
Some of these papers either rely on a strong assumption of accessing public data (Li et al., 2022),
or the strong assumption of minimal privacy loss occurs during parameter optimization (Pichapati
et al., 2019). Our proposed approach is an alternative that selects privacy parameters non-uniformly
over time. Compared to the above adaptive clipping methods, our approach eliminates the need for
public data, and as parameter selection is done prior to training, ensures zero privacy loss. Another
adaptive clipping method that is not limited to prior assumptions and is more relevant to ours is the
one proposed by Andrew et al. (2021), and presented as Alg. 6 and detailed in App.A.1. While


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


targeting the same goal of improving the privacy-utility tradeoff as ours, the method (Andrew et al.,
2021) maintains fixed privacy spending over time. Note that adaptive clipping is orthogonal to
our approach and could be combined with ours for potential performance gain. However, such
integration requires careful privacy analysis, which is beyond the scope of this paper and left for
future work. In App. A.8, we benchmark our approach against the method (Andrew et al., 2021),
showing that our approach achieves a better privacy-utility tradeoff.


3     P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK

We introduce a novel time-adaptive DP-FL framework to solve the FL optimization problem with
high utility and under privacy constraints that are not meant to be spent uniformly over time. We
first discuss our threat space and privacy-related hyperparameters (summarized in Table 1).

Threat Space. We assume that each client aims to prevent data leakage to any other client who
may be honest but curious (HbC). Specifically, HbC clients follow the FL protocol honesty but
may attempt to infer sensitive information of the victim client from the shared model updates. We
assume the server is trusted but rather than offering zero protection, we make clients perturb their
model updates before sharing with the server to preserve privacy, though at a lower level. This is
because, after the server aggregates the perturbed model updates, the total perturbation increases,
providing stronger privacy protection against other clients than the server. For enhanced protection
against the server, one can use secure aggregation (Bonawitz et al., 2016) which ensures that the
server only learns an aggregated function (typically the sum) of the clientsвҖҷ local updates, without
learning individual updates. However, the design or implementation of secure aggregation schemes
is beyond the scope of this paper, and we mainly focus on preserving privacy against HbC clients.

Privacy Hyperparameters. In spend-as-you-go method, which we will detail as part of our
framework design in Sec. 3.1, each client saves a specific fraction of their budget in certain rounds,
then incrementally spends the saved portion over time. We realize savings by using client-specific
sampling rates, denoted as qn вҲҲ [0, 1] for client n, during вҖңsavingвҖқ rounds and by using a uni-
form, higher, sampling rate, denoted as q вҲҲ [0, 1], during вҖңspendingвҖқ rounds. If qn < q, client n
is less likely to be sampled during the saving rounds. According to privacy amplification by sub-
sampling (Beimel et al., 2014), and as detailed in Sec. 4.1, a fraction of the clientsвҖҷ privacy budget
will thereby be saved for later rounds. Another hyperparameter is each clientвҖҷs designated round
for transitioning from the saving to the non-saving (spend) mode. For each n вҲҲ [N ], we use Tn to
denote the first round in which client n is in the spending mode. Intuitively, if Tn is aligned with
the client n transitioning from the coarse-grained training of early rounds to the fine-grained feature
training of later rounds, the clientвҖҷs saved budget during early rounds enables the client to spend
more in later rounds when additional accuracy is beneficial in learning more fine-grained features.
By setting qn = q or Tn = 1 for every n вҲҲ [N ], each clientвҖҷs privacy spending becomes uniform
over time, resembling the traditional non-time-adaptive spending approaches. We show the hyper-
parameters qn and Tn , which are specific to our framework, in the first two rows of Table 1. Other
hyperparameters, which are common in much of the DP-FL literature, are summarized in rows 3 to
10 of Table 1. The privacy-related parameters, consistent across clients and fixed over time, include
the global clip norm c, the sampling rate q, the DP parameter Оҙ, and the RDP-related order Оұ. The
configuration of these hyperparameters to avoid additional privacy loss is covered partly in simula-
tions (Sec. 5 and App. A.8) and partly in theory (Sec. 4). Later, in Sec. 6, we discuss potential future
directions for broader hyperparameter tuning.

3.1   T HE SPEND - AS - YOU - GO M ETHOD

We consider an FL setting where every client n вҲҲ [N ] is given a privacy budget Пөn derived from
their individual privacy preferences. We assume all clients exhaust their privacy budget after T
global rounds. We propose the spend-as-you-go method, which is executed before training begins,
and obtains the following privacy parameters used during execution: the local noise multipliers Пғnt ,
the sampling rates qnt , the privacy budget remaining Пөtn (with an initial value of Пө0n = Пөn ), and
the local clip norms ctn . Each qnt is chosen as either q or qn , depending on whether client n is
in spending or saving mode. From now on, we denote qnt as the sampling rate, and to distinguish


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


between q and qn , we respectively refer to them as the spending-based sampling rate and the saving-
based sampling rate. To denote whether clients are in saving or spending mode at each round, we
use Mnt , a binary variable that is set to 0 if round t is a saving round for client n, and 1 otherwise.
I.e., Mnt = 0 if t < Tn and Mnt = 1 if t вүҘ Tn . Algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode for the
spend-as-you-go method. Regardless of the saving or sampling mode, in each round, we first find
the value Пғnt required to obtain the remaining privacy budget Пөtn using the GetNoise1 function
(Line 4 of Alg. 1). This function takes as inputs Пөtn , Оҙ, q, and the number of remaining rounds T вҲ’ t.
During the spending rounds of client n (i.e., when Mnt = 1), the client is sampled according to
qnt = q. During the saving rounds (when Mnt = 0), the client sets qnt = qn . As shown in lines
6-8, we calculate the privacy spent and Пөtn at the end of each round t вҲҲ [T ] and for every client
n вҲҲ [N ]. Using Compute rdp function, we calculate the privacy spent given qnt , Пғnt , and Оұ. We
then use get privacy spent to convert the RDP privacy spent into the DP privacy spent, given
the RDP privacy spent, Оұ, and Оҙ. We finally follow the same procedure as in Boenisch et al. (2024)
to compute local clip norms ctn such that their average across n вҲҲ [N ] equals the hyperparameter c.
                                                                          P                вҲ’1
To achieve this, we calculate ctn = cПғ t /Пғnt (Line 12), where Пғ t = N       nвҲҲ[N ] 1/Пғn
                                                                                        t
                                                                                              (Line 10).

       Table 1: Hyperparameters Summary
                                                                      Algorithm 2 Iterative Training in Our Time-
          Tn      Saving-to-spending transition round
          qn      Saving-based sampling rate of Client n              adaptive DP-FL Framework
          T       Number of rounds                                    Inputs: No. clients N , No. global rounds T , No. local iterations L,
          L       Number of local iterations                          local privacy budgets Пөn , sampling rate q, average clip norm c, modes
                                                                         t
          B       Batch size                                          Mn    вҲҲ {0, 1}, sampling rates for saving mode qn , loss functions Ln ,
          О»       Learning rate                                       datasets Dn , learning rate О», batch size B, Prob. of violating Оҙ
          Оұ       ReМҒnyi order in RDP
          Оҙ       Probability of violating in DP                      1: {qt , Пғt , {qnt , ctn , Пғnt }nвҲҲ[N ] }tвҲҲ[T ]                        !
          c       Average clipping norm                                                                       t
                                                                          =SetPrivacyParams c, q, {qn , Пөn , Mn }nвҲҲ[N ] , T, Оҙ
          q       Global (spending-based) sampling rate                                                                           tвҲҲ[T ]
                                                                      2: Initialize global model Оё0
                                                                      3: for each global round t вҲҲ [T ] do
Algorithm 1 The spend-as-you-go Method in                             4:     C t вҶҗ Sample clients with probability {qn t
                                                                                                                          }.
Our Time-adaptive DP-FL Framework                                     5:     for each client n вҲҲ [N ] in parallel do
                                                                      6:          Лң  t                              tвҲ’1
                                                                                                                        , ctn , Пғn
                                                                                                                                 t

Inputs: No. clients N , No. global rounds T , local privacy budgets              вҲҶОё  n = ClientUpdate t, n, Оё                       .
Пөn , sampling rate q, average clip norm c, modes Mn   t
                                                         вҲҲ {0, 1},    7:     end for
sampling rates for saving mode qn , Prob. of violating Оҙ.                     Лң t=P             Лң t                              c2 (Пғ t )2
                                                                      8:
                                                                                                        P
                                                                  !          вҲҶОё          nвҲҲC t вҲҶОёn +       nвҲҲ[N ]\C t N       0,     N      I
                                       t                                                          Лң        t
Def SetPrivacyParams c, q, {qn , Пөn , Mn }nвҲҲ[N ] , T, Оҙ               9:    Update Оё t = Оё tвҲ’1 + qвҲҶОё
                                                                                                   tN
                                                         tвҲҲ[T ]

1: Initialize Пө0n = Пөn and ПөМ„0rdp,n = 0 for all n вҲҲ [N ]              10: end for
2: for each global round t вҲҲ [T ] do                                  Def ClientUpdate t, n, Оё tвҲ’1 , ctn , Пғn
                                                                                                            t

3:     for each client n вҲҲ [N ] do                                                                t,0
4:         Пғn t
                 =GetNoise Пөn    tвҲ’1
                                     , Оҙ, q, T вҲ’ t
                                                                      1:  Initialize local model Оёn   = Оё tвҲ’1
5:                t             t                t
           If Mn = 0, then qn = qn , Else, qn = q.                    2: for local iteration l вҲҲ [l] do
                                                                                    |D |/B
6:         Пөtrdp,n =Compute rdp qn      t    t                        3:     {Bi }i=1n        вҶҗ Split Dn to size B batches

                                          , Пғn ,Оұ
7:           t         tвҲ’1       t
           ПөМ„rdp,n = ПөМ„rdp,n + Пөrdp,n                                 4:     for each batch Bi do
                                                                                                                                t,lвҲ’1
                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                       О»
                                                                                                     (x,y)вҲҲBi              вҲҮLn Оёn     ;(x,y)
                                                                                  t,l    t,lвҲ’1

8:         Пөtn = Пөn вҲ’get privacy spent Оұ, ПөМ„trdp,n , Оҙ                5:        Оёn    = Оёn     вҲ’              B

9:     end for
                                                                      6:     end for
                                                вҲ’1                    7: end for
10:     Compute Пғ t вҶҗ N      1               1
                                                                      8: Compute вҲҶОёnt = Оёnt,L вҲ’    t,0
                                P
                                   nвҲҲ[N ] Пғ t
                                              n                                                   Оёn
                                                                              Лң t = вҲҶОё t min 1,        ct
11:    for each client n вҲҲ [N ] do                                    9: Clip вҲҶОё n        n
                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                     вҲҘвҲҶОёt вҲҘ
12:        Set local clip norm ctn = cПғ
                                            t                                                                   n 2
                                           t
                                          Пғn                                        Лң t вҶҗ вҲҶОё
                                                                                          Лң t +N                   (ct )2 (Пғ t )2
                                                                      10: Add noise вҲҶОё n    n                    0, n N n I
13:    end for P
14:    qt = N  1     N
                     n=1 qn
                             t                                                   Лң t
                                                                      11: Return вҲҶОё n
15: end for
16: Return {qt , Пғt , {qnt , ctn , Пғnt }nвҲҲ[N ] }tвҲҲ[T ]


3.2      T HE I TERATIVE T RAINING M ODULE

After setting parameters through the spend-as-you-go method, our DP-FL framework operates the
iterative training module, with the pseudocode presented in Algorithm 2. We note that although
the primary contribution of our DP-FL framework lies in the spend-as-you-go method, the iterative
   1
     To introduce our spend-as-you-go method, we use some functions as implemented by Opacus li-
brary (Yousefpour et al., 2021).


                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


training module also differs from the baseline due to the use of time-adaptive privacy parameters
and has to be carefully designed. This module spans T communication rounds. Within each round,
clients conduct L iterations of local training. For iteration l вҲҲ [L] within round t вҲҲ [T ], let Оёnt,l
denote the local model of client n. In round t вҲҲ [T ], C t denotes the set of workers contributing to
local training. This set is randomly chosen using Poisson sampling (Line 4). Each client n вҲҲ [N ]
in round t вҲҲ [T ] has an independent probability qnt вҲҲ [0, 1] of being selected for C t . In expectation
                           1
  t                  t
q N clients, where q = N nвҲҲ[N ] qnt , are sampled in round t.
                              P

Client update: In round t, each client n вҲҲ [N ] initializes Оёnt,0 = ОёtвҲ’1 (Line 1
of ClientUpdate). It then performs L iterations of local training, using a gradient-
based technique, such as mini-batch SGD. In each iteration l вҲҲ [L], the client first
splits Dn into size B batches (Line P       3 of ClientUpdate).  For each batch Bi , the
                                        О»
nth client updates Оёnt,l = Оёnt,lвҲ’1 вҲ’ B       (x,y)вҲҲB вҲҮLn Оёnt,lвҲ’1 ; (x, y) , where О» is the learn-
               1
                                                  i
ing rate and B (x,y)вҲҲBi вҲҮLn Оёn ; (x, y) estimates the gradient вҲҮLМ„n (Оёnt,lвҲ’1 ) (Line 5 of
                                   t,lвҲ’1
                 P

ClientUpdate). Once local training finishes, the client computes the resulting model update
вҲҶОёnt = Оёnt,L вҲ’ Оёnt,0 (Line 8 of ClientUpdate). The first phase of integrating the DP mecha-
nism in the iterative training module is to assign the client the task
                                                                    of tclipping     вҲҶОёnt as shown in
                                                Лң nt = вҲҶОёnt min 1,       c
(Line 9 of ClientUpdate), and detailed as вҲҶОё                              n
                                                                       вҲҘвҲҶОёntвҲҘ     , where ctn is the clip
                                                                              2
norm. The client then perturbs further its clipped model update by injecting random noise (Line
                                                                                          t
10 of ClientUpdate). The noise       is selected
                                          t t 2
                                                  independently for each client n вҲҲ C in round t.
                                        (c Пғ )      Лң t вҶҗ вҲҶОёЛң t + zt .
Algebraically, given noise znt вҲј N 0, nNn I , вҲҶОё      n         n    n

Server aggregation: As shown in lines 6 and 8, the server aggregates вҲҶОё   Лң nt for all n вҲҲ C t , and com-
putes the sum вҲҶОё Лң t=   P        Лң t                        being selected, i.e., n вҲҲ [N ]\C t , the server
                          nвҲҲC t вҲҶОёn . For those clients not P
                                             Лң       Лң

compensates by injecting additional noise вҲҶОё вҶҗ вҲҶОё + nвҲҲ[N ]\C t N 0, c2 (Пғ t )2 /N I . Assuming
                                                t       t

cПғ t = ctn Пғnt for all n вҲҲ [N ], because of this compensation, the total noise power N 0, c2 (Пғ t )2 I
that is injected to the global model update is not a function of the sampling. The round ends with
                                      Лң t
the server computing Оёt = ОёtвҲ’1 + qвҲҶОё   t N (Line 9).


4     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
For the DP-FL framework (described in Sec. 3), we now develop the theory that underlies our privacy
accounting (Sec. 4.1), and optimize the sampling rates to improve utility (Sec. 4.2).

4.1   P RIVACY ACCOUNTING

In this section, we calculate the RDP bounds for each client n вҲҲ [N ] at round t вҲҲ [T ]. The results
will support the general idea of save-to-spend in our framework. Since we use RDP to perform
privacy accounting, we convert each clientвҖҷs privacy budgets {Пөn }nвҲҲ[N ] into the RDP equivalent,
denoted {Пөrdp,n }nвҲҲ[N ] , at a fixed order Оұ. For client n, we use Пөtrdp,n and Пөtrdp-left,n to denote, respec-
tively, the RDP privacy spent in round t and the вҖңgo-forwardвҖқ RDP privacy budget remaining for
round t onwards.
The privacy accounting for the spend-as-you-go method first involves calculating each Пөtrdp,n
(cf. line 6 of Alg. 1). Next, the total RDP privacy spent during the first t rounds is calculated as
PtвҲ’1 П„                                                      t
                                                                                    PtвҲ’1 П„
   П„ =1 Пөrdp,n (Line 7 of Alg. 1), with budget remaining Пөrdp-left,n = Пөrdp,n вҲ’       П„ =1 Пөrdp,n . Recalling
from Sec. 3.1, client n selects the noise multiplier Пғnt assuming that Пөtrdp-left,n will be spent uniformly
across the remaining T вҲ’ t + 1 rounds subject to using sampling rate q. As shown by Mironov et al.
                                                                 Пөt  2Оұq           2
(2019), under this uniform assumption Пғnt should satisfy Trdp-left,n
                                                           вҲ’t+1 = Пғ t . When t < Tn , the sam-
                                                                               n
                                                            Пөt        (qn )2
pling rate qn reduces the RDP expenditure to Пөtrdp,n = (Trdp-left,n
                                                           вҲ’t+1)(q)2 . When t вүҘ Tn , the full allocated
budget is used in round t. The RDP privacy spend Пөtrdp,n can be computed recursively as
                                     PtвҲ’1          !                 t  2        !
                    t
                             Пөrdp,n вҲ’ П„ =1 ПөП„rdp,n                  qn
                   Пөrdp,n =                            1t<Tn              + 1tвүҘTn .                 (1)
                                   T вҲ’t+1                            q


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 1 solves the recursive formula (1) for the RDP spent. Theorem 1 shows the RDP spent is
non-decreasing over time. The proofs of Lem. 1 and Thm. 1 are respectively provided in App. A.2
and A.3.
Lemma 1. Given any n вҲҲ [N ], t вҲҲ [T ], and Tn вҲҲ [T ], we have
                       пЈұ             2 Q                          2
                          Пөrdp,n    qn     tвҲ’1           1       qn
                                           i=1 1 вҲ’ T вҲ’t+1+i             if t < Tn
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈІ T вҲ’t+1 q                                 q
               t
              Пөrdp,n =              QTn вҲ’1
                                                                    2
                                                                                  .         (2)
                           Пөrdp,n                    1        qn
                                             1 вҲ’                        ow
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈі T вҲ’T  n +1    i=1       T вҲ’Tn +1+i    q



Theorem 1. For (n, t, Tn ) вҲҲ [N ] Г— [T ] Г— [T ], Пөtrdp,n вүҘ ПөtвҲ’1                    t        tвҲ’1
                                                            rdp,n if t вүӨ Tn , and Пөrdp,n = Пөrdp,n if t > Tn .

Remark 1. The non-decreasing result of Thm. 1 indicates that during saving rounds (Mnt = 0)
clients spend at least as much of their privacy budget in each round as in the previous round. In
other words, saving decreases over time. During spending rounds (Mnt = 1) clients expend privacy
                                                                                n вҲ’1
budget at a constant rate. If budget savings are accumulated than ПөTrdp,n
                                                                      n
                                                                          > ПөTrdp,n  and clients will
have access to a larger budget to spend.

4.2     O PTIMAL P ERMUTATION OF S AVING - BASED S AMPLING R ATES

We now optimize the selection of sampling rates. We start from a pre-defined set of N sampling
rates. We then choose a permutation that assigns each of the N rates to a distinct client. The
permutation is selected to minimize the per-round difference between the utility achieved when DP
perturbation is not applied (which generally will maximize utility), and the utility achieved when
our DP-FL framework is used. In the first case, the server aggregates the unperturbed local updates
вҲҶОёnt (i.e., no clipping or noise addition) for all clients n вҲҲ [N ] (i.e., no sub-sampled), and updates
the global model as Оёt = ОёtвҲ’1 + вҲҶОёt where
                                                         N
                                                   1 X
                                           вҲҶОёt =        вҲҶОёt .                                            (3)
                                                   N n=1 n

In our DP-FL framework, local updates undergo the DP mechanism detailed in Sec. 3. Factoring
                                  Лң t the clipping norms ctn , the additive noise multipliers Пғnt , and
into the (modified) global update вҲҶОё
the sampling rates qnt , we get
                                    N
                     Лң t=   1 X t
                                      bn Clip вҲҶОёnt , ctn + ztn + (1 вҲ’ btn )zМғtn ,

                     вҲҶОё         t
                                                                                                 (4)
                         N q n=1
                                                   2

              PN                           (Пғt ct )
where q t = N1 n=1 qnt , ztn , zМғtn вҲј N 0, nNn         are identically and independently distributed
(IID), and btn вҲј Bern (qnt ) are also IID. The optimization problem is to choose the {qnt }nвҲҲ[N ] so
     Лң t closely approximates an unbiased estimate of вҲҶОёt . We define the difference between the
that вҲҶОё
respective model updates as
                                                          Лң t.
                                          Errort := вҲҶОёt вҲ’ вҲҶОё                                             (5)

Errort has four sources of randomness:

       (i) Local dataset randomness: the randomness of local datasets Dn , which are sampled from
           distributions Pn . This randomness is reflected in the local updates вҲҶОёnt .
      (ii) Client sampling randomness: the sampling of clients, represented by the use of random
           variables btn . These determine whether a client n contributes to the round tвҖҷs local training.
      (iii) Noise addition randomness: the addition of the Gaussian noises ztn and zМғtn .
      (iv) Privacy budget assignment randomness: the matching of clients with different datasets
            Dn and data distributions Pn to different privacy budgets Пөn . Here, {Пөn }nвҲҲ[N ] are consid-
            ered as a random permutation of a predefined set of privacy budgets {ПөМӮn }nвҲҲ[N ] .


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To optimize the sampling rates, we first develop two upper bounds on the bias term E Errort .

Both bounds build on the clipping bias lemma (Das et al., 2023), cf., Lem. 2 in App. A.6.1. Our
theorems extend the results of that lemma to the situation where clients have individualized privacy
budgets and use time-varying clip norms ctn and sampling rates qnt .
Our first theorem, Thm. 2, bounds the expected bias with respect to (w.r.t.) three  sources of random-
ness: (i), (ii), and (iii). We denote this expectation as E(i),(ii),(iii) Errort . The proof of Thm. 2

is given in App. A.4.
Theorem 2. Taking the expectation w.r.t. (i), (ii), and (iii), and for any ПҒ > 1, we have
                                        N                                   N                  ПҒ
                                                 qnt                     1 X qnt E(i) вҲҘвҲҶОёnt вҲҘ

                            t
                                  1 X                          t

     E(i),(ii),(iii) Error      вүӨ            1 вҲ’ t E(i) вҲҶОёn +                              ПҒвҲ’1    . (6)
                                  N n=1          q                       N n=1 q t   (ctn )

To minimize this bias term in a reasoned fashion we select the qnt to minimize the upper bound. The
upper bound in (6) contains terms that couple qnt with the pure local updates вҲҶОёnt . The latter are
not accessible to the server who is responsible for sampling clients. If clients were to select their
own qnt based on their local updates, this could lead to privacy leakage and would require additional
privacy protection. The coupling between qnt and вҲҶОёnt can be removed from the first term of the
upper bound in (6) under certain conditions. For example, if all clients are sampled at the same rate
(qnt = q t ) or if E(i) (вҲҶОёnt ) is equal across all n вҲҲ [N ], the first term becomes zero. In such cases,
the upper bound reduces to the second term, which still couples qnt with вҲҶОёnt and the clip norms ctn .
In contrast to Thm. 2, in Thm. 3 we take the expectation w.r.t. the additional source of randomness,
(iv). This results in a bound that depends solely on clipping norms, which makes optimizing the
sampling rates, qnt , easier to accomplish. As we now bound the expected bias w.r.t. all four sources
of randomness вҖ“ (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv) вҖ“ we denote the expectation as E(i),(ii),(iii),(iv) Errort .

The proof of Thm. 3 is given in App. A.5.
Theorem 3. Taking the expectation w.r.t. (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv), and for any ПҒ > 1, we have:
                                                   N
                                                                       ! N                    !
                                      t
                                             1    X
                                                                  t ПҒ
                                                                        X       qnt      1
           E(i),(ii),(iii),(iv) Error     вүӨ 2         E(i) вҲҶОёn                                  .    (7)
                                            N     n=1                     n=1
                                                                                q t (ctn )ПҒвҲ’1

The main step in the proofs of Thm. 3 builds on the common assumption in FL that the sampling
from Pn and of Пөn is independent. This assumption is made without significant loss of generality as
privacy budgets are often assigned based on clientsвҖҷ personal preferences and policy requirements.
In contrast, the data distribution is influenced by external factors such as geographical locations.
Such decoupling of privacy budgets and data distributions simplifies the proof of Thm. 3. It avoids
the need to model potential correlations between the clientвҖҷs data and privacy preferences. These are
often unknown or irrelevant in practice.
As per Thm. 3, to minimize E(i),(ii),(iii),(iv) Errort w.r.t. the sampling rates qnt , we solve the

following optimization problem:

                                                   N
                                                   X qt   n     1
                                         min                     ПҒвҲ’1
                                       {О t }T
                                            t=1    n=1
                                                         qt
                                                          (ctn )           ,                                       (8)
                                                    t
                                            s.t.   qn = qО вҲ’1 (n) , n вҲҲ [N ]
                                                          t

where the {О t } are a set of (bijective) permutation maps О t : [N ] вҶ’ [N ]. Each permutation maps
each element of the index set [N ] to a distinct element of [N ]. We apply the permutation to the
indices of the fixed set of sampling rates {q1 , . . . , qN } to get {q1t , . . . , qN
                                                                                     t
                                                                                       }. The set {q1 , . . . , qN } is
a hyperparameter in our problem, which is constrained by the condition qn вүӨ q for every n вҲҲ [N ].
The optimized choice of the set of sampling rates {q1 , . . . , qN } is reserved for future work. Per
(8), the optimal choice for {q1t , . . . , qN
                                            t
                                              } is to assign clients with smaller clip norms ctn (which will
contribute highly perturbed model updates) to have lower sampling rates qnt , and vice versa. The
intuition is that by matching the qnt to the ctn , we prevent clients who contribute a highly perturbed
model update from deteriorating other clientsвҖҷ performance during saving rounds. This reduces
clipping bias and allows these clients to preserve more of their privacy budget compared, with the
subsequent benefit of enabling them to contribute more in future rounds.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5    E XPERIMENTS

Datasets. To empirically evaluate the performance of our framework against baselines, we con-
sider widely used datasets. For the Fashion MNIST (FMNIST) and MNIST, we use a convolutional
neural network (CNN) architecture from (McMahan et al., 2017). For the Adult Income dataset,
we use multi-layer perception from (Zhang et al., 2020). For the CIFAR10 dataset, we use a CNN
architecture from He et al. (2016). We partition datasets across 100 clients in a non-IID manner
using the Dirichlet distribution with a default parameter 0.1 (Zhang et al., 2023).

Privacy Settings. To reduce the number of choices for clientsвҖҷ privacy budgets, and motivated by
society wherein individuals often share similar privacy preferences (Alaggan et al., 2015; Boenisch
et al., 2024), in our experiments we divide clients into three groups. The groups are respectively
assigned budgets of Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , or Пөgroup,3 . We randomly allocate 34% of clients to belong
to Group 1, 43% to Group 2, and 23% to Group 3. In other words, Client n in Group m, shares
Пөn = Пөgroup,m . To account for privacy consumption, we use the Opacus library (Yousefpour et al.,
2021). We consider DP parameter Оҙ = 10вҲ’5 and choose an extended version of the default RDP
parameter Оұ from the RDPAccountant function in Opacus. We apply per-layer clipping (McMahan
et al., 2017) to restrict the influence of individual layers by constraining their norms.

Baselines. As discussed in Sec. 2, we consider several baselines. The first is the non-private Fe-
dAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) which represents our upper bound on utility without any privacy
constraints. The second is DP-FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) where we use a uniform privacy
budget, chosen according to the smallest epsilon value of any of the clients. This ensures that
no clientвҖҷs privacy budget is exceeded. The third is IDP-FedAvg which is the IDP-integration
(Boenisch et al., 2024) of DP-FedAvg. The fourth is adaptive clipping (Andrew et al., 2021). To
have a fair comparison with the baselines, we evaluate two variants of our framework. The first
variant assumes every clientвҖҷs budget is constrained by the smallest value in the group budget tuple
(Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ). The second variant incorporates different privacy groups. Further details
on the choice of hyperparameters in our experiments are given in Table 4 in Appendix A.7.

                                                                   Time Adaptive DP-FL                                    Time Adaptive DP-FL
                                   80                                                                           80
            Global Test Accuracy


                                                                                         Global Test Accuracy


                                                                   IDP-FedAvg                                             IDP-FedAvg

                                   60                                                                           60
                                   40                                                                           40
                                   20                                                                           20
                                        0       5       10    15         20        25                                0       5        10    15     20      25
                                                          Rounds                                                                        Rounds
                                            (a) Test Accuracy FMNIST                                                     (b) Test Accuracy MNIST

Figure 1: Our framework improves accuracy in later rounds compared to the baseline. We plot
the global test accuracy vs. rounds for (a) the FMNIST dataset, and (b) the MNIST dataset. In (a),
(Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (10, 20, 30), and in (b) it equals (10, 15, 20).

Table 2: Global test accuracy for FedAvg without DP constraints, DP-FedAvg with Пөn = 10, IDP-
FedAvg with non-uniform privacy budgets, our framework with Пөn = 10, and our framework with
non-uniform budgets. For the FMNIST and Adult Income datasets, the non-uniform privacy budgets
Пөn are (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (10, 20, 30), and for MNIST, they are (10, 15, 20).

      DATASET                                  FedAvg          DP-FedAvg                              IDP-FedAvg                         Ours           Ours
                                               (non-DP)        Пөn = 10                                Non-uniform                        Пөn = 10        Non-uniform
       FMNIST                                       72.95              64.8                                          65.45                 67.90           70.57
        MNIST                                       90.23             76.79                                          76.94                  80.2           83.83
     Adult Income                                   78.93             60.12                                          70.93                 72.14           77.53



                                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              IDP-FedAvg, =30
                                                     25       Ours, =30


                              Privacy Budget Spent
                                                              IDP-FedAvg, =20
                                                     20       Ours, =20
                                                              IDP-FedAvg, =10
                                                     15       Ours, =10

                                                     10
                                                     5
                                                     0
                                                          0      5       10        15   20   25
                                                                          Rounds

Figure 2: While both adhere to privacy budgets, our framework follows spend-as-you-go,
whereas IDP-FedAvg uses uniform privacy spending. The blue solid curves correspond to clientsвҖҷ
privacy spending in our framework, while the red dashed curves show IDP-FedAvg. The curves of
clients with budgets of 30, 20, and 10 are marked with rectangles, circles, and squares, respectively.

Experimental Results. As shown in Table 2 and Fig. 1, our framework yields improvements in
the resulting global modelвҖҷs accuracy by spending privacy budget non-uniformly across training
rounds. Comparing Columns 4 and 6 of Table 2, our framework with non-uniform privacy budgets
improves global test accuracy over IDP-FedAve by 7.8%, 8.9%, and 9.3% on FMNIST, MNIST, and
Adult Income. In the case of using a uniform budget of Пөn = 10 across all clients n, our framework
achieves respective improvements of 4.7%, 4.4%, and 19.9% compared to DP-FedAvg, as shown
in Columns 3 and 5. We also observe that, our time-adaptive DP-FL scheme comes closest to the
ideal-case performance of FedAvg (column 2) without privacy constraints. Figure 1 plots global test
accuracy vs. global rounds for our framework with non-uniform privacy budgets and IDP-FedAvg,
on the FMNIST and MNIST datasets. This figure shows that while our framework conserves privacy
in early rounds, it allocates more budget in later rounds, eventually catching up to and surpassing
IDP-FedAvg by about 8% on FMNIST and 6% on MNIST in the final round.
In Fig. 2 we present the privacy budget spent by clients from different budget groups (10, 20, 30)
across rounds. This figure shows that, while IDP-FedAvg enforces uniform privacy consumption
over time, in our framework, clients follow spend-as-you-go, saving budgets in the first half of
training, and spending more in later rounds. Our experimental results demonstrate that our time-
adaptive approach boosts the utility of the trained model while adhering to privacy constraints.
In Appendix A.8, we present extended experimental results, including benchmarks on the CIFAR10
dataset (Table 11), comparisons with adaptive clipping (Table 7), and evaluations across privacy-
related hyperparameters (Tables 6, 9, and 10, and Figure 5), as well as other parameters (Tables 5
and 8 and Figure 4).

6   D ISCUSSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

We now discuss some limitations of our work that represent interesting directions for future work.
Our spend-as-you-go method reduces reliance on determining when clients should transition from
saving to spending by allowing them to gradually spend their saved budgets over time, rather than
waiting until a specific round to start spending. While our experiments indicate that transitioning
from saving to spending midway through training generally yields good results, tuning the hyper-
parameters involved in estimating the transitioning round may improve utility. However, such hy-
perparameter tuning can lead to additional privacy loss (Papernot & Steinke, 2021) that would need
to be accounted for. For future work, we believe that our time-adaptive DP-FL framework should
be closely integrated with a form of privacy-preserving hyperparameter tuning to identify the best
rounds in which to transition from savings to spending.
Furthermore, as we demonstrated theoretically and validated experimentally, adapting saving-related
hyperparameters to clientsвҖҷ specific privacy budgets can enhance utility. To eliminate the risk of
privacy leakage from this adaptation, we provide theoretical optimizations that rely solely on clientsвҖҷ
privacy-related constraints, independent of their data. Future research can explore data-and-privacy
joint measures to quantify clientsвҖҷ contributions with controlled privacy leakage and adapt client-
specific savings decisions accordingly.


                                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge our sponsors. This work was supported in part by a Discovery
Research Grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC),
by an NSERC Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarship-Doctoral (CGS D3), by a DiDi
graduate award, and by the Mitacs Globalink research award.

R EFERENCES
Mohammad Alaggan, SeМҒbastien Gambs, and Anne-Marie Kermarrec. Heterogeneous differential
 privacy. ArXiv preprint:1504.06998, 2015.
Galen Andrew, Om Thakkar, Brendan McMahan, and Swaroop Ramaswamy. Differentially private
  learning with adaptive clipping. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17455вҖ“
  17466, 2021.
Barry Becker and Ronny Kohavi. Adult dataset. UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1996. DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5XW20.
Amos Beimel, Hai Brenner, Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, and Kobbi Nissim. Bounds on the
 sample complexity for private learning and private data release. Machine Learning, 94:401вҖ“437,
 2014.
Franziska Boenisch, Adam Dziedzic, Roei Schuster, Ali Shahin Shamsabadi, Ilia Shumailov, and
  Nicolas Papernot. When the curious abandon honesty: Federated learning is not private. In IEEE
  European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), pp. 175вҖ“199. IEEE, 2023.
Franziska Boenisch, Christopher MuМҲhl, Adam Dziedzic, Roy Rinberg, and Nicolas Papernot. Have
  it your way: Individualized privacy assignment for dp-sgd. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar
  Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for federated
  learning on user-held data. ArXiv preprint:1611.04482, 2016.
Rudrajit Das, Satyen Kale, Zheng Xu, Tong Zhang, and Sujay Sanghavi. Beyond uniform lips-
  chitz condition in differentially private optimization. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 7066вҖ“7101. PMLR, 2023.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141вҖ“142, 2012.
Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
  Programming, pp. 1вҖ“12. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and TrendsВ® in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3вҖ“4):211вҖ“407, 2014.
Adam Dziedzic, John Paparrizos, Sanjay Krishnan, Aaron Elmore, and Michael Franklin. Band-
  limited training and inference for convolutional neural networks. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1745вҖ“1754. PMLR, 2019.
Jonas Geiping, Hartmut Bauermeister, Hannah DroМҲge, and Michael Moeller. Inverting gradients-
  how easy is it to break privacy in federated learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:16937вҖ“16947, 2020.
Robin C Geyer, Tassilo Klein, and Moin Nabi. Differentially private federated learning: A client
  level perspective. ArXiv preprint:1712.07557, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  770вҖ“778, 2016.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rui Hu, Yuanxiong Guo, and Yanmin Gong. Federated learning with sparsified model perturba-
  tion: Improving accuracy under client-level differential privacy. IEEE Transactions on Mobile
  Computing, 2023.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Tian Li, Manzil Zaheer, Sashank Reddi, and Virginia Smith. Private adaptive optimization with side
  information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 13086вҖ“13105. PMLR, 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. 08 2016.
   doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1608.03983.
Saber Malekmohammadi, Yaoliang Yu, and Yang Cao. Noise-aware algorithm for heterogeneous
  differentially private federated learning. ArXiv preprint:2406.03519, 2024.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial Intelli-
  gence and Statistics, pp. 1273вҖ“1282, 2017.
H Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. Learning differentially private
  recurrent language models. ArXiv preprint:1710.06963, 2017.
Ilya Mironov. ReМҒnyi differential privacy. In Computer Security Foundations Symp. (CSF), pp. 263вҖ“
   275. IEEE, 2017.
Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. ReМҒnyi differential privacy of the sampled gaussian
   mechanism. ArXiv preprint:1908.10530, 2019.
Nicolas Papernot and Thomas Steinke. Hyperparameter tuning with reМҒnyi differential privacy. ArXiv
  preprint:2110.03620, 2021.
Venkatadheeraj Pichapati, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Felix X Yu, Sashank J Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar.
  Adaclip: Adaptive clipping for private sgd. ArXiv preprint:1908.07643, 2019.
Maithra Raghu, Justin Gilmer, Jason Yosinski, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Svcca: Singular vector
 canonical correlation analysis for deep learning dynamics and interpretability. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Swaroop Ramaswamy, Om Thakkar, Rajiv Mathews, Galen Andrew, H Brendan McMahan, and
  FrancМ§oise Beaufays. Training production language models without memorizing user data. ArXiv
  preprint:2009.10031, 2020.
Xiaoying Shen, Hang Jiang, Yange Chen, Baocang Wang, and Le Gao. Pldp-fl: Federated learning
  with personalized local differential privacy. Entropy, 25(3):485, 2023.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the black box of deep neural networks via informa-
  tion. ArXiv preprint:1703.00810, 2017.
Stacey Truex, Nathalie Baracaldo, Ali Anwar, Thomas Steinke, Heiko Ludwig, Rui Zhang, and
  Yi Zhou. A hybrid approach to privacy-preserving federated learning. In Proceedings of the ACM
  Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, pp. 1вҖ“11, 2019.
Stacey Truex, Ling Liu, Ka-Ho Chow, Mehmet Emre Gursoy, and Wenqi Wei. Ldp-fed: Federated
  learning with local differential privacy. In Proceedings of the ACM International Workshop on
  Edge Systems, Analytics and Networking, pp. 61вҖ“66, 2020.
Kang Wei, Jun Li, Ming Ding, Chuan Ma, Howard H Yang, Farhad Farokhi, Shi Jin, Tony QS Quek,
  and H Vincent Poor. Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms and performance
  analysis. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 15:3454вҖ“3469, 2020.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. ArXiv preprint:1708.07747, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ge Yang, Shaowei Wang, and Haijie Wang. Federated learning with personalized local differential
  privacy. In IEEE International Conference on Computer and Communication Systems (ICCCS),
  pp. 484вҖ“489. IEEE, 2021.
Xiyuan Yang, Wenke Huang, and Mang Ye. Dynamic personalized federated learning with adaptive
  differential privacy. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:72181вҖ“72192, 2023.
Ashkan Yousefpour, Igor Shilov, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Davide Testuggine, Karthik Prasad,
  Mani Malek, John Nguyen, Sayan Ghosh, Akash Bharadwaj, Jessica Zhao, Graham Cormode,
  and Ilya Mironov. Opacus: User-friendly differential privacy library in PyTorch. ArXiv
  preprint:2109.12298, 2021.
Daniel Yue Zhang, Ziyi Kou, and Dong Wang. Fairfl: A fair federated learning approach to reducing
  demographic bias in privacy-sensitive classification models. In 2020 IEEE International Confer-
  ence on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1051вҖ“1060, 2020. doi: 10.1109/BigData50022.2020.9378043.
Jianqing Zhang, Yang Hua, Hao Wang, Tao Song, Zhengui Xue, Ruhui Ma, and Haibing Guan.
   Fedala: Adaptive local aggregation for personalized federated learning. In Proceedings of the
   AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 11237вҖ“11244, 2023.
Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. Deep leakage from gradients. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      A PPENDIX

A.1       S UMMARY OF N OTATIONS AND B ENCHMARKING S CHEMES

We summarize the important notations (including the hyperparameters shown in Table 1) in Table 3.
We formally depict the baselines: FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) as Alg. 3, DP-FedAvg as Alg. 4,
IDP-FedAvg as Alg. 5, and adaptive clipping (Andrew et al., 2021) as Alg. 6. Next, we provide
further details to explain the adaptive clipping baseline in comparison with our proposed approach.

                                   Table 3: A Summary of Notation and Hyperparameters1 .

    N       No. of Clients                            Dn                  Dataset of Client n
    Ct      Client set in R. t                          Bi                      Batch i
     T      No. of rounds                               B                     Batch size
     L      No. of local iterations                     Пөn          DP privacy budget of Client n
     Оёt     Global model at R. t                    Пөtrdp,n      RDP privacy spent of Client n in R. t
   вҲҶОёt      Global model update at R. t          Пөtrdp-left,n RDP budget RE. of Client n for R. t onwards
    Оёnt,l   Model of Client n at R. t, I. l         ПөМ„trdp,n  RDP privacy spend of Client n up to R. t + 1
        t
   вҲҶОёn      Model update of Client n at R. t            Пөtn    DP budget RE. of Client n for R. t onwards
   Лң nt
   вҲҶОё       Perturbed update of Client n at R. t        Пғt          Global noise multiplier in R. t
  Errort вҲҶОёt вҲ’ вҲҶОё   Лң t                                Пғnt        Noise multiplier of Client n in R. t
     О»      Learning rate                                c              Average clipping norm
     Оұ      ReМҒnyi order in RDP                         ctn        Clipping norm of Client n in R. t
     Оҙ      Probability of violating in DP               q          Spending-based sampling rate
    Tn      Saving-to-spending transition R.            qn      Saving-based sampling rate of Client n
   Mnt      Saving-or-spending mode                     qnt        Sampling rate of Client n in R. t
    Ln      Loss function of Client n                   qt           Average sampling rate in R. t
  1
     TableвҖҷs abbreviations: вҖңNo.вҖқ for вҖңNumberвҖқ, вҖңRE.вҖқ for вҖңRemainingвҖқ, вҖңI.вҖқ for вҖңIterationвҖқ, and вҖңR.вҖқ for
     вҖңRoundвҖқ.


                                                                        Algorithm 4 Differential Private Federated Aver-
                                                                        aging (DP-FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017)
Algorithm 3 Federated Averaging                                (Fe-     Inputs: No. clients N , No. global rounds T , No. local iterations L,
dAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017)                                            noise multiplier Пғ, clip norm c, sampling rate q, loss functions Ln ,
                                                                        local datasets Dn , learning rate О», batch size B
Inputs: No. clients N , No. global rounds T , No. local iterations L,
loss functions Ln , local datasets Dn , learning rate О», batch size B   1: Initialize global model Оё0
                                                                        2: for each global round t вҲҲ [T ] do
1: Initialize global model Оё0                                           3:     C t вҶҗ Sample clients with probability q.
2: for each global round t вҲҲ [T ] do                                    4:     for each client n вҲҲ C t in parallel do
3:     C t вҶҗ Sample clients with probability q.                         5:          Лң t = ClientUpdate t, n, Оё tвҲ’1 , c .

                                                                                   вҲҶОё  n
4:     for each client n вҲҲ C t in parallel do                           6:     end for
               t
5:                = ClientUpdate t, n, Оё tвҲ’1 .

           вҲҶОёn                                                          7:     Aggregate вҲҶОёЛң t=P             Лң t
                                                                                                      nвҲҲC t вҲҶОёn
6:     end for
                                                                        8:     Add noise вҲҶОёЛң t вҶҗ вҲҶОёЛң t + N (0, c2 Пғ 2 I)
7:     Aggregate вҲҶОё t =
                           P         Лң t
                              nвҲҲC t вҲҶОёn                                                                 Лң t
                 t     tвҲ’1     вҲҶОё t                                     9:     Update Оё t = Оё tвҲ’1 + вҲҶОё
8:     Update Оё = Оё        + qN                                                                         qN
                                                                        10: end for
9: end for
                                                                        Def ClientUpdate t, n, Оё t , c

Def ClientUpdate t, n, Оё t

                                                                        1: Initialize local model Оёnt,0 = Оёt
1: Initialize local model Оёnt,0 = Оёt                                    2: for local iteration l вҲҲ [l] do
2: for local iteration l вҲҲ [l] do                                                     |D |/B
              |D |/B                                                    3:     {Bi }i=1n        вҶҗ Split Dn to size B batches
3:     {Bi }i=1n        вҶҗ Split Dn to size B batches
                                                                        4:     for each batch Bi do
4:     for each batch Bi do                                                                           О»
                                                                                                          P              t,lвҲ’1

                                                                                                                    вҲҮLn Оёn     ;(x,y)

                                                t,lвҲ’1                                                  (x,y)вҲҲBi

                                                                                    t,l    t,lвҲ’1
                                                                        5:                       вҲ’
                                  P
           t,l    t,lвҲ’1
                              О»   (x,y)вҲҲBi вҲҮLn Оёn     ;(x,y)                      Оёn    = Оёn
5:        Оёn   = Оёn     вҲ’                                                                                       B
                                            B                           6:     end for
6:    end for                                                           7: end for
7: end for                                                              8: Compute вҲҶОёnt = Оёnt,L вҲ’    t,0
8: Return вҲҶОёnt = Оёnt,L вҲ’ Оёnt,0                                                                      Оёn
                                                                                Лң   t       t
                                                                        9: Clip вҲҶОёn = вҲҶОёn min 1, вҲҘвҲҶОёct вҲҘ
                                                                                                              n 2
                                                                                   Лң t
                                                                        10: Return вҲҶОё n


                                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The Adapting Clipping Baseline. In this paper, we consider the adaptive clipping method (Andrew
et al., 2021) as a baseline for our time-adaptive DP-FL approach. In the extended simulations (cf.
App. A.8), we benchmark that method against our approach. The method is formally presented as
Alg. 6. As shown in Line 13, the server dynamically adjusts the clipping norm based on a specified
quantile Оі of the distribution of clientsвҖҷ updates. The goal of this method is to minimize the dif-
ference between the clipping norm and the quantile in the distribution, aiming to achieve the same
objective as ours: improving the privacy-utility tradeoff. In contrast to our time-adaptive approach,
which is independent of the clientвҖҷs data and can be done prior to training, the method (Andrew
et al., 2021) introduces privacy risks during the quantile approximation. To mitigate these risks, and
as is shown in Line 2 of the SetClipping function in Alg. 6, the method (Andrew et al., 2021)
incorporates a supplementary DP mechanism that allocates part of the privacy budget to preserve
privacy during quantile estimation. However, this results in a lower remaining privacy budget, re-
quiring a larger noise multiplier Пғ, as computed in Line 2 of SetSigma in Alg.6, in comparison to
our approach.


                                                                           Algorithm 6 DP-FedAvg-M with Adaptive Clip-
                                                                           ping (Andrew et al., 2021)
                                                                           Inputs: No. clients N , No. global rounds T , No. local iterations
Algorithm 5 Individualized DP-FedAvg (IDP-                                 L, noise multiplier Пғ, clip norm c, sampling rate q, loss functions
                                                                           {Ln }nвҲҲ[N ] , local datasets {Dn }nвҲҲ[N ] , client-side learning rate О»,
FedAvg), a natural integration of IDP (Boenisch                            server-side learning rate О»s , clip-related learning rate О»b , Оі quantile,
et al., 2024) to FL                                                        batch size B, probability of violating Оҙ,
Inputs: No. clients N , No. global rounds T , No. local iterations L,
                                                              1: Пғ =SetSigma(q, Пө, T, Оҙ, Пғb )
local privacy budgets Пөn , average clip norm c, sampling rate q, loss
                                                              2: Initialize global model Оё0
functions Ln , local datasets Dn , learning rate О», batch size B, proba-
bility of violating Оҙ                                         3: for each global round t вҲҲ [T ] do
                                                              4:     C t вҶҗ Sample qN clients uniformly.
1: Пғ, {cn }nвҲҲ[N ] =SetPrivacyParams c, q, {Пөn }nвҲҲ[N ] , T, Оҙ 5:      for each client n вҲҲ C t in parallel do

                                                              6:                Лң t ) = ClientUpdate t, n, Оё tвҲ’1 , ct .
                                                                         (btn , вҲҶОё

2: Initialize global model Оё0                                                       n
3: for each global round t вҲҲ [T ] do                          7:     end for
                                                              8:     Aggregate вҲҶОё  Лң t=P             Лң t
4:     C t вҶҗ Sample clients with probability q.                                               nвҲҲC t вҲҶОёn
5:                           t
       for each client n вҲҲ C in parallel do                   9:     Add  noise   Лң
                                                                                 вҲҶОё   t
                                                                                        вҶҗ   Лң
                                                                                           вҲҶОё  t
                                                                                                 +  N (0, (ct )2 Пғ 2 I)
6:          Лң t = ClientUpdate t, n, Оё tвҲ’1 , cn .

           вҲҶОё  n                                              10:     Average вҲҶОё Лң t вҶҗ 1 вҲҶОё    Лң t
                                                                                           qN
7:     end for                                                11:     Compute вҲҶОё  Лң t вҶҗ ОІs вҲҶОё Лң tвҲ’1 + (1 вҲ’ ОІs )вҲҶОё    Лң t
8:     Aggregate вҲҶОё Лң t=P           Лң t
                              nвҲҲC t вҲҶОёn                       12:     Update   Оё t
                                                                                    =  Оё tвҲ’1
                                                                                             +  О»  Лң t
                                                                                                   вҲҶОё
                                                                                                 s
9:     Add noise вҲҶОёЛң t вҶҗ вҲҶОёЛң t + N (0, c2 Пғ 2 I)              13:     ct+1 =SetClippig {btn }nвҲҲCt , Пғb , q, Оі, О»b , ct

                  t     tвҲ’1     Лң t
                               вҲҶОё
10:     Update Оё = Оё        + qN                              14: end for
11: end for
                                                                           Def ClientUpdate t, n, Оё t , ct


Def ClientUpdate t, n, Оё t , cn

                                                                           1: Initialize local model Оёnt,0 = Оёt
1: Initialize local model Оёnt,0 = Оёt                                       2: for local iteration l вҲҲ [l] do
                                                                                         |D |/B
2: for local iteration l вҲҲ [l] do                                          3:     {Bi }i=1n        вҶҗ Split Dn to size B batches
              |D |/B
3:     {Bi }i=1n        вҶҗ Split Dn to size B batches                       4:     for each batch Bi do
                                                                                                                                   t,lвҲ’1

4:
                                                                                                             P
       for each batch Bi do                                                                                О»
                                                                                                         (x,y)вҲҲBi             вҲҮLn Оёn     ;(x,y)
                                                                                      t,l    t,lвҲ’1
                                  P              t,lвҲ’1
                                                                           5:        Оёn   = Оёn     вҲ’                              B
            t,l    t,lвҲ’1
                               О»   (x,y)вҲҲBi вҲҮLn Оёn     ;(x,y)
5:        Оёn    = Оёn     вҲ’                   B
                                                                           6:    end for
6:     end for                                                             7: end for
7: end for                                                                 8: Compute вҲҶОёnt = Оёnt,L вҲ’ Оёnt,0
8: Compute вҲҶОёnt = Оёnt,L вҲ’    t,0
                            Оёn
                                                                           9: Compute b = IвҲҘвҲҶОёnt вҲҘвүӨct

        Лң   t       t            cn
9: Clip вҲҶОё                                                                                                            ct
           n = вҲҶОёn min 1, вҲҘвҲҶОё t вҲҘ                                                   Лң t = вҲҶОё t min
                                                                           10: Clip вҲҶОёn     n                  1,      tвҲҘ
                                        n 2                                                                         вҲҘвҲҶОёn  2
           Лң t
10: Return вҲҶОё                                                                            Лң t
              n                                                            11: Return b, вҲҶОёn

Def SetPrivacyParams c, q, {Пөn }nвҲҲ[N ] , T, Оҙ                              Def SetSigma(q, Пө, T, Оҙ, Пғb )
1: for each client n вҲҲ [N ] do                                             1: ПғМ„ =GetNoise(Пө,  Оҙ, q, T )
2:     Set local noise multiplier Пғn =GetNoise(Пөn , Оҙ, q, T )
                                                                           2: Пғ = ПғМ„12 вҲ’ (2Пғ1 )2
                                                                                                   вҲ’1/2
3: end for            P                вҲ’1                                                         b
4: Compute Пғ вҶҗ N1 nвҲҲ[N ] Пғ1n                                               3: Return Пғ
5: for each client n вҲҲ [N ] do                                             Def SetClippig {btn }nвҲҲCt , Пғb , q, Оі, О»b , ct

6:     Set local clip norm cn = ПғcПғ n
                                                                           1: Aggregate bМғt = nвҲҲCt btn
                                                                                              P
7: end for
8: Return Пғ, {cn }nвҲҲ[N ]                                                   2: Add noise bМғ вҶҗ bМғt + N (0, Пғb2 I)
                                                                                          t

                                                                           3: Average bМғt вҶҗ qN1
                                                                                                 bМғt

                                                                                      t+1
                                                                           4: Update c      = c exp вҲ’О»b (bМғt вҲ’ Оі)
                                                                                               t

                                                                           5: Return ct+1


                                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

We use induction to solve the recursive formula (1). According to (1), when t = 1 < Tn , Пө1rdp,n =
                                                             Пөrdp,n вҲ’Пө1rdp,n
                                                                                2
Пөrdp,n (qn )2                                         2                       qn
   T (q)2 , and when t = 2 < Tn , client n spends Пөrdp,n =        T вҲ’1         q  . By substituting Пө1rdp,n

                                                   2    2
                                 Пө               qn     qn
in Пө2rdp,n , we obtain Пө2rdp,n = Trdp,n
                                    вҲ’1    1 вҲ’ 1
                                              T   q      q . We now assume ПөtвҲ’1   rdp,n satisfies in (2) for

every 2 вүӨ t < T . If t < Tn , by substituting ПөtвҲ’1
                                               rdp,n in (1), we obtain



                                                                пЈ«                    2           пЈ¶
                          PtвҲ’1                                    tвҲ’1               q      tвҲ’1
                                                                         вҲ’             вҲ’
                                            !
               Пөrdp,n вҲ’             П„                    2      Пө     (T   t + 2)        Пө            2
                              П„ =1 Пөrdp,n          qn         пЈ¬ rdp,n              qn      rdp,n пЈ· qn
 Пөtrdp,n =                                                   =пЈӯ                                                             (9)
                       T вҲ’t+1                       q                      T вҲ’t+1                   q
                                                                                                 пЈё

                                                  2
                                            qn
                       T вҲ’t+2вҲ’               q
        = ПөtвҲ’1
           rdp,n                                                                                                           (10)
                             T вҲ’t+1
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                               qn
                                    2   tвҲ’2         2 !!                                      T вҲ’t+2вҲ’           q
            Пөrdp,n            qn        Y1         qn
        =                      1вҲ’                                                                                          (11)
          T вҲ’t+2          i=1
                               q   T вҲ’ t + 2 + i    q                                           T вҲ’t+1
                      2 tвҲ’1                       2 !
            Пөrdp,n  qn  Y              1         qn
        =                     1вҲ’                      .                                                                    (12)
          T вҲ’t+1 q      i=1
                                 T вҲ’t+1+i q



If t = Tn , by substituting ПөtвҲ’1
                             rdp,n in (1), we obtain



                                                        пЈ«                     2           пЈ¶
                          PTn вҲ’1 П„ !                    Tn вҲ’1                q      Tn вҲ’1
               Пөrdp,n вҲ’                               Пө       (T вҲ’ T  + 2)      вҲ’ Пө
                           П„ =1 Пөrdp,n              пЈ¬ rdp,n         n       qn      rdp,n пЈ·
  ПөTrdp,n
      n
          =                                        =пЈӯ                                                                      (13)
                       T вҲ’ Tn + 1                                  T вҲ’ Tn + 1
                                                                                          пЈё

                                   2
                    T вҲ’ Tn + 2 вҲ’ qqn                                 2
           Tn вҲ’1                                               q
        = Пөrdp,n                                                                                                           (14)
                              T вҲ’ Tn + 1                      qn

                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                               qn
                                 n вҲ’2
                                TY                                             2 !!       T вҲ’ Tn + 2 вҲ’          q
                 Пөrdp,n               1          qn
        =                                   1вҲ’                                                                             (15)
              T вҲ’ Tn + 2
                       i=1
                                T вҲ’ Tn + 2 + i    q                                            T вҲ’ Tn + 1
                     n вҲ’1
                    TY                          2 !
             Пөrdp,n                 1          qn
        =                  1вҲ’                       .                                                                      (16)
          T вҲ’ Tn + 1 i=1      T вҲ’ Tn + 1 + i q



If t > Tn , by substituting ПөtвҲ’1
                             rdp,n in (1), we obtain



                                             PtвҲ’1       П„
                                                                !         tвҲ’1                  tвҲ’1
                                                                                                       !
                                Пөrdp,n вҲ’          П„ =1 Пөrdp,n            Пөrdp,n (T вҲ’ t + 2) вҲ’ Пөrdp,n
                 Пөtrdp,n =                                          =                                                      (17)
                                        T вҲ’t+1                                   T вҲ’t+1
                                                   n вҲ’1
                                                  TY                        2                          !
                                           Пөrdp,n                1        qn
                          = ПөtвҲ’1
                             rdp,n =                    1вҲ’                                                 .               (18)
                                        T вҲ’ Tn + 1 i=1     T вҲ’ Tn + 1 + i q


                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1


We use the explicit solutions of the recursive formula (1), presented in Lem. 1, to prove this theorem.
When t < Tn ,



                                              2 tвҲ’1                                    2 !
                        Пөrdp,n          qn      Y                1               qn
 Пөtrdp,n вҲ’ ПөtвҲ’1
            rdp,n =                                       1вҲ’                                                        (19)
                      T вҲ’t+1             q         i=1
                                                             T вҲ’t+1+i             q
                                  2 tвҲ’2                           2 !
                     Пөrdp,n     qn    Y               1          qn
                вҲ’                          1вҲ’                                                                       (20)
                  T вҲ’t+2 q            i=1
                                              T  вҲ’  t + 2 +  i    q
                            2 tвҲ’2                             2 !!
                            qn     Y              1           qn
                = Пөrdp,n                 1вҲ’                                                                         (21)
                             q     i=1
                                            T вҲ’ t +  2 + i     q
                                                  2 !                !
                          1               1       qn               1
                Г—                 1вҲ’                       вҲ’                                                        (22)
                    T вҲ’t+1             T вҲ’t+2 q               T вҲ’t+2
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                          qn

                               qn
                                     2       tвҲ’2
                                             Y              1

                                                                            qn
                                                                                  2 !!         1вҲ’          q
                = Пөrdp,n                             1вҲ’                                                         .
                                q            i=1
                                                        T вҲ’t+2+i             q           (T вҲ’ t + 1)(T вҲ’ t + 2)
                                                                                                              (23)


The right-hand side of (23) is larger than equal to zero because qn вүӨ q. Therefore, in this case
Пөtrdp,n вүҘ ПөtвҲ’1
           rdp,n . When t = Tn ,


                                            n вҲ’1
                                           TY                              2 !
                    Tn вҲ’1      Пөrdp,n                        1            qn
         ПөTrdp,n
             n
                 вҲ’ Пөrdp,n =                       1вҲ’                                                                (24)
                           T вҲ’ Tn + 1 i=1             T вҲ’ Tn + 1 + i q
                                              2 TY n вҲ’2                            2 !
                               Пөrdp,n        qn                       1            qn
                         вҲ’                                1вҲ’                                                        (25)
                           T вҲ’ Tn + 2 q            i=1
                                                              T  вҲ’ Tn  +  2 + i     q
                                      n вҲ’2
                                    TY                               2    !!
                                                        1          qn
                         = Пөrdp,n            1вҲ’                                                                     (26)
                                      i=1
                                                 T вҲ’  Tn + 2 +  i   q
                           пЈ«                                                     2 пЈ¶
                                                                2 !             qn
                                   1                  1        qn                q
                         Г—пЈӯ                  1вҲ’                          вҲ’                                          (27)
                           пЈ¬                                                           пЈ·
                              T вҲ’t+1             T вҲ’ Tn + 2 q               T вҲ’ Tn + 2
                                                                                       пЈё

                                                                                                            2
                                          n вҲ’2
                                         TY                                            2 !! 1 вҲ’       qn
                                                                  1              qn                    q
                         = Пөrdp,n                        1вҲ’                                                     .   (28)
                                             i=1
                                                            T вҲ’ Tn + 2 + i        q          (T вҲ’ Tn + 1)


The right-hand side of (28) is again larger than equal to zero because. Therefore, in this case we
                     Tn вҲ’1
also have ПөTrdp,n
              n
                  вүҘ Пөrdp,n . Lem. 1 also shows Пөtrdp,n = ПөtвҲ’1
                                                          rdp,n when t > Tn .


                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2



If the expectation is taken w.r.t. (i) the randomness of local datasets, (ii) the sampling of clients, and
(iii) the randomness of injected Gaussian noise, then the bias is simplified as follows:


       E(i),(ii),(iii) Errort


           N
        1 X                                  1
              E(i),(ii),(iii) вҲҶОёnt вҲ’ t btn Clip вҲҶОёnt , ctn + ztn + (1 вҲ’ btn )zМғtn

      =
        N n=1                               q
           N
        1 X                           1
              E(i),(ii) вҲҶОёnt вҲ’ t btn Clip вҲҶОёnt , ctn

      =                                                                                                    (29)
        N n=1                         q
           N
                                 qnt

        1 X                t                        t   t

      =       E(i) вҲҶОёn вҲ’ t Clip вҲҶОёn , cn                                                                   (30)
        N n=1                    q
           N
                                qt      qnt     qnt        qnt

        1 X                t                                              t  t

      =       E(i) вҲҶОёn              вҲ’ t + t вҲ’ t Clip вҲҶОёn , cn                                              (31)
        N n=1                   qt      q       q          q
           N    t
                           qnt                    qnt

        1 X       q                           t                    t                 t    t

      =               вҲ’          E  (i)  вҲҶОё   n   +       E (i) вҲҶОё n вҲ’    Clip  вҲҶОё     ,
                                                                                     n n c                 (32)
        N n=1     qt       qt                         qt
           N                                              N
        1 X qt          qnt                           1 X qnt

                                            t
                                                                   E(i) вҲҶОёnt вҲ’ Clip вҲҶОёnt , ctn

      вүӨ          t
                    вҲ’     t
                               E (i)   вҲҶОё   n    +               t
                                                                                                           (33)
        N n=1 q         q                             N n=1 q
           N                                              N                     ПҒ
        1 X qt          qnt                           1 X qnt E(i) вҲҘвҲҶОёnt вҲҘ

                                            t

      вүӨ             вҲ’ t E(i) вҲҶОёn +                                         ПҒвҲ’1     .                       (34)
        N n=1 q t       q                             N n=1 q t      (ctn )


The equality (29) is due to E(iii) (ztn ) = E(iii) zМғtn = 0. The equality (30) is due to E(ii) btn = qnt .

The inequality (33) is due to triangle inequality. The inequality (34) is due to the clipping bias
lemma (Das et al., 2023), given any ПҒ > 1.


A.5    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3



If the expectation is taken w.r.t. (i) the randomness of local datasets and (ii) the sampling of clients,
(iii) the randomness of injected Gaussian noise, and (iv) privacy budget assignment randomness,
then the bias is simplified as follows:


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    E(i),(ii),(iii),(iv) Errort


          N
     1 X                                  t      1 t                       t   t
                                                                                       t
                                                                                                       t     t

   =        E(i),(ii),(iii),(iv) вҲҶОёn вҲ’ t bn Clip вҲҶОёn , cn + zn + (1 вҲ’ bn )zМғn
     N n=1                                      q
          N
     1 X                           t        1 t                   t     t

   =        E(i),(ii),(iv) вҲҶОёn вҲ’ t bn Clip вҲҶОёn , cn                                                                      (35)
     N n=1                                 q
          N
                                           bt

     1 X
            E(i),(ii),(iv) вҲҶОёnt вҲ’ nt Clip вҲҶОёnt , ctn

   =                                                                                                                     (36)
     N n=1                                 q
          N
                                     qnt

     1 X                      t                          t    t

   =        E(i),(iv) вҲҶОёn вҲ’ t Clip вҲҶОёn , cn                                                                              (37)
     N n=1                           q
          N
                         вҲҶОёnt q t            qnt      qnt          qnt

     1 X                                                                            t     t

   =        E(i),(iv)                    вҲ’ t + t вҲ’ t Clip вҲҶОёn , cn                                                       (38)
     N n=1                  1        qt       q        q            q
          N                 t
                                        qnt

     1 X                       q                   t                          t t    t                   t     t

   =          E(i),(iv)            вҲ’           вҲҶОё n      +   E  (i),(iv)    qn q  вҲҶОё n вҲ’     Clip    вҲҶОё    ,
                                                                                                         n n c           (39)
     N n=1                     qt       qt
          N          t
                                qnt

     1 X                q                            t

   вүӨ        E(iv)           вҲ’           E  (i)  вҲҶОё   n        +
     N n=1              qt       qt
        N           t
     1 X             qn               t                     t     t

   +        E(iv)        E(i) вҲҶОёn вҲ’ Clip вҲҶОёn , cn                                                                        (40)
     N n=1           qt
          N          t
                                qnt

     1 X                q                            t

   вүӨ        E(iv)           вҲ’ t E(i) вҲҶОёn                      +
     N n=1              qt       q
        N          t
     1 X             qn               t                     t     t

   +       E(iv)         E (i)   вҲҶОё   n  вҲ’     Clip    вҲҶОё     ,
                                                            n n c                                                        (41)
     N n=1           qt
                                                                                                             ПҒ
          N                                                               N
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                       qnt E(i) вҲҘвҲҶОёnt вҲҘ
                     t
                                qnt

     1 X                q                            t
                                                                     1 X
   вүӨ        E(iv)           вҲ’ t E(i) вҲҶОёn                       +              E(iv)                   ПҒвҲ’1          .     (42)
     N n=1              qt       q                                  N n=1              qt       (ctn )


The equality (35) is due to E(iii) (ztn ) = E(iii) zМғtn = 0. The equality (36) is due to E(ii) btn = qnt .

The inequality (40) is due to triangle inequality. The inequality (42) is due to the clipping bias
lemma (Das et al., 2023) given any ПҒ > 1.
We next further simplify the first and second terms on the right-hand side of (42).


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first term equals zero:
                          t
                               qnt

                          q                      t

                 E(iv)       вҲ’       E (i)  вҲҶОё  n
                          qt   qt
                                                   qt

                                ПҒ
                 = E(i) вҲҶОёnt        E(iv) 1 вҲ’ nt                                                (43)
                                                    q
                                    пЈ«                                             пЈ¶
                                                                        t

                                ПҒ      X                              q
                 = E(i) вҲҶОёnt                 Pr (Пөn = ПөМӮi ) E(iv) 1 вҲ’ nt Пөn = ПөМӮi пЈё

                                    пЈӯ                                                           (44)
                                                                      q
                                      iвҲҲ[N ]
                                    пЈ«                            пЈ¶
                                            X                t

                                ПҒ      1                  qМӮ
                 = E(i) вҲҶОёnt                         1 вҲ’ it пЈё

                                    пЈӯ                                                           (45)
                                      N                   q
                                           iвҲҲ[N ]
                                    пЈ«                             пЈ¶
                                            X                 t

                                ПҒ      1                   q
                 = E(i) вҲҶОёnt                          1 вҲ’ nt пЈё

                                    пЈӯ                                                           (46)
                                      N                    q
                                           nвҲҲ[N ]

                                                     qt N

                                ПҒ      1
                 = E(i) вҲҶОёnt                 NвҲ’ t                = 0.                           (47)
                                      N               q

Equality (43) is due to the independency of randomness between (i) and (iv). Equality (45) is
because of our assumption that the sampling from Pn and of Пөn is independent. Equality (47) is
        PN
because n=1 qnt = q t .
The second term on the right-hand side of (42) can be further simplified into:
                                       ПҒ
                                           !
                    qnt E(i) вҲҘвҲҶОёnt вҲҘ
             E(iv)               ПҒвҲ’1
                     qt    (ctn )
                                                           !
                          t ПҒ
                                           qnt      1
              = E(i) вҲҶОёn          E(iv)                                                         (48)
                                           q t (ctn )ПҒвҲ’1
                                  пЈ«                                                     !пЈ¶
                                                                    t
                             ПҒ       X                            qn       1
              = E(i) вҲҶОёnt

                                  пЈӯ        Pr (Пөn = ПөМӮi ) E(iv)                 Пөn = ПөМӮi пЈё      (49)
                                                                  q t (ctn )ПҒвҲ’1
                                    iвҲҲ[N ]
                                  пЈ«                           пЈ¶
                             ПҒ       1   X qМӮ t          1
                                                i
              = E(i) вҲҶОёnt

                                  пЈӯ                           пЈё                                 (50)
                                    N          q t (cМӮti )ПҒвҲ’1
                                        iвҲҲ[N ]
                                  пЈ«                            пЈ¶
                             ПҒ       1   X qt             1
                                                  n
              = E(i) вҲҶОёnt

                                  пЈӯ                            пЈё.                               (51)
                                    N           q t (ctn )ПҒвҲ’1
                                        nвҲҲ[N ]


Equality (48) is due to the independency of randomness between (i) and (iv). Equality (49) is because
of our assumption that the sampling from Pn and of Пөn is independent. Combining (42), (47), and
(51), Thm. 3 is proved.

A.6     E XTENDED BACKGROUND

A.6.1    S OME U SEFUL L EMMAS FROM P RIOR W ORKS

Lemma 2. [Clipping bias (Das et al., 2023) Suppose П•(Оҫ) (where Оҫ denotes the source of ran-
domness) is an unbiased estimator of П•, i.e., EОҫ (П•(Оҫ)) = П•. Let b(Оҫ) denote the clipping bias of
Clip (П•(Оҫ), c), i.e., b(c) = вҲҘП• вҲ’ EОҫ (Clip (П•(Оҫ), c))вҲҘ. Then for any ПҒ > 1,
                                                            ПҒ
                                                 EОҫ (вҲҘП•(Оҫ)вҲҘ )
                                        b(c) вүӨ                .                                 (52)
                                                     cПҒвҲ’1

                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.6.2    D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY
Definition 1 ((Пө, Оҙ)-DP Dwork et al. (2014)). The randomized algorithm A : ПҮ вҶ’ R with domain
ПҮ and range R satisfies (Пө, Оҙ)-DP iff for any two neighboring inputs D, DвҖІ вҲҲ ПҮ that differ by at most
one record, and any measurable subset of outputs S вҠҶ R,
                             Pr (A(D) вҲҲ S) вүӨ eПө Pr (A(DвҖІ ) вҲҲ S) + Оҙ.                            (53)

In (53), the privacy budget Пө вҲҲ R+ controls the extent to which the output distributions induced by
two neighboring inputs may differ. The Оҙ вҲҲ [0, 1] quantifies the probability of violating the privacy
guarantee. Allowing a larger Оҙ вҲҲ [0, 1] improves utility at the cost of a more relaxed (weaker)
privacy guarantee. One way to relax the DP guarantee is to use (Оұ, Пө)-ReМҒnyi DP (RDP) (Mironov,
2017). The Оұ > 1 is the order of ReМҒnyi divergence between distributions P := Pr (A(D)) and
P вҖІ := Pr (A(DвҖІ )), defined as
                                                                 Оұ
                                       вҖІ       1                 P
                             RОұ ( P вҲҘ P ) :=       log ExвҲјP вҖІ          .                         (54)
                                             1вҲ’Оұ                 PвҖІ
  While the ReМҒnyi divergence can be defined for Оұ < 1, including negative orders, the RDP defini-
tion Mironov (2017) is based on Оұ вүҘ 1 and is outlined as follows.
Definition 2 (ReМҒnyi DP (RDP) Mironov (2017)). The randomized algorithm A : ПҮ вҶ’ R with
domain ПҮ and range R is (Оұ, Пө)-RDP iff for any neighboring inputs D, DвҖІ вҲҲ ПҮ, we have
                                RОұ ( Pr (A(D))вҲҘ Pr (A(DвҖІ ))) вүӨ Пө.                               (55)

When accounting for total privacy consumption over an iterative algorithm, RDP offers a smoother
composition property than DP. RDP allows the privacy budget to accumulate linearly with the num-
ber of training rounds (Mironov, 2017). This simplifies the tracking and management of privacy
budgets over time. We next recall a lemma from (Mironov, 2017). Lemma 3 shows how RDP can
be converted to DP when needed.
Lemma 3. If A is an (Оұ, Пөrdp )-RDP algorithm, it also satisfies (Пө, Оҙ)-DP for any 0 < Оҙ < 1, where
                                               Оұ вҲ’ 1 log Оҙ + log Оұ
                              Пө = Пөrdp + log        вҲ’              .                            (56)
                                                 Оұ       ОұвҲ’1

To implement privacy guarantees, we use the sampled Gaussian mechanism (SGM) Mironov et al.
(2019), formally defined as follows.
Definition 3 (SGM Mironov et al. (2019)). Consider the algorithm A which maps a subset D вҠҶ ПҮ
to Rw and has в„“2 -sensitivity c. The sampled Gaussian mechanism parameterized by the sampling
rate q вҲҲ [0, 1], c, and noise multiplier Пғ > 0 is defined as
           GПғ,c,q (D) := A({x | x вҲҲ D is sampled with Probability q}) + N (0, c2 Пғ 2 Iw ),      (57)
where each element of D is (Poisson) sampled independently at random with probability q, and
N (0, c2 Пғ 2 Iw ) is spherical w-dimensional Gaussian noise with per-coordinate variance c2 Пғ 2 .
Lemma 4 (Mironov et al. (2019)). The SGM GПғ,c,q with c = 1 guarantees (Оұ, Пө)-RDP, where
        2
Пө вүӨ 2Оұq
     Пғ2 .


A.7     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We conduct our experiments in Python 3.11 using Pytorch leveraging the 4 Г— L4 24 GB GPU.
Below, we provide additional details on the experimental setups used in Sec. 5 to analyze how our
time-adaptive DP-FL framework enhances the privacy-utility tradeoff and in Appendix A.8 which
extends experiments for further analysis.
Details on Datasets. For our experiments, we use FMNIST, MNIST, Adult Income, and CIFAR10
datasets. Both FMNIST and MNIST datasets have a training set of 60,000 and a test set of 10,000
28 Г— 28 images, associated with 10 labels. The Adult Income dataset consists of 48,842 samples
with 14 features and is split into a training set of 32,561 samples and a test set of 16,281 samples.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The CIFAR10 dataset consists of 60,000 32 Г— 32 color images in 10 classes, with 6000 images per
class. There are 50,000 training images and 10,000 test images.
Simulation Parameters. Throughout our simulations, we use SGD optimizer and momentum equal
to 0.9. We also use a CosineAnnealing learning rate scheduler from (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016)
for faster convergence. In Sec.5, we fix the spending-based sample rate (during spend mode) to
q = 0.9 and the average clipping norm to c = 250. We consider the transition from saving round to
spending round occurs in the middle of training. I.e., given the total number of rounds T = 25, we
set Tgroup,1 = Tgroup,2 , Tgroup,3 = 13. The obtained results are averaged over three runs. In Table 4
we summarize other hyperparameters, including learning rate (О»), number of clients (N ), batch size
(B), number of local epochs (L), and the saving-based sampling rates of clients from privacy groups
1, 2, and 3 (qgroup,1 , qgroup,2 , qgroup,3 ).

Table 4: Parameters for different datasets, used in Table 2 and Figure 2. We set T = 25, Tgroup,1 =
Tgroup,2 , Tgroup,3 = 13, q = 0.9, and c = 250.

  Dataset                (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 )            О»        N         B          L    (qgroup,1 , qgroup,2 , qgroup,3 )

  FMNIST                 (10, 20, 30)                                 0.001 100          125        30   (0.5, 0.6, 0.7)
  MNIST                  (10, 15, 20)                                 0.001 100          125        30   (0.5, 0.6, 0.7)
  Adult Income           (10, 20, 30)                                 0.01 80            32         5    (0.6, 0.7, 0.8)


                                                       1.50
                                                                                   Time Adaptive DP-FL
                               Average Training Loss


                                                       1.25                        IDP-FedAvg

                                                       1.00
                                                       0.75
                                                       0.50
                                                       0.25
                                                              0   5       10    15        20       25
                                                                            Rounds
Figure 3: Average Training loss of clients in our time-adaptive DP-FL scheme plotted ver-
sus the IDP-FedAvg baseline with FMNIST dataset in training rounds T = 25. We set
(Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (10, 20, 30) in our scheme and IDP-FedAvg.

A.8    E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Impact of Training Rounds on Model Convergence. We extend experiments to more training
roundsвҖ” T вҲҲ {25, 50, 100}. For example, in Figure 4, we set T = 50, and plot the global test
accuracy vs. communication rounds. It is evident from Figure 4 that for our time-adaptive DP-
FL framework, as the number of training rounds increases, the upward trend in the accuracy starts
slowing down. However, increasing the number of communication rounds does not always improve
accuracy. This is because, with more rounds, the privacy budget is distributed across more rounds,
resulting in a lower budget per round. Consequently, the increased effect of perturbation can degrade
the privacy-utility tradeoff. This is demonstrated in our FMNIST and MNIST experiments, as shown
in Table 5, in which we report the final-round test accuracy across different schemes. As shown in
the third column of Table 5, when training rounds increase from 25 to 50 and from 50 to 100, Fe-
dAvg (the non-DP baseline scheme) consistently demonstrates an upward trend in both MNIST and
FMNIST experiments. However, our scheme (fifth column of Table 5) and IDP-FedAvg (fourth col-
umn), which operate under limited group privacy budgets (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (10, 20, 30),
do not exhibit the same consistent improvement. They exhibit an upward trend from 25 to 50 rounds
but not consistently from 50 to 100 rounds. Notably, the best performance amongst the DP ex-
periments of Table 5) is achieved by our scheme, reaching 75.63% after T = 100 rounds for the
FMNIST dataset, and 90.78% at T = 50 rounds for the MNIST dataset.
Impact of Different Privacy Budgets on Model Utility. We present additional experimental results
to evaluate the impact of stricter privacy budgets (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (2, 5, 10) and (5, 5, 5)


                                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                      Time Adaptive DP-FL
                                                  80


                           Global Test Accuracy
                                                  60
                                                  40
                                                  20
                                                       0          10       20     30         40       50
                                                                             Rounds
Figure 4: Global test accuracy for increasing number of communication rounds. In this figure,
we use the FMNIST dataset, N = 100 clients, L = 30 local iterations, (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) =
(20, 20, 20), c = 250, and q = 0.8.

Table 5: Benchmarking our time-adaptive DP-FL scheme against the baselines in terms of
global test accuracy and across varying datasets and number of training rounds (T). We set
(Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (10, 20, 30) in our scheme and IDP-FedAvg.

                        Dataset                            T           FedAvg        IDP-FedAvg             Ours
                                                                       (non-DP)
                                                            25          72.95           62.57               66.55
                       FMNIST
                                                            50          76.00           71.80               75.51
                                                           100          80.14           71.29               75.63
                                                            25          90.23           64.53               74.69
                        MNIST
                                                            50          93.42           89.57               90.78
                                                           100          95.91           87.00               90.15

                                                  80
                                                               Time Adaptive DP-FL
                           Global Test Accuracy


                                                               IDP-FedAvg
                                                  60

                                                  40

                                                  20
                                                       0          10       20     30         40       50
                                                                             Rounds
Figure 5: Test accuracy for our time-adaptive DP-FL framework vs. IDP-FedAvg, using
stricter privacy budgets (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (2, 5, 10). In this figure, we use N = 100
clients, T = 50 global rounds, L = 30 local iterations, c = 250, and q = 0.8.


on model utility (test accuracy). The results are presented in Figure 5 and Tables 6 and 7. As
expected, we observe that lower privacy budgets hamper utility. In particular, in Table 6, we bench-
mark our scheme against the IDP-FedAvg baseline using two sets of non-uniform privacy budgets,
(10, 20, 30) and (2, 5, 10), evaluated across two datasets. Our findings suggest that the time-adaptive
DP-FL framework yields considerably higher utility than IDP-FedAvg, also under stringent privacy
constraints. Similarly, Table 7 focuses on uniform privacy budgets and further confirms that even
with a reduction in privacy budgets from (10, 10, 10) to (5, 5, 5), our scheme consistently outper-
forms the corresponding baselines.
Additional Baseline. We benchmark our scheme against the adaptive clipping method Andrew et al.
(2021), with pseudocode provided in Algorithm 6. We present results in the third and fifth columns
of Table 7. This baseline is designed for uniform privacy budgets and is parameterized by the server-
side learning rate О»s and momentum parameter ОІs , which are not privacy-specific. To ensure a fair
comparison with our scheme and other baselines in our paper, we set these parameters to О»s = 1.0


                                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Benchmarking our time-adaptive DP-FL scheme against the baselines in terms of the final-
round test accuracy and across varying privacy budgets (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ). We set T = 25 and
L = 30 for Пө = {10, 20, 30} and T = 25 and L = 50 for Пө = {2, 5, 10}, (qgroup,1 , qgroup,2 , qgroup,3 ) =
(0.3, 0.5, 0.7).

                   Dataset        Privacy Budgets          IDP-FedAvg       Ours
                                                           Non-uniform      Non-uniform
                   FMNIST           (10, 20, 30)              62.57            66.55
                   FMNIST            (2, 5, 10)               60.99            65.75
                   MNIST            (10, 20, 30)              64.53            77.38
                   MNIST             (2, 5, 10)               63.35            66.50

Table 7: Benchmarking our time-adaptive DP-FL scheme against the baselines in terms of the final-
round test accuracy and across varying uniform privacy budgets Пөgroup,1 = Пөgroup,2 = Пөgroup,3 . We set
T = 25 and L = 30.

   Dataset      Privacy           Adaptive Clipping          DP-FedAvg       Adaptive Clipping      Ours
                Budgets           (ОІs , О»s ) = (0, 1.0)                      optimal (ОІs , О»s )
  FMNIST        (10, 10, 10)             60.23                   64.8              67.64           67.90
  FMNIST          (5, 5, 5)              52.39                  51.06              52.39           60.79
  MNIST         (10, 10, 10)             65.59                  76.79              78.04            80.2
  MNIST           (5, 5, 5)              55.48                  61.45              55.48           69.07


and ОІs = 0.0. In column 3, we use these default values, while in column 5, we select the optimal
values from a set of possible choices. As shown in the table, our scheme consistently outperforms
adaptive clipping, even when the baselineвҖҷs parameters are optimally tuned.
Effect of Number of Clients on Model Utility. We experiment with different numbers of clientsвҖ”
N вҲҲ {30, 60, 75}вҖ”for the MNIST dataset to validate the applicability of our time-adaptive DP-
FL framework across various scenarios. Additionally, we also perform experiments to analyze if
our framework outperforms the baselines, in terms of the utility of the trained model. Our results
in Table 8 indicate that for all the different numbers of clients that we consider, our framework
remarkably surpasses the utility of the baseline.

Table 8: Comparison of model utility on a varying number of clients and comparison of model utility
for time-adaptive DP-FL with baselines for a varying number of clients

              Number of clients        SETUP                  IDP-FedAvg       Ours
                                       Privacy Budgets        Non-uniform      Non-uniform
                      30                 (10, 20, 30)            72.35            73.34
                      60                 (10, 20, 30)            78.69            83.83
                      75                 (10, 20, 30)            70.93            77.53

The Choice of Hyperparameters. We evaluate our DP-FL framework with different choices
of hyperparametersвҖ”different saving-based sampling rates (qgroup,1 , qgroup,2 , qgroup,3 ) and different
saving-to-spending transition rounds (Tgroup,1 , Tgroup,2 , Tgroup,3 ). The final-round test accuracies for
different choices of (qgroup,1 , qgroup,2 , qgroup,3 ), and across both MNIST and FMNIST datasets, are
presented in Table 9. In this table, in Column 3 we set these rates as (0.5,0.6,0.7), in Column 4
as (0.3, 0.5, 0.7), and in Column 5 as (0.6, 0.6, 0.6). As shown in the table, our scheme, which
uses lower sampling rates during savingвҖ”e.g., for all i вҲҲ [3], qgroup,1 is smaller than q = 0.9 in
this tableвҖ”outperforms the IDP-FedAvg baseline (Column 6) that uses a uniform sampling rate q
over time. This table also shows that our method is relatively robust against the clientsвҖҷ choice of
saving-based sampling rates, consistently achieving performance between that of IDP-FedAvg and
the ideal case of FedAvg without DP (Column 2).


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Evaluating the impact of saving-based sampling rates of different privacy groups,
(qgroup,1 , qgroup,2 , qgroup,3 ), on our time-adaptive DP-FL scheme in comparison with the baseline. We
set (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (10, 20, 30), T = 25, L = 30 and N = 100, Tgroup,1 = Tgroup,2 =
Tgroup,3 = 13, q = 0.9, c = 250, О» = 0.001, and B = 125.

        DATASET         FedAvg          Ours                   Ours                  Ours           IDP-FedAvg
                        non-DP     (0.5, 0.6, 0.7)        (0.3, 0.5, 0.7)       (0.6, 0.6, 0.6)

         MNIST          90.23           72.72                 77.39                 71.6              64.53
        FMNIST          72.95           70.57                 66.55                 67.75             62.57



The final-round test accuracies for different choices of saving-to-spending transition rounds
(Tgroup,1 , Tgroup,2 , Tgroup,3 ), for both MNIST and FMNIST datasets, are presented in Table 10. We
set the total number of rounds as T = 25. In this table, in Column 3 we set the transition rounds as
(7,7,7), in Column 4 as (7, 13, 19), in Column 5 as (19, 13, 7), and in Column 6 as (19, 19, 19). As
shown in the table, our scheme, which transitions from saving to spend mode sometime between the
first and final roundвҖ”i.e., for all i вҲҲ [3], 1 < Tgroup,1 < 25вҖ”outperforms the IDP-FedAvg baseline
(Column 7) which can be viewed as a special case of ours with transition rounds set to (1, 1, 1). This
table shows the robustness of our method to the clientвҖҷs choice of transition rounds, showing less
than a 2% variation in accuracy across different choices while consistently achieving performance
between that of IDP-FedAvg and the ideal-case of FedAvg without DP (Column 2).

Table 10: Evaluating the impact of saving-to-spending transition rounds of different privacy
groups, (Tgroup,1 , Tgroup,2 , Tgroup,3 ), on our time-adaptive DP-FL scheme in comparison with the
baseline. We set (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (10, 20, 30), T = 25, L = 30, N = 100,
(qgroup,1 , qgroup,2 , qgroup,3 ) = (0.3, 0.5, 0.7), q = 0.9, c = 250, О» = 0.001, and B = 125.

      DATASET        FedAvg        Ours            Ours              Ours               Ours          IDP-FedAvg
                     non-DP      (7, 7, 7)      (7, 13, 19)       (19, 13, 7)        (19, 19, 19)

       MNIST          90.23       74.38           74.69               72.24             73.88           64.53
      FMNIST          72.95       66.72           65.29               65.34             67.5            62.57


Experiments on The CIFAR10 Dataset. We run experiments on the CIFAR10 dataset. The final-
round test accuracies of our time-adaptive DP-FL framework in comparison with the FedAvg (non-
DP) and IDP-FedAvg baselines are presented in Table 11. The results suggest that our proposed
approach surpasses IDP-FedAvg, by lowering the gap to the ideal case of FedAvg by about 9%. We
note that the test accuracies reported for all schemes in this table are relatively lower than those we
reported earlier in this paper for the MNIST, FMNIST, and Adult Income datasets. We hypothe-
size that this happens due to the increased complexity of the CIFAR10 dataset, particularly when
distributed in a non-iid manner in an FL setting with N = 100 clients.

Table 11: Benchmarking our time-adaptive DP-FL framework against the baselines using the CI-
FAR10 dataset. We set (Пөgroup,1 , Пөgroup,2 , Пөgroup,3 ) = (100, 50, 25), T = 50, L = 30, N = 100,
(qgroup,1 , qgroup,2 , qgroup,3 ) = (0.5, 0.5, 0.5), q = 0.9, c = 250, О» = 0.001, and B = 125.

                           DATASET           FedAvg         IDP-FedAvg           Ours
                              CIFAR10        44.42              34.97            35.41


                                                       25
