Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DATA C ENTER C OOLING S YSTEM O PTIMIZATION
U SING O FFLINE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
  Xianyuan Zhan1,2∗ † , Xiangyu Zhu1∗ , Peng Cheng1 , Xiao Hu1 , Ziteng He1 , Hanfei Geng1 ,
 Jichao Leng1 , Huiwen Zheng3 , Chenhui Liu3 , Tianshun Hong3 , Yan Liang3 ,
 Yunxin Liu1,2† , Feng Zhao1†
 1
   Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
 2
   Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Global Data Solutions Co., Ltd.
 {zhanxianyuan, liuyunxin}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn, fz@alum.mit.edu



                                               A BSTRACT
             The recent advances in information technology and artificial intelligence have
             fueled a rapid expansion of the data center (DC) industry worldwide, accompanied
             by an immense appetite for electricity to power the DCs. In a typical DC, around
             30∼40% of the energy is spent on the cooling system rather than on computer
             servers, posing a pressing need for developing new energy-saving optimization
             technologies for DC cooling systems. However, optimizing such real-world in-
             dustrial systems faces numerous challenges, including but not limited to a lack of
             reliable simulation environments, limited historical data, and stringent safety and
             control robustness requirements. In this work, we present a novel physics-informed
             offline reinforcement learning (RL) framework for energy efficiency optimization
             of DC cooling systems. The proposed framework models the complex dynam-
             ical patterns and physical dependencies inside a server room using a purposely
             designed graph neural network architecture that is compliant with the fundamental
             time-reversal symmetry. Because of its well-behaved and generalizable state-action
             representations, the model enables sample-efficient and robust latent space offline
             policy learning using limited real-world operational data. Our framework has been
             successfully deployed and verified in a large-scale production DC for closed-loop
             control of its air-cooling units (ACUs). We conducted a total of 2000 hours of short
             and long-term experiments in the production DC environment. The results show
             that our method achieves 14∼21% energy savings in the DC cooling system, with-
             out any violation of the safety or operational constraints. We have also conducted a
             comprehensive evaluation of our approach in a real-world DC testbed environment.
             Our results have demonstrated the significant potential of offline RL in solving a
             broad range of data-limited, safety-critical real-world industrial control problems.

1       I NTRODUCTION
With the surge of demands in information technology (IT) and artificial intelligence (AI) in recent
decades, data centers (DCs) have quickly emerged as crucial infrastructures in modern society. Along
with the rapid growth of the DC industry, comes immense energy and water consumption. In 2022,
the global DC electricity consumption was estimated to be 240∼340 TWh, accounting for around
1∼1.3% of global electricity demand (International Energy Agency, 2023). It is forecasted that
by 2026, the DC energy consumption in the US will rise to approximately 6% of the country’s
total power usage (International Energy Agency, 2024). To deal with the considerable amount of
heat generated from servers and achieve temperature regulation, cooling systems typically account
for about 30∼40% of total energy consumption in large-scale DCs (Van Heddeghem et al., 2014).
Compared to server-side energy consumption that is primarily spent on computational tasks, reducing
cooling energy consumption offers greater practical value for energy saving. How to improve the
energy efficiency of DC’s cooling systems while ensuring thermal safety requirements has become a
critical problem for the DC industry, which has great economic and environmental impacts.
    * Equal contribution.
    †
        Corresponding authors.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Illustration of the DC floor-level cooling system and temperature fields under different server loads.

In typical DCs, cold water generated from chillers and evaporative cooling towers is sent to multiple
air-cooling units (ACUs) in the server rooms to provide cold air for servers. Properly controlling these
ACUs in the server room is a challenging industrial control task. The difficulties arise from several
aspects. First, frequently changing sever loads and physical locations of servers produce complex
and dynamic temperature fields inside the server room (see Figure 1 as an illustration). Reaching
the maximum degree of energy saving requires joint control of multiple ACUs in a way that is fully
load-aware and capable of capturing complex thermal dynamics. Second, commercial DCs have very
strict thermal safety and operational requirements, making it quite challenging to strike the right
balance between energy efficiency and thermal safety. Lastly, due to the complex thermal dynamics
of the cooling system, it becomes exceptionally hard to build high-fidelity and scalable simulators.
Although there are many efforts (Chen et al., 2019; Ran et al., 2022a;b; Mahbod et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2019; Chervonyi et al., 2022) that tried to build simulation environments based
on techniques such as computational fluid dynamics (CFD) or multi-physics simulation, they suffer
from nuanced system identification and calibration, while still having unavoidable large sim-to-real
gaps. This makes the control policies learned using simulation-based online reinforcement learning
(RL) methods hardly deployable in real-world DCs. Until now, most DCs still use conventional
semi-automatic control methods, such as local Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) controllers
for each ACU, which are manually tuned based on the expertise of human operators and operate
conservatively to prevent overheating.
The recently emerged offline RL approach (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Zhan et al., 2022a) has provided an
attractive data-driven and simulator-free solution to overcome the above-mentioned drawbacks. It
offers a new possibility to learn policies directly from the historical operational data of DC cooling
systems, and leverage highly expressive deep neural networks to overcome the low expressiveness
and scalability issues in conventional PID (Durand-Estebe et al., 2013) and model predictive control
(MPC) (Lazic et al., 2018; Mirhoseininejad et al., 2021; Ogawa et al., 2013) approaches. However,
most existing offline RL algorithms require large amounts of training data with sufficient state-
action space coverage to learn reasonable policies, otherwise will suffer from severe performance
degradation (Li et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2023). By contrast, although monitored by a large number of
sensors, the historical operational data from real-world DC cooling systems are limited as compared
to control complexity, and the data coverage is also quite narrow as they are generated from existing
conventional controllers. This reality poses stringent requirements on the out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization and small-sample learning capability for a deployable offline RL model.
In this paper, we develop a physics-informed offline RL framework for energy-efficient DC cool-
ing control. Specifically, we construct a special dynamics model to capture the complex thermal
dynamics inside the server room, based on fundamental time-reversal symmetry (T-symmetry) compli-
ance (Lamb & Roberts, 1998; Cheng et al., 2023) and graph neural network (GNN) (Kipf & Welling,
2017) architecture that embeds domain knowledge. Based on the well-behaved and generalizable
latent representations provided by the model, we develop a sample-efficient offline RL algorithm,
which learns and maximizes the value function in the latent space, while regularizing the agreement
of policy-induced samples to both offline data distribution and T-symmetry consistency. The resulting
algorithm enjoys great OOD generalization capability and is particularly effective given the limited
real-world data availability.
Based on the proposed offline RL framework, we also developed a deployment-friendly system to
facilitate real-world validation. Our system has been successfully deployed and verified in a real-


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


world large-scale commercial data center, achieving closed-loop control of its ACUs. Real-world
validation experiments demonstrate that our system achieves 14-21% energy savings in the DC
cooling system without violating any safety or operational constraints during a total of 2000 hours of
short and long-term experiments. As production DC facilities do not tolerate any safety violations, we
also build a real-world small-scale DC testbed environment (with 22 servers and an ACU) to fully
evaluate and compare our approach against existing methods. Through comprehensive comparative
experiments, our approach proves to be safe, effective, and robust as compared to other baseline
methods. Last but not least, our approach has values not restricted to the scope of data center cooling,
but also broadly applicable to other data-limited, safety-critical industrial control scenarios.


2    BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

Data center cooling control optimization. The cooling loop of typical DCs consists of water-side
and air-side sub-systems. The former cools water with chillers and evaporative cooling towers, while
the latter circulates the cold water to ACUs on the server floors. Through air-water heat exchange,
the cooled air is blown out from the ACUs, regulating the air temperature in the server room. The
generated warm water is then sent back to the chillers and cooling towers for re-cooling. In this
study, we focus on the air-side cooling in the server room (also called floor-level cooling (Lazic et al.,
2018)), where the primary goal is to optimize the fan speed (control the airflow) and valve opening
(control the amount of cold water supply) in multiple ACUs, in order to achieve energy saving while
meeting the room temperature requirements and ensuring thermal safety.
Traditional air-side cooling control methods include the local PID control (Durand-Estebe et al.,
2013), the two-stage method (Lazic et al., 2018; Mirhoseininejad et al., 2021; Ogawa et al., 2013;
Garcia-Gabin et al., 2018), and expert-based control (Gao & Jamidar, 2014). Specifically, local PID
control relies on local sensor feedback to regulate the fan speed and valve opening of each individual
ACU based on PID controllers, which is only applicable to small-scale control problems and unable
to jointly optimize numerous ACUs. Two-stage methods first build a mechanism model and then
apply optimization methods (such as MPC or linear quadratic control) to solve the cooling control
problem based on the model. Both local PID and two-stage methods lack sufficient expressive power
to capture complex state-action and dynamics patterns, and do not scale effectively with increasing
problem size. Expert-based control leverages the experience and expertise of human operators to
manage ACU cooling, requiring significant human labor and lacking transferability to different DC
cooling systems. Recently, there have been many attempts to use online reinforcement learning
(RL) to solve the DC cooling optimization problem (Chen et al., 2019; Ran et al., 2022b;a; Mahbod
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2019; Chervonyi et al., 2022; An et al., 2023). However,
these studies are restricted to simulation-based policy learning and validation. For a safety-critical
industrial control scenario like DC cooling, it is nearly impossible to interact with real systems during
policy training, and building a high-fidelity simulator can be very costly and impractical. This makes
the previous online RL methods hardly have any success in real-world deployment.
Offline reinforcement learning. Offline RL aims to solve a sequential decision-making problem
formulated by a Markov Decision Process (MDP), solely using a fixed offline dataset D. The MDP is
typically defined by a tuple (S, A, T, r, γ) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), where S and A denote the state
and action spaces, respectively. T (st+1 |st , at ) denotes the transition dynamics. r(st , at ) denotes the
                                                                                             ∗
reward function. γ is the discount factor. Our goal is to learn an optimized   P∞policy π (s) based on
dataset D to maximize the discounted cumulative return, i.e., R(π) = E[ t=0 γ t r(st , at )].
Under the offline setting, evaluating the RL value function in OOD regions can produce falsely
optimistic values. Such exploitation errors can quickly build up during Bellman updates, eventually
leading to severe value overestimation and misguiding policy learning. Hence most offline RL
methods adopt various forms of data-related regularization schemes to stabilize policy learning,
such as adding explicit or implicit behavioral constraints (Kumar et al., 2019; Fujimoto et al., 2019;
Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Li et al., 2022; 2023; Mao et al., 2024b), value regularization (Kumar et al.,
2020; Xu et al., 2022c; Bai et al., 2021; Zhan et al., 2022b; Lyu et al., 2022; Niu et al., 2022), or
adopt strict in-sample learning (Kostrikov et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022a;b; Wang et al., 2024; Mao
et al., 2024a). However, due to the exclusive use of strict data-related regularization, existing offline
RL methods often suffer from over-conservatism and poor OOD generalization performance (Li
et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2023), which greatly restricts their usability in most data-limited real-


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Illustration of the physics-informed offline RL framework for energy-efficient DC cooling control.


world control scenarios. The recently proposed T-symmetry regularized offline RL (TSRL) (Cheng
et al., 2023) relaxes the restrictive data-related constraints by leveraging the fundamental time-
reversal symmetry (i.e., the underlying laws of physics should not change under the time-reversal
transformation: t → −t), which significantly outperforms existing offline RL algorithms in terms
of data efficiency and OOD generalization. Inspired by TSRL, we develop a new physics-informed
offline RL framework and a system tailored to solving real-world complex, data-limited industrial
control problems, such as DC cooling system optimization.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
In this study, we develop a physics-informed offline RL framework and a system to solve the DC
cooling control optimization problem. We first mathematically formulate the problem into a standard
MDP, with a specifically designed safety-aware reward function to ensure thermal-safe cooling
control. The core component of our framework is a T-symmetry enforced Thermal Dynamics Model
(TTDM), with a specifically designed GNN architecture to embed domain knowledge of spatial and
control dependencies among sensors and ACUs. This model provides well-behaved and generalizable
representations, enabling data-efficient and robust offline policy learning in the latent space. Based on
the proposed offline RL framework, we also built an ACU control system that successfully deployed
it in real-world DC environments. The overall framework of our method is illustrated in Figure 2.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND R EWARD D ESIGN

As illustrated in Figure 1a, typical DC floor-level cooling systems involve several rows of server
racks, flanked by two air handling rooms (AHRs) on each side, each containing 5 to 6 ACUs that blow
cold air into the server rooms. The server racks are arranged with hot and cold aisles, utilizing hot (or
cold) aisle containment. Temperature and humidity sensors are distributed throughout the aisles for
overheating monitoring. The fan speed and valve opening can be controlled for each ACU to achieve
desirable temperature regulation. However, commercial DCs have strict temperature requirements,
improper control could cause cold aisle temperatures to exceed the safety threshold and negatively
impact server operations. To solve this problem, we formulate it into a MDP with states, actions, and
a reward function designed as follows:
States. The states of our problem s = {ss , sa , se } contain three types of sensor inputs, including
temperature and humidity sensor readings within the hot and cold aisles, and server rack temperature
sensor readings, denoted as ss ; the working states of ACUs, such as leaving water temperature (LWT),
leaving air temperature (LAT), and entering air temperature (EAT), denoted as sa ; and lastly, as


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the entering water temperature (EWT) of each ACU and the server power consumption cannot be
manipulated or controlled by the floor-level cooling system, they are considered as external factors,
denoted as se . For real-world DC server rooms, the state vector s typically has around 80 dimensions
after feature engineering, collected at 2 to 5-minute intervals.
Actions. The action a consists of the controllable variables for all ACUs in the server room,
specifically the fan speed fm (control the airflow) and valve opening om (control the amount of water)
for each ACU m. For a server room with 11 ACUs, the complete action vector has 22 dimensions.
Safety-aware reward function. We design a reward function to balance energy saving and
temperature regulation, taking into account both the operational parameters of the ACUs and the
environmental factors within the cooling system. For an actual ACU m, high fan speed fm directly
increases its power consumption, as the fan power consumption is proportional to the cube of the
fan speed. On the other hand, a large valve opening om could also marginally increase the energy
consumption on the water-side sub-system. However, increasing fan speed and valve opening also
improves the ACU’s cooling effect, hence there is a complex trade-off. In terms of temperature
safety constraints, our primary concern is whether the cold aisle temperature (CAT) Tcn monitored
by the corresponding temperature sensor n violates the safety threshold ρT . Additionally, for safety
considerations and in consultation with on-site engineers’ experience, we also regulate the LAT Tlm
of ACU m below a predefined threshold ρL . The resulting reward function is thus designed as:
             M
             X              N
                            X                                   M
                                                                X              M
                                                                               X
                    3
r = r0 −β1         fm −β2         ln (1 + exp (Tcn − ρT ))−β3         om −β4         ln (1 + exp (Tlm − ρL ))
             m=1            n=1                                 m=1            m=1
                                                                                                      (1)
where r0 is a bias constant to keep the reward positive, M is the number of ACUs, and N is the
total number of temperature sensors in the cold aisles. Positive coefficients β1 , β2 , β3 , β4 are used
to weight the respective terms in the reward function, balancing energy saving optimization and
temperature regulation within the cooling system.

3.2   T- SYMMETRY E NFORCED T HERMAL DYNAMICS M ODEL

To extract robust and generalizable representations conducive to sample-efficient offline policy
learning, we construct a special T-symmetry enforced thermal dynamics model (TTDM) to model and
explain the fundamental thermal dynamics patterns inside the server room. More specifically, we start
by abstracting the cooling system into two coupled graph structures with corresponding adjacency
matrices as illustrated in Figure 2b. In this graph, each green node represents the ACU features sa
and a, corresponding to its working states and controllable actions (fan speeds and valve openings),
while each orange node represents sensor measurements ss . As nearby sensor readings often have
strong spatial correlation, while sensor readings themselves also have control dependencies on nearby
ACUs, hence we connect these two types of nodes with orange and green edges to reflect the spatial
and control dependencies respectively based on domain knowledge.
The detailed encoder-decoder architecture of TTDM is shown in Figure 2c. We design a state-action
encoder ϕ(s, a) that contains a pair of GCN blocks (Kipf & Welling, 2017), to capture the spatial
dependencies between sensor nodes (orange) and control dependencies across sensor nodes and ACU
nodes (green). The external factors se are integrated through a two-layer MLP to derive the final
embedded representations. From the encoder ϕ(s, a), we can obtain the latent representations of
the current state, action and next state zs , za , zs′ from data. To further enhance the reliability and
generalizability of the learned representations, we introduce a pair of ODE latent forward dynamics
f (zs , za ) = żs and reverse dynamics g(zs′ , za ) = −żs to enforce the T-symmetry consistency
(f (zs , za ) = −g(zs′ , za )). To learn this model, we design the following loss terms:
Reconstruction loss. As mentioned above, the state-action encoder ϕ(s, a) = (zs , za ) takes state-
action pairs as input and outputs their corresponding latent representations. We then use a pair of
state and action decoders ψs (zs ) and ψa (za ) to ensure that the learned representations can be mapped
back to the original data space:
                             ℓrec (s, a) = ∥s − ψs (zs )∥22 + ∥a − ψa (za )∥22                            (2)

Latent ODE forward and reverse dynamics. We utilize the similar approach in Cheng et al.
(2023) and Champion et al. (2019), embedding a discrete-time first-order ODE system to capture


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the latent forward dynamics f (zs , za ) = żs , and the reverse dynamics g(zs′ , za ) = −żs , where
żs = zs′ − zs . The reason that we model the latent dynamics as ODE systems is to encourage
learning parsimonious models (Champion et al., 2019), which enables the model to capture more
fundamental properties from the data, thereby helping avoid severe over-fitting that commonly occurs
in small-sample learning situations and maximally promotes generalization. Note that based on the
chain-rule, we can write żs = dz           ∂zs ds
                                    dt = ∂s · dt = ∇s zs · ṡ. Hence to enforce the ODE property, we
                                     s

can use the following loss to train f and g:
                                                          ∂ϕ(s, a)
            ℓf wd (s, a, s′ ) = ∥(∇s zs )ṡ − żs ∥22 = ∥          ṡ − f (ϕ(s, a))∥22               (3)
                                                             ∂s
                                                                  ∂ϕ(s′ , a)
            ℓrvs (s, a, s′ ) = ∥(∇s′ zs′ )(−ṡ) − (−żs )∥22 = ∥             (−ṡ) − g(ϕ(s′ , a))∥22 (4)
                                                                       ∂s′
Moreover, we also require the state decoder ψs (zs ) has the capability to decode ṡ from żs (i.e.,
ψs (żs ) = ṡ), to ensure it is compatible with the ODE property. This implies the following loss:
                                        ℓds (s, a, s′ ) = ∥ṡ − ψs (żs )∥22                         (5)
T-symmetry regularization. To obtain a well-behaved latent representation derived from ϕ, we
enforce an adapted version of T-symmetry for the discrete-time MDP setting (Cheng et al., 2023),
by constraining the two latent ODE dynamics to satisfy f (zs , za ) = −g(zs′ , za ). This leads to the
following T-symmetry consistency loss:
                                                                                2
                           ℓT -sym (zs , za ) = ∥f (zs , za ) + g(zs + f (zs , za ), za )∥2            (6)
Note that in above loss term, we leverage the fact zs = zs + żs = zs + f (zs , za ) and use g(zs +
                                                                ′

f (zs , za ), za ) instead of g(zs′ , za ) to further couple the learning process of f and g. We find this
treatment can better regulate the learning process of the latent ODE forward and reverse dynamics in
our empirical experiments.
Final learning objective. Finally, the complete loss function of TTDM is:
                             X
                LT T DM =           [ℓrec + ℓf wd + ℓrvs + ℓds + ℓT -sym ](s, a, s′ )                 (7)
                              (s,a,s′ )∈D


3.3   S AMPLE -E FFICIENT O FFLINE P OLICY O PTIMIZATION

We construct a highly sample-efficient offline RL algorithm for energy-efficient DC cooling control
by integrating the properties of the learned TTDM. The most notable benefit of leveraging TTDM
in offline policy learning lies in the well-behaved compact data representations produced by its
state-action encoder ϕ(s, a), which are both information-rich (capturing fundamental dynamics
information) and robust (well-regularized and T-symmetry preserving). This can greatly enhance
offline policy learning and generalization on OOD areas, crucial for the small-sample learning setting.
Consequently, instead of learning the action-value function in the original data space as in typical RL
algorithms, we learn our action-value function within the latent space (i.e., Q(zs , za )). This provides
more reliable value estimates even with limited offline data. Specifically, we update our Q-function
using the following objective with the safety-aware reward function defined in Eq. (1):
                                                                                         2
                                                             ′     ′
              Q = argmin E(s,a,s′ )∼D r(s, a) + γ Q̂ (ϕ (s , π (s ))) − Q(ϕ(s, a))                    (8)
                      Q

For policy optimization, we adopt a similar treatment as in TD3+BC (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021), where
we maximize the value function Q but in the latent space, and constrain the policy output actions
closer to actions within the dataset. However, solely adding the regularization to offline behavioral
data is insufficient to ensure reasonable generalization performance. Hence we further regularize
the T-symmetry consistency of policy-induced samples (s, π(s)) using the T-symmetry consistency
loss ℓT -sym as in Cheng et al. (2023). This enforces the policy to generate actions that are compliant
with T-symmetry, even in OOD areas, thereby greatly enhancing the generalization performance and
sample efficiency of policy learning. The final policy optimization objective is presented as follows:
           π = argmax E(s,a)∼D λα Q(ϕ(s, π(s))) − (π(s) − a)2 − ℓT -sym (ϕ(s, π(s)))

                                                                                                    (9)
                   π
                                                P
where we follow TD3+BC and use λα = α/[ si ,ai |Q(ϕ(s, a))|/N ] as the normalization term to
balance the strength of value maximization and policy regularization (N is the number of samples in
a training batch). We tuned the scale parameter α in the range of [2.5, 10] during our experiments.


                                                    6
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Table 1: Comparison of conventional PID control and our approach under comparable server load settings on
   two server rooms of the commercial DC. “AEP” and “EC” denote average electric power and energy consumption,
   respectively. We use the offline RL policy to control 4, 6, and all the ACUs in each room. ACLF is the air-side
   cooling load factor, calculated as the ratio of energy consumption of ACUs to servers, the lower the better.

                              PID                                 Ours (4 ACUs)                       Ours (6 ACUs)    Ours (all ACUs)
Server Room A
                    May 5th         May 6th         May 7th             May 8th         May 9th       Sep 23 11:00 -   Nov 11 16:30 -
                  11:00 - 17:30   09:50 - 17:20   11:00 - 17:30       09:50 - 17:20   09:50 - 17:20    Sep 29 10:30    Nov 12 16:30
Server AEP (kW)      555.31         552.17          548.61              549.28          550.19           572.77            577.63
Server EC (kWh)     3610.15         4141.34         3566.65             4120.42         4127.38         82199.92          13864.55
ACU AEP (kW)          24.53           23.82           19.9                20.19           20.00           20.78            19.66
ACU EC (kWh)         159.42          178.73          129.24              151.44          149.97          2981.84           471.8
ACLF (%)              4.42            4.32        3.62 (↓18%)         3.68 (↓15%)     3.63 (↓16%)      3.63 (↓16%)      3.40 (↓21%)

                              PID                                     Our (4 ACUs)                    Ours (6 ACUs)    Ours (all ACUs)
Server Room B
                    May 5th         May 6th         May 7th             May 8th         May 9th       Sep 23 11:00 -   Oct 30 10:10 -
                  11:00 - 17:30   09:50 - 17:20   11:00 - 17:30       09:50 - 17:20   09:50 - 17:20    Sep 29 10:30     Nov 1 17:30
Server AEP (kW)      617.18         602.04          593.28              610.57          611.34           576.52            619.55
Server EC (kWh)     4010.83         4520.42         3853.19             4579.69         4586.52         82746.24          34302.42
ACU AEP (kW)          37.2           36.38           30.58               31.66            31.76           29.15            30.06
ACU EC (kWh)         241.79          272.9           198.75              237.43          238.15          4183.44          1663.22
ACLF (%)              6.03            6.04        5.16 (↓14%)         5.18 (↓14%)     5.19 (↓14%)      5.06 (↓16%)      4.85 (↓20%)



   4     R EAL -W ORLD E XPERIMENTS

   To validate our proposed physics-informed offline RL framework, we develop a deployment-friendly
   software system to support the close-loop control of ACUs using the learned policy. We successfully
   deployed our system and conducted a series of experiments (from January to December 2024) in a
   large-scale commercial data center in China, controlling up to 4, 6, and all (10 or 11) ACUs in two
   of its server rooms (referred as Room A and B in the later content). Our method has been operated
   effectively and safely for over 2000 hours in total. As conducting experiments in a production
   environment suffers lots of restrictions, to further validate our method, we also built a real-world
   small-scale DC testbed to conduct more comprehensive comparative experiments and model ablations.
   The testbed contains 22 servers and an ACU, and supports testing a wide range of server load settings.
   More information about the two real-world DC testing environments and the collected historical
   operational datasets can be found in Appendix B. Throughout this study, we train and validate our
   model on real-world data and environments, with completely no simulation involved.

   4.1    VALIDATION ON R EAL -W ORLD DATA C ENTER

   Comparison with conventional control. We first compare our DC cooling optimization method
   with the default ACU PID controllers on two server rooms in the real-world commercial data center.
   As our experiments are conducted in the real production environment, we are only allowed by the
   DC operator to control 4 out of 11 ACUs in the room in the early stages of the experiment, once
   the effectiveness was validated, we proceeded with experiments controlling 6 ACUs and then all
   ACUs in a server room. To ensure a fair comparison, we select several time periods (lengths from
   5.5 to 7.5 hours) that have similar server load patterns for comparison. Table 1 shows the results on
   energy consumption metrics, including the average electric power and total energy consumption of
   servers and the ACU cooling system. We use the Air-side Cooling Load Factor (ACLF) to analyze
   the floor-level cooling system’s energy efficiency, which is widely adopted by the DC industry. It is
   calculated as the ratio of the ACU system’s energy consumption to the servers’ energy consumption
   during the test period. Lower ACLF indicates higher energy efficiency. In the tested two server rooms,
   our method improves the cooling system’s energy efficiency by 14% to 21% compared to the default
   PID controllers. Throughout our experiment, we observed no thermal safety violations and regulated
   the cold aisle temperature (CAT) well below the required operational threshold.
   Control quality. We also conducted consecutive 48-hour experiments to compare the control
   behaviors of our method and the PID controllers in Server Room B with fluctuating server loads.
   The results are presented in Figure 3, where we compare the same 4 controlled ACUs and the
   temperature variation patterns of the directly impacted hot and cold aisles. As shown in Figure 3a,
   during the periods controlled by the PID controllers and our method, the total server load fluctuated


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Comparisons of key system metrics and the controllable actions of our method and the PID controller
over 2-day testing periods in Server Room B. Figures on the left show results from the PID-controlled period
(May 13-15, 2024), and figures on the right are the results controlled by our method (June 29 - July 1, 2024).

at a similar level, but our method consistently achieved noticeably lower ACLF value than that of the
PID controller, indicating higher energy efficiency. In Figures 3b and 3c, we compare the controllable
actions (fan speeds and valve openings) of the 4 controlled ACUs during the test period. For fan
speeds, several ACUs controlled by the default PID controller remained almost constant for a long
time, whereas the fan speeds of the 4 ACUs controlled by our method were dynamically adjusted
throughout the testing period. Notably, during the PID control phase, there was a short period having
drastic adjustments in fan speed and valve opening, while such abnormal control behavior was not
observed in our method. In terms of overall control behavior, our method tends to lower the fan speeds
while slightly increasing the cold water valve openings, which helps reduce ACU energy consumption
while maintaining the same level of cooling capacity. Figure 3d shows hot and cold aisle temperature
variations during the testing periods. The solid curve and shaded area represent the mean and the
mean±std envelop of multiple temperature sensor readings. Our method slightly decreased the cold
aisle temperature, even with less ACU energy consumption (lower ACLF). Moreover, we find that our
method achieves significantly better temperature regulation for the hot aisle, which results in much
more concentrated temperature distributions as compared to the PID controller, indicating a more
uniform and stable temperature field inside the hot aisle. More results that showcase the superior
adaptability of our method under drastic server load fluctuations can also be found in Appendix C.1.
Long-term control performance. To verify the long-term robustness and energy-saving effectiveness
of our method, we conducted two 14-day experiments by continuously running our offline RL policy
and the PID controller on the 4 controllable ACUs in Server Room B. Our model was in operation
from June 17 to July 1, 2024, while the PID controller was in operation from July 2-16, 2024. Figure 4
presents the results of energy efficiency and temperature conditions of the directly influenced cold
and hot aisles (see Appendix B.1 for details). In Figure 4a, each point represents the average total
server load within an hour and the corresponding calculated ACLF value. The ACLF values of
our model are consistently lower than those of the PID controller across all server load conditions,
with even lower ACLF values observed under higher server loads. This again demonstrates the
load-awareness of our approach, which enjoys a greater level of energy saving with the increase of
server loads, forming a sharp contrast to the almost constant ACLF level of the PID control. Figure 4b
illustrates the temperature distribution in the most relevant hot aisle, where the PID controller resulted
in a distribution clustering around 29°C and 31.5°C. By contrast, our method maintained a more
concentrated temperature distribution around 30°C, leading to a more uniform temperature field
inside the hot aisle during the testing period. Figure 4c shows the temperature distribution of the
two most relevant cold aisles during the 14-day experiments, both methods regulated the cold aisle
temperature below the operational threshold of 25°C. These results demonstrates the potential of our
method for safe and stable long-term deployment in real-world data centers.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Results of the 14-day long-term experiments in Server Room B. a, ACLF values under different total
server loads. b, c, Temperature distribution of the directly influenced hot and cold aisles.


      Figure 5: The energy-saving impact of controlling different numbers of ACUs through our approach.

Impact of the number of controlled ACUs. We also conducted additional experiments with our
model controlling 1 to all ACUs to further investigate its energy-saving impact. The results are
presented in Figure 5, which clearly show an increasing trend of energy efficiency with more ACUs
controlled by our method. Figure 5a shows the experiment results conducted in seven morning
periods (10:30 - 13:30) in Server Room A; Figure 5b,c on the right show the experiment results
conducted in seven morning (10:30 - 13:30) and afternoon (14:30 - 17:30) periods in Server Room B.
These promising results suggest that if more ACUs can be controlled by our method, it is very likely
that we can achieve even higher energy efficiency.

4.2     E VALUATION AND A BLATION ON THE T ESTBED

As testing in the production DC environment suffers lots of restrictions, to further validate our method,
we conducted extensive exploratory experiments and model ablations in our testbed environment.
Comparative evaluation against baseline methods. We compare our method with competing
baseline methods including conventional industrial control methods PID and MPC (Lazic et al.,
2018), off-policy RL-based DC cooling optimization method CCA (Li et al., 2019), mainstream
offline RL algorithms IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2022) and CQL (Kumar et al., 2020), and the state-of-the-
art safe offline RL algorithm FISOR (Zheng et al., 2024) (see Appendix D.2 for detailed descriptions).
For the comparative experiments, we tested three server load conditions: low, medium, and high
loads, with average electric power of 4.9kW, 7.4kW, and 8.0kW, respectively. Each method controlled
the ACU in closed-loop mode for 6 hours under the same experimental conditions, and we recorded
the energy efficiency and thermal safety metrics, i.e., ACLF and CAT violations (proportion of time
steps during the experiment that the CAT exceeds the pre-defined threshold). To make the task more
challenging, we set a lower CAT threshold (22°C) as compared to the one used in the commercial DC
to test the capability of the algorithm in balancing energy saving and temperature regulation. The
results are reported in Figure 6. Due to the smaller scale of the testbed and significantly lower server
load as compared to the real-world DC, the calculated ACLF values are higher than those observed in
the real DC experiments. We observe some aggressive baseline methods (CCA and CQL) achieve
lower energy consumption but perform poorly in terms of thermal safety, which is unacceptable. By
contrast, our method achieved the highest energy efficiency under all load conditions, while ensuring
no CAT violations throughout the experiments, outperforming all other baseline methods.
Ablation study. In addition, we conducted ablation experiments to validate the effectiveness of key
designs in our method, including the GNN architecture and T-symmetry enforcement. Additional


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 6: Comparative evaluation of our method against baseline methods on our real-world testbed.


 Figure 7: Ablation experiments on the impact of GNN blocks and T-symmetry enforcement in our method.


ablation results on the reward function design can be found in the Appendix C.2. In Figure 7a, b, we
compare the multi-step prediction error of our proposed TTDM trained on the historical data of Server
Room B with and without the GNN structure and T-symmetry enforcement. The prediction errors are
measured in terms of mean square error (MSE) on the predicted future states. The results show that
incorporating domain knowledge (spatial and control dependencies among sensors and ACUs) using
GNN blocks significantly reduces TTDM’s prediction error, especially when the number of prediction
steps increases. We also obtain similar results when incorporating T-symmetry enforcement in TTDM,
which demonstrates that both the GNN architecture and T-symmetry design can substantially improve
the capacity and generalization of our thermal dynamics model, thereby providing better modeling
and representation of the offline dataset. In Figure 7c, we compare the offline policy optimization
results of our method with and without T-symmetry under low and high server load conditions on
the testbed. Each experiment ran continuously for 6 hours. The results show that, the version of our
offline RL framework with T-symmetry achieves much better energy efficiency improvements in
both load conditions compared to the version without T-symmetry. This indicates that T-symmetry
plays a crucial role in enhancing the generalization during policy learning, therefore resulting in more
performant policy given limited real-world data.


5    C ONCLUSION

In this study, we develop a physics-informed offline RL framework and a deployable system for
energy-efficient DC cooling control. The core of our framework is a graph-structured and T-symmetry
consistent thermal dynamics model, which provides well-behaved and generalizable representations,
enabling highly sample-efficient offline policy learning in the latent space. Our system has been
successfully deployed and validated in a real-world large-scale commercial data center and achieved
closed-loop control of its ACUs. Our empirical results show that our proposed method can achieve
14∼21% energy savings in the real-world DC cooling system, and ran smoothly without any safety
or operational constraints violation during long-term experiments. We also provide comprehensive
comparative evaluations and ablations of our approach in a real-world small-scale DC testbed
environment that is constructed specifically for this research. Our work demonstrates the huge
potential of offline RL in solving a broad range of complex real-world industrial control problems,
especially for those having limited historical data and impossible to build high-fidelity simulators.
Lastly, we also urge the RL community to move away from current toy simulation-based RL
benchmark environments and focus more on real-world control problems. The current simulation-
based RL benchmarks have many unrealistic and biased dataset/task settings, which often provide
misleading insights that mismatch with observations in real-world practices.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by Carbon Neutrality and Energy System Transformation (CNEST) Program,
and funding from Global Data Solutions Co., Ltd and Wuxi Research Institute of Applied Technolo-
gies, Tsinghua University under Grant 20242001120. We are especially grateful for all the support
from Global Data Solutions Co., Ltd in our real-world DC experiments.

R EFERENCES
Zhiyu An, Xianzhong Ding, Arya Rathee, and Wan Du. Clue: Safe model-based rl hvac control using
  epistemic uncertainty estimation. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM International Conference on
  Systems for Energy-Efficient Buildings, Cities, and Transportation, pp. 149–158, 2023.
Kiam Heong Ang, Gregory Chong, and Yun Li. Pid control system analysis, design, and technology.
  IEEE transactions on control systems technology, 13(4):559–576, 2005.
Chenjia Bai, Lingxiao Wang, Zhuoran Yang, Zhi-Hong Deng, Animesh Garg, Peng Liu, and Zhao-
  ran Wang. Pessimistic bootstrapping for uncertainty-driven offline reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Kathleen Champion, Bethany Lusch, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. Data-driven discovery of
  coordinates and governing equations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(45):
  22445–22451, 2019.
Bingqing Chen, Zicheng Cai, and Mario Bergés. Gnu-rl: A precocial reinforcement learning solution
  for building hvac control using a differentiable mpc policy. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM
  international conference on systems for energy-efficient buildings, cities, and transportation, pp.
  316–325, 2019.
Peng Cheng, Xianyuan Zhan, Wenjia Zhang, Youfang Lin, Han Wang, Li Jiang, et al. Look beneath
  the surface: Exploiting fundamental symmetry for sample-efficient offline rl. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Yuri Chervonyi, Praneet Dutta, Piotr Trochim, Octavian Voicu, Cosmin Paduraru, Crystal Qian,
  Emre Karagozler, Jared Quincy Davis, Richard Chippendale, Gautam Bajaj, et al. Semi-analytical
  industrial cooling system model for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.13131,
  2022.
Baptiste Durand-Estebe, Cédric Le Bot, Jean Nicolas Mancos, and Eric Arquis. Data center optimiza-
  tion using pid regulation in cfd simulations. Energy and Buildings, 66:154–164, 2013.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:20132–20145, 2021.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2052–2062. PMLR, 2019.
Jim Gao and Ratnesh Jamidar. Machine learning applications for data center optimization. Google
  White Paper, 21, 2014.
Winston Garcia-Gabin, Kateryna Mishchenko, and Erik Berglund. Cooling control of data cen-
 ters using linear quadratic regulators. In 2018 26th Mediterranean Conference on Control and
 Automation (MED), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2018.
International Energy Agency.     Data centres and data transmission net-
  works,      2023.          URL   https://www.iea.org/energy-system/
   buildings/data-centres-and-data-transmission-networks.
   https://www.iea.org/energy-system/buildings/
   data-centres-and-data-transmission-networks.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


International Energy Agency. Electricity 2024 - analysis and forecast to 2026, 2024.
   URL https://www.iea.org/reports/electricity-2024. https://www.iea.
   org/reports/electricity-2024.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit
   q-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
  q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  Jun 2019.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1179–1191, 2020.
Jeroen S.W. Lamb and John A.G. Roberts. Time-reversal symmetry in dynamical systems: A survey.
  Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, pp. 1–39, Jan 1998. doi: 10.1016/s0167-2789(97)00199-1.
Nevena Lazic, Craig Boutilier, Tyler Lu, E. Wong, Binz Roy, M. Ryu, and Greg Imwalle. Data center
  cooling using model-predictive control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Jan
  2018.
Jianxiong Li, Xianyuan Zhan, Haoran Xu, Xiangyu Zhu, Jingjing Liu, and Ya-Qin Zhang. When
   data geometry meets deep function: Generalizing offline reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Jianxiong Li, Xiao Hu, Haoran Xu, Jingjing Liu, Xianyuan Zhan, Qing-Shan Jia, and Ya-Qin Zhang.
   Mind the gap: Offline policy optimization for imperfect rewards. In The Eleventh International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Yuanlong Li, Yonggang Wen, Dacheng Tao, and Kyle Guan. Transforming cooling optimization
  for green data center via deep reinforcement learning. IEEE transactions on cybernetics, 50(5):
  2002–2013, 2019.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Jiafei Lyu, Xiaoteng Ma, Xiu Li, and Zongqing Lu. Mildly conservative q-learning for offline
   reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:1711–1724, 2022.
Muhammad Haiqal Bin Mahbod, Chin Boon Chng, Poh Seng Lee, and Chee Kong Chui. Energy
 saving evaluation of an energy efficient data center using a model-free reinforcement learning
 approach. Applied Energy, 322:119392, 2022.
Liyuan Mao, Haoran Xu, Xianyuan Zhan, Weinan Zhang, and Amy Zhang. Diffusion-dice: In-
  sample diffusion guidance for offline reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2024a.
Liyuan Mao, Haoran Xu, Weinan Zhang, and Xianyuan Zhan. Odice: Revealing the mystery of
  distribution correction estimation via orthogonal-gradient update. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b.
SeyedMorteza Mirhoseininejad, Ghada Badawy, and Douglas G Down. A data-driven, multi-setpoint
  model predictive thermal control system for data centers. Journal of Network and Systems
  Management, 29:1–22, 2021.
Haoyi Niu, Shubham Sharma, Yiwen Qiu, Ming Li, Guyue Zhou, Jianming Hu, and Xianyuan Zhan.
  When to trust your simulator: dynamics-aware hybrid offline-and-online reinforcement learning.
  In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 36599–36612, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Masatoshi Ogawa, Hiroshi Endo, Hiroyuki Fukuda, Hiroyoshi Kodama, Toshio Sugimoto, Takeshi
 Horie, Tsugito Maruyama, and Masao Kondo. Cooling control based on model predictive control
 using temperature information of it equipment for modular data center utilizing fresh-air. In 2013
 13th International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS 2013), pp. 1815–1820.
 IEEE, 2013.
Yongyi Ran, Han Hu, Yonggang Wen, and Xin Zhou. Optimizing energy efficiency for data center
  via parameterized deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 16(2):
  1310–1323, 2022a.
Yongyi Ran, Xin Zhou, Han Hu, and Yonggang Wen. Optimizing data center energy efficiency
  via event-driven deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 16(2):
  1296–1309, 2022b.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. 2018.
Ward Van Heddeghem, Sofie Lambert, Bart Lannoo, Didier Colle, Mario Pickavet, and Piet Demeester.
 Trends in worldwide ict electricity consumption from 2007 to 2012. Computer communications,
 50:64–76, 2014.
Ruihang Wang, Xinyi Zhang, Xin Zhou, Yonggang Wen, and Rui Tan. Toward physics-guided
  safe deep reinforcement learning for green data center cooling control. In 2022 ACM/IEEE 13th
  International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), pp. 159–169. IEEE, 2022.
Xiangsen Wang, Haoran Xu, Yinan Zheng, and Xianyuan Zhan. Offline multi-agent reinforcement
  learning with implicit global-to-local value regularization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Haoran Xu, Li Jiang, Jianxiong Li, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, Victor Wai Kin Chan, and
  Xianyuan Zhan. Offline rl with no ood actions: In-sample learning via implicit value regularization.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a.
Haoran Xu, Jiang Li, Jianxiong Li, and Xianyuan Zhan. A policy-guided imitation approach for
  offline reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022b.
Haoran Xu, Xianyuan Zhan, and Xiangyu Zhu. Constraints penalized q-learning for safe offline
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022c.
Xianyuan Zhan, Haoran Xu, Yue Zhang, Xiangyu Zhu, Honglei Yin, and Yu Zheng. Deepthermal:
  Combustion optimization for thermal power generating units using offline reinforcement learning.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 4680–4688,
  2022a.
Xianyuan Zhan, Xiangyu Zhu, and Haoran Xu. Model-based offline planning with trajectory pruning.
  In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2022b.
Yinan Zheng, Jianxiong Li, Dongjie Yu, Yujie Yang, Shengbo Eben Li, Xianyuan Zhan, and Jingjing
  Liu. Safe offline reinforcement learning with feasibility-guided diffusion model. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     S YSTEM D EPLOYMENT

We have developed a full-function software system to facilitate the deployment and validation of our
proposed physics-informed offline RL framework. We successfully deployed our system in a large-
scale commercial data center for production environment performance validation and the small-scale
DC testbed for more comprehensive model evaluation and ablation. The overall deployed system
architecture is illustrated in Figure 8, which consists of two main phases: offline training and online
deployment. In the offline training phase, the historical operational data of the floor-level cooling
systems is exported from the DC log management system. The exported data undergoes automated
data processing and feature engineering processes and is stored in a historical dataset. Subsequently,
based on the processed offline dataset, we train the T-symmetry enforced thermal dynamics model,
followed by a sample-efficient offline policy learning module to obtain the optimized floor-level
cooling control policy. In the online deployment phase, the learned policy is deployed in a local
policy server within the data center to provide control services. Real-time data from the cooling
systems is retrieved by the management system API, processed, and stored in a real-time database.
The system then forwards the real-time data to the policy server, which outputs optimized ACU
control actions. These optimized control actions are directly written into the ACUs via the Modbus
protocol for closed-loop control.
Our developed system is deployment-friendly and broadly applicable to various DC floor-level cooling
systems with different configurations, exhibiting great flexibility and transferability. Moreover,
as environmental and server load conditions in the data center frequently change over time, the
completely data-driven design of our system offers extra advantages. As it allows for re-collection of
new historical data every few months, and uses the new data to retrain and fine-tune the ACU control
policy accordingly. This endows our system with high adaptability, providing an evolvable control
optimization solution to a slowly changing industrial system.


                        Figure 8: Overall architecture of the deployment system.


B     R EAL -W ORLD T ESTING E NVIRONMENTS AND E XPERIMENT S ETUPS

B.1   P RODUCTION DATA C ENTER E NVIRONMENT

Figure 9 presents some photographs and the layout illustration of our real-world data center testing
environment. In this large-scale commercial data center, we are granted permission to conduct
experiments in two designated server rooms. These server rooms host the real IT loads of a large
video-sharing website in China. Specifically, in Server Room A, the average total server load is
around 550 kW, with an overall ACU power consumption of around 25 kW; in Server Room B, the
average total server load is around 610 kW, and the overall ACU power consumption is about 37
kW. In the early stages of the experiment, we are only allowed to control 4 ACUs in each server
room (ACU 1-6, 1-5, 2-5, and 2-4 on the left side in Server Room A; ACU 1-1, 1-2, 2-1, and 2-2 on
the right side in Server Room B). These ACUs are arranged in pairs on opposite sides of the room,
directly influencing two cold aisles and one hot aisle. The remaining ACUs continue to operate under
PID control. After verifying the effectiveness of the experiments, we further used the model to control


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: The photographs and layout illustration of the real-world commercial data center. a, Photographs of
the interior of a server room, showcasing the hot aisle, cold aisle, and server racks from left to right. b, Overhead
panoramic view of a server room, illustrating the spatial arrangement of all pertinent equipment.


6 ACUs in each server room (ACU 1-2, ACU 1-4, ACU 1-6, ACU 2-1, ACU 2-3 and ACU 2-4 in
each server room). Finally, we conducted experiments controlling all ACUs in both server rooms (In
Server Room B, all 10 ACUs are shown in Figure 9b. In Server Room A, there are 11 ACUs, with an
additional ACU (ACU 1-3) located in the position marked as ’UNUSED’ at the bottom of Figure 9b).
As we are testing on the safety-critical real production environment, it is not possible for us to fully
evaluate and test other baseline methods, as they may not have strong safety assurance. We leave
these comparative experiments to our testbed environment, where we have full control.
We follow the DC industry’s standard practice that specifies the target threshold of cold aisle
temperature (CAT) as 25°C. For Server Room A, we collected about 20 months’ historical operational
data from the logging system, including approximately 180,000 data samples at 5-minute intervals,
involving 108 state and action features. Similarly, for Server Room B, we collected historical data
over 15 months, amounting to approximately 140,000 data samples, also at 5-minute intervals, and
encompassing a total of 101 state and action features. The amount of real-world data available to train
our offline RL policy is significantly fewer than typical offline RL benchmark tasks like D4RL (Fu
et al., 2020) (often using 1 million data samples to learn simple tasks), especially considering the
much larger scale of our problem. We run a series of offline policy evaluation tests and open-loop
inspections to select the best-performing models and deploy them in real systems for closed-loop
control evaluation. During this phase, our control system takes the real-time data from the cooling
system every five minutes as inputs, then computes the optimized actions and directly transmits these
commands to the ACUs for modifying fan speeds and valve opening percentage. We conducted a
series of short and long-term experiments from January to December 2024. Our system has been
operated safely for over 2000 hours. Through these comprehensive experiments, we verified that
our proposed physics-informed offline RL framework and the resulting control system can operate
both effectively and safely under the stringent safety and operational constraints of a real-world
commercial data center.

B.2    R EAL -W ORLD T ESTBED

To thoroughly assess the performance of our proposed method, we also constructed a real-world
testbed environment, which contains 22 servers and an inter-column air conditioner as the ACU


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: The photographs and layout illustration of our constructed small-scale DC testbed. a, Illustration of
the installed temperature and humidity sensors in our testbed. b, Layout illustration of the testbed.


(located between Rack 1 and Rack 2). This is a compressor-based ACU, which is smaller than the
typical ACUs in commercial data centers that use the cold water from chillers and cooling towers as
the cold source. Therefore the fans and the compressor inside the ACUs are the primary contributors
to the ACU’s energy consumption. For the testbed environment, temperature regulation is achieved
by adjusting the entering air temperature (EAT) setpoint of the ACU to ensure the CAT remains
below the predetermined threshold. We installed 6 sets of temperature and humidity sensors (24 in
total) to monitor the internal temperature field inside our DC testbed environment. Moreover, we
also have access to the interior temperature sensor readings from each server, which provides even
finer-grained monitoring of the thermal dynamics inside the testbed. Figure 10 provides a detailed
depiction of the testbed environment configuration.
To support testing with a wide variety of server loads, we also developed a software framework to
assign servers with different load patterns that mimic real-world IT tasks. The software employs a
Kubernetes (k8s) cluster architecture and is implemented under the CentOS Stream 9 operating system.
The ACU control is implemented through the Modbus protocol, which regulates the setpoint of the
Entering Air Temperature (EAT) of the ACU, thereby indirectly adjusting the fan and compressor of
the ACU. In our experiments, the control policies calculate and output the EAT setpoint every two
minutes and control the ACU accordingly. The experimental server loads in our testbed range from
approximately 5 to 8 kW, while the power consumption of ACU varies from 1.5 to 4 kW. We also
built a data collection and database management system using InfluxDB and Telegraf to handle and
store the real-time and historical data in our testbed. We collected the historical operational data over
61 days, comprising approximately 43,000 data samples at 2-minute intervals, comprising 105 state
and action features.
As we have complete control over our testbed, we can conduct extensive exploratory experiments
with our proposed method and compare it with a wide range of existing baseline methods without
restriction. As temperature regulation in the DC testbed is comparably easier than in the large-scale
production DC environment, we employed a stricter 22°C CAT threshold to make the control tasks
more challenging. Furthermore, we also conducted experiments on the impact of weight coefficients
on our reward function and carried out ablation studies to further evaluate our method.


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: ACU control behaviors of our method and the PID controller under drastic server load fluctuation. a,
Load variation pattern of three server racks (Rack C, D, E) during the selected time period, with one server rack
having a drastic load drop and increase. b, Temperature readings from the three most relevant cold aisle sensors.
c, d, The variations in fan speed and valve opening for two ACUs during the time period, with one controlled by
the PID controller (ACU 1-1) and the other by our method (ACU 1-2).


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

C.1    P ERFORMANCE U NDER D RASTIC S ERVER L OAD F LUCTUATION

To further evaluate the adaptability and load-awareness of our method, we tested on a specific scenario
with drastic server load fluctuations in Server Room B. We compare the control strategy of two ACUs
with one controlled by the default PID controller and the other by our method. Experimental results
are presented in Figure 11. The PID controller demonstrates limited adaptability in this scenario, with
no adjustments to fan speeds and only marginal changes in valve opening percentage. In contrast, our
offline RL approach was able to promptly adapt to external changes, resulting in a more optimal and
energy-efficient strategy. These results underscore the effectiveness and adaptability of our approach
in highly dynamic DC service conditions.


C.2    A DDITIONAL A BLATIONS ON R EWARD F UNCTION D ESIGN

We considered both the control parameters of the ACUs and environmental factors within the cooling
system to design a reasonable reward function for RL policy learning. For the weight coefficient
β1 , β2 , β3 , β4 in the reward function Eq. (1), we set their values as the reciprocal of the mean of
the corresponding reward term calculated based on the preprocessed dataset. This ensures each
reward term has a similar scale. For the first constant term r0 in the reward function, to keep the
reward positive, we calculate the sum of the other terms in the reward function for each record in the
preprocessed dataset and take their maximum value plus 1 as the value of r0 .
To further investigate the robustness of our reward function design, we also conducted additional
                                                                               PN
experiments on the testbed by varying the relative scale of the third term (β2 n=1 ln(1 + exp(Tcm −
ρT ))) in Eq. (1), which controls the strength of CAT violation penalty. Specifically, we test the
default value of β2 as well as multiply it by 5 and 10, to test the impact of prioritizing more on safety
constraint satisfaction. We train three models with different β2 values and use the resulting models
to control the ACU for 6 hours under low and high server load conditions on the testbed. In all
these experiments, the CAT was controlled below the predefined threshold. Moreover, as reported
in Table 2, the energy-saving performances of the models under different β2 weight coefficients
consistently achieve comparable and low ACLF values. This shows our designed reward function
is robust and does need much tuning to ensure good practical performance, which is particularly
desirable for real-world deployments.

       Table 2: Performance on the testbed using different scale of β2 in the reward function.

                                                            Default β2    5 × β2     10 × β2
                      ACLF (%) under low server load          29.66        29.37      30.95
                      ACLF (%) under high server load         26.89        27.50      26.05


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: In the full control experiment of ACUs in the commercial data center, the water-side
related states are as follows. a, In Server Room A, before and after the use of our offline RL policy
for control, the overall server load remains stable, and both the chilled water pump frequency (CWP
freq) and the ACUs’ entering water temperature (EWT) also stay stable. After implementing our
control policy, the ACLF value significantly decreases. b, In Server Room B, a similar comparison of
the server load and water-side indicators before and after the use of our offline RL policy for control,
which shows consistent results with those in part a.


C.3   A NALYSIS OF I MPACTS ON THE U PSTREAM WATER -S IDE C OOLING S YSTEM

To evaluate the potential impact of optimizing the air-side cooling system using our method on the
upstream water-side cooling system, we conducted additional analysis on the water-side related states
through two before-and-after tests. We select two time periods with relatively stable server loads in
the two server rooms (November 10-11 for Server Room A and October 29-30 for Server Room B)
to compare the chilled water pump frequency (CWP freq) and the ACUs’ entering water temperature
(EWT) before and after using our offline RL policy for control. The CWP freq. and EWT are key
states that reflect the working conditions of the water-side cooling system, which are external factors
to the air-side cooling systems. Figure 12 shows the experimental results during the full control of
all ACUs in Server Room A and Server Room B. The Figure 12a and 12b, the dashed vertical lines
indicate the time points when our method took over the control. In both Server Room A and Server
Room B, before and after our method began controlling, the average EWT of the ACUs remained
stable. Additionally, the chilled water pump frequency of the water-side cooling system also did not
exhibit significant variations. However, comparing the results before and after adopting our control
method, the ACLF values in both rooms significantly decreased. These results demonstrate that
although our method effectively reduces the air-side cooling system’s energy consumption, it does
not have a noticeable impact on the upstream water-side cooling system. Moreover, as also shown in
Section 4.1, Figure 3 and 4, our offline RL policy enables much better temperature regulation and
forms a more stable temperature field for the hot aisles, due to smartly coordinating the control of all
ACUs based on the dynamic temperature patterns in the server rooms. This effectively decreases the
oscillation in the conventional control approach, which often results in frequent overshoots during
temperature control and causes higher ACU energy consumption. This partly explains why our
method can have lower energy consumption but achieve the same or better cooling effect.

D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
D.1    P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATIONS OF O UR P ROPOSED M ETHOD

Data preprocessing. We preprocessed the DC raw data to facilitate model training. Min-max
normalization was applied to both states and actions using the following formulas: s̃ = (S(s−S min )
                                                                                          max −Smin )

and ã = (A(a−A   min )
             max −Amin )
                         . Smax , Smin , Amax , Amin are maximum and minimum normalization bound-
aries for state and action features. For actions, we set Amin = 0 and Amax = 100 as both fan speed
and valve openings are percentage values. For the states, as described in Section 3.1, there exist
different types of sensor inputs: s = {ss , sa , se }, and each type of sensor reading has distinct scales.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, we set different normalization scales for different types of sensors by consulting the do-
main experts. Specifically, we denote all temperature-related sensor readings as stemp (e.g., LAT(sa ),
EAT(sa ), LWT(sa ), and EWT(se ), humidity sensor readings as shumi , and power consumption of
servers as spower . Their corresponding normalization boundaries are presented in Table 3.

                    Table 3: Normalization boundaries for different state components.

                                             stemp       shumi   spower
                                    Smin        1         0        0
                                    Smax       40        100      150

Model architecture and hyperparameters. The architecture and algorithm hyperparameters in
our proposed physics-informed offline RL framework are listed in Table 4. As discussed in Section
3.3, the only hyperparameter that we tuned during our experiments is α in the normalization term λα
(see Eq. (9)). We tuned α values in the range of [2.5, 10] and deployed the best-performing model
for long-term control in both the production DC and our testbed environments. This hyperparameter
modulates the conservatism of the learned policy. We observe that reasonably increasing α can
enhance the energy-saving performance to a certain degree.
Real-time data preprocessing and policy smoothing. In our deployed systems, we preprocess
the real-time sensor data by filtering out problematic data samples and resample them into uniform
time intervals (5 minutes for the large-scale commercial data center and 2 minutes for the small-scale
DC testbed). To enhance the smoothness and robustness of the closed-loop ACU control commands
generated by the policy, we apply temporal smoothing to the policy-generated actions in our practical
implementation. Specifically, the final execution action at the current time step is calculated as the
average of policy output actions at the current time step and the previous 4 time steps, which provides
a smoother control signal for ACUs.
Algorithm pseudocode. The pseudocode of our proposed physics-informed offline RL framework
can be found in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1
Require: Preprocessed historical dataset D, initialized value network Q, policy network π, and the
  T-symmetry enforced thermal dynamics model (TTDM), which contains the state-action encoder
  ϕ(s, a), latent forward dynamics model f and latent reverse dynamics model g, state and action
  decoders ψ(zs ) and ψ(za ).
  / / Learning TTDM from offline dataset
  for t = 1, · · · , T1 training steps do
      Sample a mini-batch B of samples {(s, a, s′ , a′ )} ∼ D and process through the state-action
      encoder ϕ(s, a) to get the latent representations {(zs , za , zs′ , za′ )}.
      Compute the forward and reverse dynamic losses based on Eq. (3) and Eq. (4)
      Compute T-symmetry regularization loss over the two latent dynamics models based on Eq. (6)
      Compute the reconstruction losses in Eq. (2) and Eq. (5)
      Update TTDM network parameters by minimizing the overall learning objective in Eq. (7)
  end for
  / / Sample efficient offline policy optimization
  for t = 1, · · · , T2 training steps do
      Sample a mini-batch B of samples {(s, a, r, s′ )} ∼ D, where r is calculated based on Eq. (1)
      Update the value network Q with the learned ϕ(s, a) based on the objective in Eq. (8).
      Update the policy π based on the policy learning objective in Eq. (9).
  end for


D.2   BASELINE ALGORITHMS

In our testbed experiments, we compare our method with the ACU’s default PID controller, a data-
driven MPC method for DC cooling control developed by Google (Lazic et al., 2018), an off-policy
RL-based DC cooling optimization method CCA (Li et al., 2019), mainstream offline RL methods


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Table 4: Hyperparameter details.

                         Hyperparameters                         Value
                         Optimizer type                          Adam
                         Learning rate                           3e-4
                         Weight decay                            1e-5
                         Channel number                          6
                         Common feature per node                 4
                         GNN hidden layers                       2
            TTDM         GNN hidden units                        256
          Architecture   Forward / reverse model hidden layers   2
                         Forward / reverse model hidden units    128
                         Fusion layers                           2
                         Fusion layer units                      128
                         Weight of ℓT −sym and ℓrec              1
                         Weight of ℓrvs and ℓf wd                0.1
                         α                                       Tuned in the range of [2.5,10]
                         Discount factor γ                       0.99
                         Target update rate                      0.005
                         Policy noise                            0.2
                         Critic neural network layer width       512
           Offline RL    Actor neural network layer width        512
           Algorithm     Actor learning rate                     3e-4
                         Optimizer type                          Adam
                         Critic learning rate                    3e-4
                         Policy noise clipping                   0.5
                         Policy update frequency                 2
                         Number of iterations                    5e5


such as Implicit Q-Learning (IQL) (Kostrikov et al., 2022) and Conservative Q-Learning (CQL)
(Kumar et al., 2020), and the state-of-the-art (SOTA) safe offline RL algorithm, FISOR (Zheng et al.,
2024). We provide detailed descriptions of these baseline methods as follows.
Default PID controller. The ACU in our experiments adopts a conventional PID controller (Ang
et al., 2005) to adjust its fan speed and compressor to minimize the error between the target CAT
setpoint and the system’s actual CAT value. The controller consists of three components: the
Proportional term, which responds to the current error; the Integral term, which accumulates past
errors to correct steady-state offsets; and the Derivative term, which predicts future errors based on
the rate of change.
Data-driven MPC controller (Lazic et al., 2018). This DC cooling control method is developed
by Google, which learns a linear dynamics model of the floor-level cooling system for future state
prediction, and optimizes the control action over a finite time horizon using MPC. At each time
step, MPC solves a constrained optimization problem to minimize a cost function while considering
system constraints.
Cooling Control Algorithm (CCA) (Li et al., 2019). CCA is an actor-critic RL framework for
DC cooling control. It is based on the classic off-policy RL algorithm deep deterministic policy
gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015). As DDPG is an online RL method, CCA needs online
interactions with a simulation environment to collect and store data in a replay buffer, and sample
training batches from the replay buffer for policy learning. In our offline learning setting, as there is
no reliable simulation environment available, we replace CCA’s replay buffer to the offline dataset in
our implementation.
Implicit Q Learning (IQL) (Kostrikov et al., 2022). IQL is a popular offline RL algorithm that
uses expectile regression to learn value functions from fixed datasets without explicit policy con-
straints. It avoids evaluating the potential OOD actions from the learned policy, therefore alleviating
distributional shift, and typically enjoys stable offline policy learning.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Conservative Q learning (CQL) (Kumar et al., 2020). CQL is another popular offline RL algorithm
that learns conservative estimates of Q-values on OOD actions to enforce offline behavioral data
regularization and mitigate distribution shifts.
Feasibility-guided Safe Offline RL (FISOR) (Zheng et al., 2024). FISOR is the SOTA safety-centric
offline RL algorithm which enforces hard constraints by identifying the largest feasible region from
the offline dataset based on Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) reachability analysis. It adopts a decoupled learning
scheme that optimizes a diffusion model-based safe policy by maximizing reward within the feasible
regions while minimizing safety violations within infeasible regions, thereby enjoying a strong safety
performance and superior learning stability.

E    R EAL -W ORLD DATA A NALYSIS
In the real-world data center, due to the use of PID group control for ACUs throughout the historical
operation, and infrequent adjustments to the PID-related temperature setpoints, the action patterns of
the ACUs system (fan speed and water valve opening) are narrowly distributed. Additionally, the
distributions of other state features are mostly concentrated with a single peak. All these factors
pose significant challenges to offline RL policy learning, requiring models with strong generalization
capability to effectively learn and optimize control strategies. Figure 13 shows the historical dataset
distributions collected from our real-world testbed, in which we collect system operational data
from more diverse server load and control settings, resulting in relatively broader state-action space
coverage. This actually makes the task more manageable for existing offline RL algorithms like CQL,
IQL, and FISOR. However, as we have shown in Figure 6, our proposed method still outperforms the
baseline methods in the testbed experiments, and more importantly, achieves good performance in
the much more challenging production DC environment.

F    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS
In this study, we only tested in a single large-scale commercial DC facility and a small-scale real-
world testbed. For future works, we plan to further expand our experiments to multiple DC facilities
with different air-side cooling system configurations. Also, our approach models the safety constraints
by incorporating them as penalty terms inside the RL reward function, which adds complexity to
reward design and may not be sufficient to ensure safety under certain special conditions. Future
investigations can be conducted to expand our method to a safe offline RL framework, with dedicated
consideration of constraint satisfaction, which would provide more safety guarantees in practice.
Furthermore, it is also meaningful to explore the joint optimization of both cooling and server-side
systems, which can fully maximize the potential for DC energy saving.

G    L EARNING C URVES
Figure 14 reports the learning curves of the proposed TTDM and offline policy learning method. As it
is not possible to directly interact with the real DC environment and evaluate the policy’s performance
during offline RL training, hence we report the Q-function learning loss and policy loss for different
training steps. Both our proposed TTDM and the RL policy learning scheme enjoy stable model
convergence during training.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Distributions of the state and action features in our historical dataset collected from the
real-world DC testbed.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: a, Learning curves of the overall loss function and each individual loss term of TTDM. b,
Learning curves for the offline RL policy learning.


                                                23
