Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


VARIATIONAL B EST- OF -N A LIGNMENT
    Afra Amini Tim Vieira Elliott Ash Ryan Cotterell
    ETH Zürich
    {afra.amini, ryan.cotterell}@inf.ethz.ch
    tim.f.vieira@gmail.com ashe@ethz.ch



                                               A BSTRACT

            Best-of-N (BoN ) is a popular and effective algorithm for aligning language models
            to human preferences. The algorithm works as follows: at inference time, N sam-
            ples are drawn from the language model, and the sample with the highest reward,
            as judged by a reward model, is returned as the output. Despite its effectiveness,
            BoN is computationally expensive; it reduces sampling throughput by a factor of
            N . To make BoN more efficient at inference time, one strategy is to fine-tune the
            language model to mimic what BoN does during inference. To achieve this, we
            derive the distribution induced by the BoN algorithm. We then propose to fine-tune
            the language model to minimize backward KL divergence to the BoN distribution.
            Our approach is analogous to mean-field variational inference and, thus, we term it
            variational BoN (vBoN ). To the extent this fine-tuning is successful and we end
            up with a good approximation, we have reduced the inference cost by a factor of
            N . Our experiments on controlled generation and summarization tasks show that
            BoN is the most effective alignment method, and our variational approximation
            to BoN achieves the closest performance to BoN and surpasses models
            fine-tuned using the standard KL-constrained RL objective. In the controlled
            generation task, vBoN appears more frequently on the Pareto frontier of reward
            and KL divergence compared to other alignment methods. In the summariza-
            tion task, vBoN achieves high reward values across various sampling temperatures.

                                  https://github.com/rycolab/vbon


1       I NTRODUCTION

Language models are pre-trained on large corpora to model a distribution over natural language text.1
Beyond their initial pre-training, they are often additionally fine-tuned on domain-specific data through
a process called supervised fine-tuning (SFT). The goal of SFT is to enable the model to better per-
form various downstream tasks of interest. While the fine-tuned model, called the reference model in
our paper, is indeed typically much better at performing the downstream task of interest, e.g., dialogue
generation or summarization, it may still generate undesirable content, e.g., harmful or offensive text.
To mitigate this issue, aligning the reference model to human preferences has become a fundamental
step in the development of modern large language models (Meta, 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Gemini, 2024).
The degree to which text is aligned with human preferences is typically operationalized using a
real-valued reward function. Rather than constructing a reward function by hand, it is typically
estimated from a dataset of human preferences.2 And, after estimation, we expect the reward function
to return higher values for text that is more likely to be preferred by humans, and lower values for
text that is more likely to be dispreferred. Then, given an estimated reward function, an alignment
algorithm further alters the reference models in a manner such that it places the highest probability on
the text that is high reward under the reward model and high probability under the reference model.
Alignment algorithms can be taxonomized into two groups: (i) alignment via fine-tuning, where
we change the language model’s parameters to achieve alignment (Christiano et al., 2017; Rafailov
1
    Many language models are also used to model text in non-natural languages, e.g., programming languages.
2
    In some cases, the reward model is not estimated from human preference data. It is either known, e.g.,
    code-based execution scores, or given by a classifier, e.g., toxicity or sentiment classifiers.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Best-of-(N=4)
  Billy                                                    🏅                      Billy Wilder is
 Wilder is    a delight to watch.                    2.4

             credited for a few ﬁne
               spots, including…                     1.6        a delight to
    LM
                                            Reward                              LM with Variational       a delight to
                                            Model               watch.         Best-of-N Fine-tuning   🏅 watch.
             Jack, a troubled driver
                      who…                           0.7

              bad. he was not one
                 for this ﬁlm…                       -2.7


Figure 1: Best-of-N (on the left) is an effective alignment-via-inference method: it draws N samples
from the language model, ranks them according to a reward model, and outputs the best sample.
Variational Best-of-N (on the right) approximates this process via fine-tuning. The goal is to ensure
that sampling a single string from the fine-tuned model produces a result equivalent to applying
Best-of-N . This approach allows us to achieve similar performance while increasing the throughput
by a factor of N .



et al., 2023), and (ii) alignment via inference (Nakano et al., 2022; Mudgal et al., 2024). A common
alignment-via-fine-tuning method is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF;
Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). RLHF typically consists of further
fine-tuning the language model under a KL-constrained RL objective, which is made up of two
terms: a term that encourages the model to maximize the reward, and a term that discourages high KL
divergence between the language model and the reference model. This objective is often maximized
with an RL algorithm, e.g., proximal policy optimization (PPO; Schulman et al., 2017). A common
alignment-via-inference method is the Best-of-N (BoN ; Stiennon et al., 2020) algorithm. As such, it
does not require any fine-tuning of the language model. The algorithm is straightforward: One draws
N samples from the reference model and returns the text that achieves the highest reward among
those N samples. The BoN algorithm has also been effectively applied in controlled decoding (Yang
& Klein, 2021; Mudgal et al., 2024) and to generate a dataset for supervised fine-tuning (Meta, 2023).
Despite its simplicity, BoN has proven incredibly practical in generating high-reward text that still
has a high probability under the reference model. Theoretically, Yang et al. (2024) prove that under
some simplifying assumptions, the BoN distribution is asymptotically equivalent to the optimal
distribution under the KL-constrained RL objective. Empirically, it has been repeatedly shown (Gao
et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2023; Mudgal et al., 2024) that BoN often appears on the frontier of
reward and KL curves, surpassing the performance of models fine-tuned with RLHF. However, the
main factor preventing BoN from replacing fine-tuning methods for alignment is its significant
computational overhead during inference. Even when sampling is done in parallel, BoN decreases
the text generation throughput by a factor of N . This drawback limits its practicality for generating
text from large language models.
To speed up BoN , we devise a scheme to convert it into an alignment-via-fine-tuning algorithm
rather than an alignment-via-inference algorithm. To this end, we first formally derive the probability
distribution induced by the BoN algorithm. Then we approximate this distribution by minimizing
the reverse KL divergence between the language model and the BoN distribution. This leads to
an optimization objective that we refer to as the vBoN objective. By analyzing a lower bound of this
objective, we find that it behaves similarly to the KL-regularization objective in the limit, i.e., N → 1
or N → ∞. Importantly, the vBoN objective has a unique and useful property: it is insensitive to
applying any monotonically increasing function to the reward values. This distinctive feature, along
with the empirical success of the BoN algorithm, suggests that the vBoN objective is a promising
and interesting objective to explore. Finally, we fine-tune the language model using PPO to optimize
the vBoN objective. Our scheme, depicted in Fig. 1, allows us to achieve performance close to that
of the BoN algorithm while increasing the inference throughput by a factor of N .
We experiment with vBoN on controlled generation and summarization tasks, comparing its
performance to models fine-tuned using the KL-constrained RL objective. For controlled generation,
our results indicate that models fine-tuned with the vBoN objective are more likely to fall on the
Pareto frontier of the reward vs. KL curve compared to other fine-tuning-based alignment methods.
This suggests that vBoN achieves a better balance between maximizing reward and maintaining


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


proximity to the reference model. On a summarization task, fine-tuning with vBoN yields higher
reward values and greater win rates on average than models fine-tuned with the KL-constrained RL
objective, further demonstrating its effectiveness.

2    BACKGROUND : R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FROM H UMAN F EEDBACK
Let Σ be an alphabet, a finite, non-empty set of symbols.3 The elements of Σ may be characters,
tokens, or words; the choice lies with the modeler. A string is a finite sequence of symbols drawn
from Σ. A language model is a distribution over strings y ∈ Σ∗ , where Σ∗ is the set of all strings
over the alphabet Σ. In this paper, we consider language models, e.g., those based on neural networks,
that are parameterized by a real vector θ ∈ Θ, denoted as πθ . Furthermore, we restrict ourselves
to language models that are differentiable functions of θ. In conditional generation tasks, e.g.,
summarization or dialogue generation, it is desirable to prompt the language model with a string
x ∈ Σ∗ . Consequently, we consider prompted language models, i.e., those that give a conditional
distribution over response strings y, given a prompt string x, as πθ (y | x). However, for notational
convenience, we will drop the explicit conditioning on the prompt x and simply write πθ (y).
Algorithms for RLHF fine-tune the language model to increase the expected reward of the strings
sampled from it while not diverging too far from the reference model. RLHF consists of three steps.
First, the language model is fine-tuned on a task-specific dataset using the maximum-likelihood
objective. Recall we term the language model after this step the reference model and show that with
πref . Next, a reward model r : Σ∗ → R is trained to capture human preferences; the reward of a
string is high if it is preferred by humans.4 Finally, the reference model is fine-tuned to maximize the
KL-constrained RL objective,
                                               h      i
                                J RL (θ) = E r(y) − β DKL πθ ∥ πref ,                                (1)
                                           y∼πθ

where DKL (·) is the KL divergence between two distributions, modulated by a hyperparameter β.
This objective encourages the model to assign greater probability mass to high-reward outputs while
simultaneously penalizing excessive divergence from the reference model. Levine (2018) shows that
the policy that maximizes5 this objective (Eq. (1)) is
                        1               1                 X                  1
               πθ⋆ (y) = πref (y) exp      r(y) , Z =          πref (y) exp    r(y) .           (2)
                        Z                β                   ∗
                                                                             β
                                                                y∈Σ

In simple terms, πθ⋆ is the reference model reweighted by the exponentiated reward values and
normalized by the partition function Z. However, direct sampling from πθ⋆ is not feasible, as
computing Z requires evaluating an infinite sum, making it intractable. However, a heuristic approach
to sampling from πθ⋆ would be to sample many strings from πref and only keep those that have high
rewards. Indeed, this heuristic is the motivation behind the BoN algorithm.

3    D ERIVING THE B EST- OF -N O BJECTIVE
Best-of-N is a simple alignment-via-inference algorithm. The algorithm works as follows. Let
YN = {y (n) }N                                                                               ⋆
             n=1 be the multi-set containing N i.i.d. samples from πref . Then, BoN returns y ,
      6
where
                                    y ⋆ = argmax r(y (n) ).                                 (3)
                                                  y (n) ∈YN

We present the probability distribution induced by BoN with πbon . Notably, πbon is not the optimal
distribution under Eq. (1), the KL-constrained RL objective.7 Despite this, the BoN algorithm often
3
  Please refer to Tab. 3 for a summary of notations used throughout the paper.
4
  For example, in a summarization task, a preference dataset consists of a document, two candidate summaries
  for that document, and a label indicating which summary is preferred by humans. The reward model is trained
  on this dataset to maximize the likelihood of correctly predicting human preference.
5
  This formulation implicitly assumes that there exists a θ ∈ Θ that achieves the unconstrained maximum.
6
  We assume that the argmax is unique, or ties are broken in a well-defined manner.
7
  Under simplifying assumptions is πbon asymptotically (in string length) equivalent to πθ⋆ (Yang et al., 2024).


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


performs well—even in comparison to RLHF-based methods. This naturally raises the question:
under what optimization objective is πbon the optimal distribution? To answer this question, we first
compute the probability of strings under πbon .
Proposition 1. Suppose r : Σ∗ → R is a one-to-one mapping. Then, the probability of a string y
under πbon is given by
                     N
                    X    N            N −i                         def
       πbon (y) =            F r(y)        πref (y)i ,  F r(y) = ′ P (r(y ′ ) < r(y)) .           (4)
                    i=1
                         i                                             y ∼πref


Proof. See App. B.                                                                                            ■

F can be understood
                      as the strict cumulative density function of reward values under πref . In other
words, F r(y) represents the probability that a random sample drawn from πref has a reward value
less than r(y). We now describe how to fine-tune the language model to approximate πbon . Similar
to variational inference, we minimize the reverse KL divergence between πθ and πbon . Concretely,
                                              h                        i
    J V B O N (θ) = −DKL πθ || πbon = E log πbon (y) − log πθ (y)

                                                                                                  (5a)
                                        y∼πθ
                                              h           i
                                       = E log πbon (y) + H πθ                                    (5b)
                                              y∼πθ
                                                              N
                                                     h       X   N        N −i          i
                                                                               πref (y)i + H πθ ,

                                           = E           log       F r(y)                                    (5c)
                                              y∼πθ
                                                             i=1
                                                                 i

where H(·) is the entropy of a distribution. Thus, Eq. (5) offers an answer to the question of
what objective BoN optimizes. Inspecting the objective further, we see that Eq. (5) is an entropy-
regularized objective, where we use the probability of the string under the BoN distribution as the
reward and discourage the model from having low entropy.

Monotonically invariant. An important property of the variational BoN objective is that it is invari-
ant to applying a strictly monotonically increasing function to rewards. This is because the vBoN ob-
jective relies on reward values solely through F, which, as defined in Eq. (4), only depends on the rank-
ing between the reward values and not their exact magnitude. This suggests that the vBoN objective
may be less sensitive to outliers and the scale of rewards. This property is important as RL algorithms
are notoriously sensitive to the scale of reward values (Henderson et al., 2018; Schaul et al., 2021).

Approximating log F(·). Maximizing Eq. (5) requires us to compute log F(·) for any r(y). This,
however, is computationally expensive, as we have to sum over the probabilities of all strings that
have rewards less than r(y). Fortunately, we can instead maximize a lower bound of Eq. (5) using a
Monte Carlo estimator of F(·). Concretely, we can write F(·) as an expectation,
                              F r(y) = ′ E 1{r(y ′ ) < r(y)} .

                                                                                                (6)
                                                   y ∼πref

                                                                                                    i.i.d.
We approximate F r(y) using M i.i.d. samples from πref , termed y ′(1) , ... , y ′(M ) ∼ πref , using


                                     1{r(y ′(m) ) < r(y)}. We then take the log of this Monte
                         def 1 PM
which we compute F
                 b r(y) =
                                       M     m=1
Carlo estimator as a biased, but consistent estimator of log F(·) in Eq. (5).8 In §5.1, we empirically
assess the number of samples needed for log F b to accurately approximate log F.
8
    Using Jensen’s inequality, we show biasedness. Concretely, note the following lower bound
                                                              "    M
                                                                                          #
                                                                1 X
                                                                      1{r(y ) < r(y)}
                                                                            ′(m)

                      log F r(y) = log               E                                                       (7a)
                                           y ′(1) ,...,y ′(M ) M
                                                                  m=1
                                                          "          M
                                                                                             !#
                                                                 1 X
                                    ≥          E            log        1 {r(y ′(m) ) < r(y)}    ,            (7b)
                                      y ′(1) ,...,y ′(M )        M m=1

    where Jensen’s inequality is applicable because log is concave. Consistency can be shown with an application
    of the delta method (§5.5.4; Casella & Berger, 2001).


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    100                                                  1

     90
                                                        0.9

     80
                                                        0.8
     70                                   BoNBoN                                              BoNBoN
                                          DPO           0.7                                   DPO
     60                                   PPO                                                 PPO
                                          vBoN                                                vBoN
     50                                                 0.6
                                          BoN                                                 BoN

          0          10           20           30             0          10           20           30


(a) 4% of points on Pareto front belong to BoNBoN, (b) 7% of points on Pareto from belong to BoNBoN,
4% to PPO, 42% to DPO, and 50% to vBoN .           10% DPO, 33% PPO, and 50% vBoN .

Figure 2: Steering generated movie reviews towards positive sentiment. Points that are not on the
Pareto front of each method have lower opacity. BoN is the most effective approach in achieving
high win rates and high rewards while not diverging too far from the reference model. Our variational
approximation to BoN gets closest to the performance of BoN compared to other fine-tuning methods,
as reflected in the percentage of times it appears on the Pareto front.


4    C OMPARING THE B ON AND RL O BJECTIVES
To explore the connection between the vBoN objective and the KL-regularized RL objective, we
derive a lower bound for J V B O N . Through this lower bound, we hope to achieve a deeper insight into
how the reward function is used in the variational BoN objective, and why this objective discourages
high KL divergence from the reference model.
To derive such a lower bound, we substitute the BoN distribution in Eq. (4) into the vBoN objective
in Eq. (5). We then simplify this objective to arrive at the following theorem.
Theorem 2. We have J V B O N (θ) ≥ L(θ), where
                                              h              i
                           def
                      L(θ) = (N − 1) E log F r(y) − DKL πθ ∥ πref .                             (8)
                                        y∼πθ


Proof. See App. D.                                                                                  ■

Empirically, we observe that models that are fine-tuned to maximize L(θ) perform competitively to
the ones that are fine-tuned to maximize the vBoN objective; see App. G for experimental results.
Interestingly, if we compare Eq. (8) to the KL-constrained RL objective, Eq. (1), we see they have a
very similar structure. We observe that N (in the vBoN objective) acts as a regularization parameter.
As N → 1, the optimal distribution gets closer to πref , which has the same effect as β → ∞ in Eq. (1).
Furthermore, as N → ∞, the optimal distribution only generates the string with the maximum
rewards, which is equivalent to β → 0 in Eq. (1). Importantly, in both limits, the optimal distribution
under the KL-regularized RL objective and the vBoN objective are equivalent.
The main difference between the KL-constrained RL objective Eq. (1) and the derived vBoN lower
bound Eq. (8) is in how the reward function is used. The KL-constrained RL objective aims to max-
imize the expected reward values, whereas vBoN maximizes the cumulative probability that strings
sampled from the aligned model, πθ , achieve higher rewards compared to those sampled from πref .

5    S ENTIMENT C ONTROL
We now employ the variational BoN objective, Eq. (5), to fine-tune language models. We perform an
open-ended text generation task where the goal is to generate movie reviews with positive sentiment.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The reference model, πref , is GPT-IMDB9 , a GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) model fine-tuned on IMDB
corpus (Maas et al., 2011). We use a binary sentiment classifier,10 denoted as p, with two classes
                                                   def
{POS, NEG} as the reward model, and define r(y) = p(POS | y). Following Rafailov et al. (2023), we
sample 5000 movie reviews from the training set of IMDB dataset and for each sample, we randomly
choose a prefix length from {2, ... , 8} and take that prefix as the prompt. We further generate 512
prompts in the same way from the test set of IMDB that we use to evaluate our models.
We fine-tune the reference model with PPO using the vBoN objective Eq. (5). Then, we compare
the performance of the fine-tuned model (vBoN ) to the exact BoN (BoN ), i.e., applying BoN at
inference time.
We implement and compare the following existing methods for language model alignment:

• BoN -SFT: Perhaps the most straightforward way to approximate BoN distribution is to fine-tune
  the model to maximize the likelihood of the samples taken with BoN algorithm. Unfortunately, we
  find that SFT is incapable of achieving a good trade-off between achieving high rewards and low
  KL divergence, see App. H (Fig. 7) for the experimental results.
• PPO: We use PPO to optimize the KL-constrained objective in Eq. (1). We use the default
  hyperparameters in trlx library (Havrilla et al., 2023) for fine-tuning with PPO.
• DPO. Direct preference optimization (DPO; Rafailov et al., 2023) is a popular alternative to RLHF
  that does not require training a reward model. Following DPO’s experimental setup, we generate 6
  reviews per prompt and use the resulting 12 pairwise comparisons per prompt to construct DPO’s
  contrastive loss.11
• BoNBoN: Concurrent work (Gui et al., 2024) explores another approach to approximate BoN
  distribution. Assuming that the reference model distribution πref is continuous, Gui et al. (Theorem
  3; 2024) prove that the expected difference between the relative likelihood, i.e., ππbon     (·)
                                                                                           ref (·)
                                                                                                   , of the
                                                        1             1
  Best-of-N response and the Worst-of-N response is 2β = (N −1) PN −1 1/k . They use this property
                                                                             k=1
     to construct a loss function similar to that of IPO (Azar et al., 2023). Furthermore, they add another
     term to the loss function, which simply maximizes the likelihood of the Best-of-N response. The
     final loss function is a convex combination of the IPO-like loss and the negative log-likelihood loss,
     regulated by a hyperparameter α.12

We fine-tune models by varying the degree of regularization. For BoN approaches, that is achieved
by varying N , and for DPO and PPO, we vary β.13 Conveniently, N in vBoN is a hyperparameter,
meaning that we do not need to generate more samples from πref when we increase N . However,
with BoN and BoNBoN methods, we need to increase the number of samples from the reference
model as we increase N .
We generate movie reviews based on prompts from our test set using fine-tuned models and then
measure three metrics: (i) KL divergence between the fine-tuned model and the reference model; (ii)
win rate, defined as the percentage of times the fine-tuned model’s generations receive higher rewards
compared to the reference model’s generations; and (iii) average rewards obtained by the fine-tuned
model’s sampled strings.
For the BoN method, we report the empirical upper bound of log N − NN−1 for KL divergence
(Beirami et al., 2024; Mroueh, 2024) in our plots. Furthermore, the win rate of BoN over the
reference model can be computed analytically and is equal to NN+1 .
We visualize the win rate vs. KL curves in Fig. 2a, and Fig. 2b the average rewards of generations
under πθ vs. the KL divergence. As expected, BoN is the most effective approach; however, this
comes at an extra inference cost that grows with N . We observe that among the fine-tuning methods,
our variational approximation to BoN gets closest to the performance of BoN , as it appears more
9
 Specifically, we use https://huggingface.co/lvwerra/gpt2-imdb.
10
   Specifically, we use https://huggingface.co/lvwerra/distilbert-imdb.
11
   One could argue that DPO has a slight advantage over other methods in this setup since it has seen 6 unique
   generations per prompt during training, while the others only have seen one (or 2 with BoNBoN). Nevertheless,
   we observe that vBoN is more effective than DPO.
12
   Following the authors’ recommendation, we set α so that both terms contribute equally to the final loss.
13
   See App. F for more details regarding the regularization hyperparameters.


                                                       6
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              prompt: Horrible. I see many user                                                     prompt: I thoroughly enjoyed this
                                                         prompt: Billy Wilder is …
              comments …                                                                            movie because there …



log F (̂ y)

                                             M                                             M                                        M


                             r( y)                                       r( y)                                       r( y)

    Figure 3: Estimates of log F(·) with increasing the number of Monte Carlo samples. We test an
    adversarial prompt (left plot), a neutral prompt (middle plot), and a prompt with a positive sentiment
    (right plot). Overall, we hardly see any difference between the estimates after taking 200 samples.
    For the adversarial prompt, the distribution of rewards is peaked, and we do not see any changes in
    our estimator after taking only 100 samples.



    often on the Pareto front of the two curves compared to other methods. Notably, we observe that
    DPO performs better than PPO in terms of win rates but worse in terms of average rewards; this could
    be attributed to the contrastive nature of DPO’s loss function.


    5.1       E RROR IN E STIMATING log F(·)

    We empirically quantify the error when estimating log F(·) with a finite number of i.i.d samples from
    πref . To get a better intuition on the error of our estimators, in Fig. 3, we visualize the estimators for 3
    different prompts: one adversarial prompt (left plot), where the prompt itself has a negative sentiment,
    one neutral prompt (middle plot), and one prompt with a positive sentiment (right plot). We vary the
    number of Monte Carlo samples from 10 to 600. We observe that for all the 3 prompts, the estimated
    CDF hardly changes after 200 samples. When using the adversarial prompt, the reward distribution
    is negatively peaked, and the estimated CDF does not change after taking only 100 samples.
    We then quantify the change in the estimator by performing a two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test
    (Hodges, 1958). This test measures the closeness of two empirical cumulative distribution functions.
    Concretely, the test statistic is


                                                      b M r(y) − F
                                                  sup F          b M r(y) ,                                                             (9)
                                                         1          2
                                                  y∈Σ∗



    where F
          b M and F
              1
                      b M are estimated CDFs from M1 and M2 samples respectively. The statistics
                         2
    show the magnitude of the difference between the two empirical distributions of samples. The null
    hypothesis is that the two distributions are identical.
    In Tab. 1, for each sample size M , we compare the esti-
    mated CDF with M samples to the estimated CDF with 600                           Table 1: Measuring the estimation error with
    samples. If the two distributions are identical according                        increasing the sample size. After 250 sam-
    to the test, we can reliably use the M sample to estimate                        ples, the estimated CDF is unchanged for all
    the CDF. We report the number of prompts (out of 5000                            the prompts.
    prompts) for which we reject the null hypothesis, mean-
    ing that the distributions are not identical. Furthermore,                       M         Rejection rate   Test statistics   p-value
    for those prompts, we report the average test statistics and                     5            6.14%              0.63          0.02
    p-values. In general, for very few prompts, the null hypoth-                     20           4.02%              0.33          0.03
    esis is rejected. Moreover, with 250 samples, the estimated                      100          1.14%              0.17          0.02
                                                                                     200          0.06%              0.12          0.02
    CDFs are identical to the estimated CDF with 600 samples                         250             0                 -             -
    for all prompts.


                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2   E FFICIENCY A NALYSIS

We break down the efficiency analysis into 3 main parts: (i) the inference cost, (ii) the preference
optimization cost, (iii) and the preprocessing cost.

Inference cost. As discussed earlier, vBoN is an alignment-via-fine-tuning method, and along with
other alignment-via-fine-tuning methods, it is N times more efficient at inference compared to BoN .

Optimization cost. We compare vBoN ’s preference optimization cost to its closest alignment-
via-fine-tuning counterpart, PPO. In the optimization loop, the main difference between PPO and
vBoN is that vBoN requires computing the strict CDF function, F, using M samples. Crucially,
N in vBoN serves as a regularization hyperparameter, and increasing N does not incur additional
computation costs. To implement vBoN efficiently, we precompute the F function before starting the
optimization loop. This means the computational overhead is incurred only once, regardless of the
number of optimization runs.14 Since the F values are precomputed, we empirically observe that the
time needed to run the vBoN optimization loop is the same as running the PPO optimization loop,
and the cost of evaluating F is negligible. Therefore, the main computational overhead in vBoN
comes from precomputing log F(·).

Preprocessing cost. Estimating log F(·) requires
only forward passes through the LLM and reward
model without the need to compute and store gradi-                        0.85

ents. This makes the process highly parallelizable.
Our experiments utilize a memory-efficient library for                     0.8
                                                            Performance


LLM inference (V LLM; Kwon et al., 2023), which
allows us to perform these approximations efficiently.
                                                                          0.75
We examine the impact of increasing the computa-
tional cost of vBoN by varying M , which directly          0.7                               Average Reward
affects the total elapsed time and downstream                                                Win Rate
performance. For this analysis, we fix N = 10 and
                                                                1    2 3        7 10     20      37     74
fine-tune the model using three random seeds. We               M=   M= M=      M= M=    M=      M=     M=
                                                                  2   4   8      16 32     64      128    256
report the average and standard deviation of reward
values and win rates in Fig. 4 on a single A100-40GB                Total Elapsed Time (Minutes)
GPU. Our results show that increasing M generally
improves the aligned model’s rewards and win rates. Figure 4: The average reward and win rate
Notably, even with M = 32 samples (taking only 10 of the aligned models improve as we increase
minutes), the performance remains competitive with the sample size M used for approximating
higher values of M . We hypothesize that the data the vBoN loss function.
efficiency of the simple Monte Carlo estimator can be improved by taking into account the similarity
between different prompts to learn an approximation to log F function, which we plan as future work.


6     S UMMARIZATION

We further employ variational BoN in a summarization task, where the goal is to generate summaries
that align with human preferences. The reference model, πref , is a pythia-2.8B model fine-tuned
on human-written summaries of Reddit posts Stiennon et al. (2020).15 We use SFT to refer to this
model in the plots. We use two separate reward models for training and evaluation: a pythia-2.8B16
reward model for fine-tuning and a larger pythia-6.9B17 model exclusively for evaluation.

Dataset. To evaluate the generalization ability of the aligned models on out-of-distribution data, we
fine-tune the models using only posts from the relationship and relationship advice subreddits
14
   This is particularly advantageous since practitioners often perform the optimization multiple times to test
   various hyperparameter settings.
15
   We use https://huggingface.co/cleanrl/EleutherAI pythia-2.8b-deduped sft tldr.
16
   We use https://huggingface.co/cleanrl/EleutherAI pythia-2.8b-deduped reward tldr.
17
   We use https://huggingface.co/cleanrl/EleutherAI pythia-6.9b-deduped reward tldr.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     7
           0.8                                                    BoNBoN                                SFT
                                                                  DPO
                                                                   6.5                                  BoNBoN
                                                                  PPO                                   DPO
           0.7                                                       6
                                                                  vBoN                                  PPO


                                                     Average Reward
                                                                  BoN
                                                                   5.5                                  vBoN
Win Rate



           0.6                                                                                          BoN
                                                                       5

                                                                      4.5
           0.5
                                                                       4

                                                                      3.5
           0.4
                                                                       3


                 0.25   0.5       0.75         1                            0.25   0.5       0.75   1
                         Temperature                                                Temperature
(a) Comparing the win rates of alignment meth- (b) Comparing the average rewards obtained from the evalu-
ods against samples from the πref . vBoN ator reward model. BoN outperforms other alignment meth-
achieves closer results to BoN compared to ods, and vBoN achieves closer results to BoN compared to
other alignment-via-fine-tuning methods.       other alignment-via-fine-tuning methods.

Figure 5: Performance of different alignment methods on the summarization task. Solid traces
show the performance on in-distribution Reddit posts, while dashed lines demonstrate the out-of-
distribution performance. Overall, BoN is the most effective approach in achieving high win rates and
average rewards across all sampling temperatures. Our variational approximation to BoN (vBoN )
gets closest to the performance of BoN while being significantly cheaper at inference time.


of the Reddit TL;DR (Stiennon et al., 2020) dataset. We then assess the models’ performance on the
two types of data by dividing the test set into two equally-sized groups: in-distribution Reddit posts
from the relationship and relationship advice subreddits, and out-of-distribution posts from
the rest of the subreddits. We visualize the performance of methods on in-distribution data with a
solid trace and on out-of-distribution data with a dashed trace.

Experimental setup. We fine-tune the model with both the KL-constrained RL objective and vBoN
objective for 10000 episodes. Similar to the previous experiment, we use 200 samples to estimate
log F(·) values. To create a smooth and continuous reward function, we further fit an exponential
curve18 to the estimates. We set N = 100 for BoN and vBoN methods and the equivalent value
of β = 0.05 for the KL-constrained RL objective. We closely follow Huang et al. (2024) for
setting the hyperparameters of the PPO algorithm; please refer to App. F for more experimental
details. After fine-tuning, we sample from the aligned models with different sampling temperatures
t ∈ [0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.], each with 3 different random seeds.

Win rates. In Fig. 5a, we visualize the average and standard deviation of win rates compared against
the samples from the SFT model. Notably, BoN achieves the highest win rates, which is consistent
with findings from previous studies (Rafailov et al., 2023). We do not observe any significant
differences between BoN performance on in-distribution (solid trace) and out-of-distribution data,19
which is expected as BoN is an alignment-via-inference method. Similarly, we mostly do not observe
significant differences between in- and out-of-distribution performance of all alignment-via-fine-
tuning methods, indicating that these methods can generalize effectively in this experimental setup.
DPO and BoNBoN only manage to perform competitively to other methods at lower temperatures
(0.25, 0.5), and their performance drops significantly at higher temperatures (0.75, 1). Importantly,
while PPO and vBoN perform comparably at higher temperatures, vBoN significantly outperforms
PPO at lower temperatures (0.25 and 0.5).

18
     We fit an exponential function of the form f (x) = −a exp(−bx) to the data using non-linear least squares.
19
     The difference between the two data distributions becomes more apparent at temperature 1, potentially due to
     increased sample diversity in this setting.


                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: An example of summaries sampled at temperature 0.5 and their corresponding reward obtained from
the evaluator reward model.

       Content                                                                                       Reward
       SUBREDDIT: r/relationship advice                                                              -
       TITLE: Stuck in a rut and in need of advice/inspiration!
       POST: My boyfriend and I have been together for 3 years, and living together for 2. I’m
       quite the homebody, and when we first met, he was very outgoing and loved partying
       and socialising (although he was a student at the time). We’re both working now, and
       most nights we find ourselves doing the same things: watching series (luckily we enjoy
       the same shows), playing Minecraft or playing various board games. We’re tired after
       work, and can’t bring ourselves to leave the house. The weekend is much the same – lots
       of sleep, or sitting around staring at one screen or another. We do party occasionally
       (we’ll head to a pub once every few months) and there are a few mutual friends we enjoy
       spending time with, but I worry that we’ve become stuck in our boring ways. I really
       enjoy our lifestyle, and would be quite happy to never leave the house again, but I’m
       starting to feel guilty for turning him into a 50 year-old when he’s only 24. Any ideas for
       shaking things up a little? Bear in mind that we live in a small town in South Africa, and
       neither of us has a car.
                                                                                                     3.08
       SFT: I’m stuck in a rut, and need to shake things up to see if it’ll work out. Any advice?
                                                                                                     4.59
       PPO: In need of inspiration to break out of rut and live life fully! Any ideas welcome!
                                                                                                     6.79
       vBoN : Been happily living together for 2yr+, feeling bored after work regularly, looking
       for ideas to spice things up!
                                                                                                     9.18
       BoN : My boyfriend and I have been together for 3 years, and are both working full time.
       We spend most of our time in the house, and have become boring. What can we do to
       shake things up?



Average rewards. In Fig. 5b, we measure the average rewards across different temperatures. As
the temperature increases, the average reward decreases consistently across all methods. This trend
is also evident in the qualitative analysis in App. I, where we show sampled summaries at different
temperatures. DPO and BoNBoN suffer more from increasing the temperature, as the average rewards
get close to (or even worse than) the SFT average rewards. Generally, the average reward results align
with the win-rate trends, and we observe that vBoN achieves significantly higher rewards compared
to PPO at lower temperatures. In Tab. 2, we show an example of summaries generated from the
fine-tuned models with their associated reward values.

7    C ONCLUSION
Motivated by the effectiveness of the BoN algorithm, we formally derive a variational approximation
to the distribution induced by BoN algorithm via fine-tuning language models. Our analysis highlights
the similarities and distinctions between the variational BoN objective and the KL-constrained RL
objectives. Our empirical findings reveal that models fine-tuned using the variational approximation
to BoN not only attain high reward values but also maintain proximity to the reference models.
Crucially, inference on the fine-tuned models with the vBoN objective remains as cost-effective as
inference on the original reference model.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Ahmad Beirami for the fruitful discussion in the early stages of this project. We also thank
Amrit Singh Bedi for identifying a typo in a previous version of the bound derivations. Finally, we
thank the anonymous reviewers for their feedback. Afra Amini is supported by the ETH AI Center
doctoral fellowship.


                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Bilal Piot, Daniel Guo, Daniele Calandriello, Michal
 Valko, and Rémi Munos. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human
 preferences. Computing Research Repository, arXiv:2310.12036, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
 org/abs/2310.12036.

Ahmad Beirami, Alekh Agarwal, Jonathan Berant, Alexander D’Amour, Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag
  Nagpal, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Theoretical guarantees on the best-of-n alignment policy.
 Computing Research Repository, arXiv:2401.01879, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.
  01879.

Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V. Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling.
  Computing Research Repository, arXiv:2407.21787, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
  21787.

George Casella and Roger L. Berger. Statistical Inference. Chapman and Hall/CRC, Pacific
  Grove, CA, 2nd edition, 2001. ISBN 9781032593036. URL https://www.routledge.com/
  Statistical-Inference/Casella-Berger/p/book/9781032593036.

Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. Coarse-to-fine n-best parsing and MaxEnt discriminative
  reranking. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2005. doi: 10.3115/1219840.1219862. URL https://aclanthology.org/P05-1022.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep rein-
  forcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2017/file/
  d5e2c0adad503c91f91df240d0cd4e49-Paper.pdf.

Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Yihan Zhang, Winnie Chow, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao,
  Jipeng Zhang, KaShun SHUM, and Tong Zhang. RAFT: Reward ranked finetuning for generative
  foundation model alignment. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=m7p5O7zblY.

Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/gao23h.html.

Gemini. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. Technical report, Google, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.11805.

Lin Gui, Cristina Gârbacea, and Victor Veitch. BoNBoN alignment for large language models and
  the sweetness of best-of-n sampling. Computing Research Repository, arXiv:2406.00832, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.00832.

Alexander Havrilla, Maksym Zhuravinskyi, Duy Phung, Aman Tiwari, Jonathan Tow, Stella Bi-
  derman, Quentin Anthony, and Louis Castricato. trlX: A framework for large scale reinforce-
  ment learning from human feedback. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.530. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.530.

Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Proceedings of the Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence and Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference and AAAI Symposium on
  Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, 2018. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.
  5555/3504035.3504427.

Joseph L. Hodges. The significance probability of the Smirnov two-sample test. Arkiv för Matematik,
  3, 1958. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:121451525.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shengyi Huang, Michael Noukhovitch, Arian Hosseini, Kashif Rasul, Weixun Wang, and Lewis
  Tunstall. The N+ implementation details of RLHF with PPO: A case study on TL;DR summariza-
  tion. In Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  kHO2ZTa8e3.

Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS Symposium on Operating
 Systems Principles, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06180.

Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning and control as probabilistic inference: Tutorial and review.
  Computing Research Repository, arXiv:1805.00909, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1805.
  00909.

Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2011. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P11-1015.

Meta.   Llama 2:   Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. Technical re-
 port,  Meta,   2023.        URL https://ai.meta.com/research/publications/
 llama-2-open-foundation-and-fine-tuned-chat-models/.

Youssef Mroueh. Information theoretic guarantees for policy alignment in large language models.
  Computing Research Repository, arXiv:2406.05883, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
  05883.

Sidharth Mudgal, Jong Lee, Harish Ganapathy, YaGuang Li, Tao Wang, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng
  Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Michael Collins, Trevor Strohman, Jilin Chen, Alex Beutel, and Ahmad
  Beirami. Controlled decoding from language models. In Proceedings of The International
  Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.17022.

Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. WebGPT:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. Computing Research Repository,
  arXiv:2112.09332, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.09332.

OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. Technical report, OpenAI, 2023. URL https://cdn.openai.com/
  papers/gpt-4.pdf.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper
  files/paper/2022/file/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Alizée Pace, Jonathan Mallinson, Eric Malmi, Sebastian Krause, and Aliaksei Severyn. West-of-n:
  Synthetic preference generation for improved reward modeling. Computing Research Repository,
  arXiv:2401.12086, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12086.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language mod-
  els are unsupervised multitask learners, 2019. URL https://d4mucfpksywv.cloudfront.net/
  better-language-models/language models are unsupervised multitask learners.pdf.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.18290.
  pdf.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Iurii Kemaev, and Diana Borsa. Return-based scaling: Yet another
  normalisation trick for deep RL. Computing Research Repository, arXiv:2105.05347, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05347.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. Computing Research Repository, arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Robert Dadashi, Léonard Hussenot, Johan Ferret, Nino Vieillard, Alexan-
  dre Ramé, Bobak Shariari, Sarah Perrin, Abe Friesen, Geoffrey Cideron, Sertan Girgin, Pi-
  otr Stanczyk, Andrea Michi, Danila Sinopalnikov, Sabela Ramos, Amélie Héliou, Aliaksei
  Severyn, Matt Hoffman, Nikola Momchev, and Olivier Bachem. BOND: Aligning LLMs
  with best-of-N distillation. Computing Research Repository, arXiv:2401.12086, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12086.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute opti-
  mally can be more effective than scaling model parameters. Computing Research Repository,
  arXiv:2408.03314, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03314.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper files/paper/2020/file/1f89885d556929e98d3ef9b86448f951-Paper.pdf.
Joy Qiping Yang, Salman Salamatian, Ziteng Sun, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and Ahmad Beirami.
  Asymptotics of language model alignment. Computing Research Repository, arXiv:2404.01730,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2404.01730.
Kevin Yang and Dan Klein. FUDGE: Controlled text generation with future discriminators. In
  Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  naacl-main.276.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Symbol            Type           Explanation
       Σ          alphabet           Σ is a set of symbols
     y, y ′         ∈ Σ∗             strings in Σ∗
       x            ∈ Σ∗             prompt string in Σ∗
       θ            ∈Θ               A real vector representing the parameters of a language model
      πθ      language model         A language model parameterized by θ
      πref    language model         A supervised-fine-tuned language model
       r         Σ∗ → R              A reward model
       β             R               Regularization parameter for the KL divergence term
       F          R→R                A strict cumulative density function of reward values under πref
      N              Z+              Number of samples used in BoN algorithm
      M              Z+              Number of samples used in the MC estimator

                            Table 3: A summary of the notation used in the paper


A     R ELATED W ORK

Best-of-N . BoN is a straightforward alignment-via-inference algorithm to optimize the output
of the language model using a trained reward model (Charniak & Johnson, 2005; Stiennon et al.,
2020). Despite its simplicity, BoN performs comparably or even better than other alignment methods,
such as RLHF and direct preference optimization (Nakano et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023; Rafailov
et al., 2023). However, as noted by Stiennon et al. (2020), BoN is an inefficient algorithm due to the
reduced throughput at inference time.

Applications. BoN has been applied successfully at various stages of the development of language
models. Meta (2023); Dong et al. (2023) employ iterative supervised fine-tuning on the outputs of
the BoN algorithm to clone its behavior in the model. Pace et al. (2024) leverage BoN to enhance
reward modeling by training the reward model on both the best and worst responses. Additionally,
Brown et al. (2024); Snell et al. (2024) explore the scaling laws for alignment-via-inference methods
and demonstrate how to utilize the limited inference budget to achieve the alignment.

Best-of-N as an alignment-via-fine-tuning method. Two concurrent efforts to ours have also
attempted to convert BoN to an alignment-via-fine-tuning method. First, Gui et al. (2024) approxi-
mate the BoN by maximizing the likelihood of the Best-of-N response and adjusting the relative
likelihood of the Best-of-N and the Worst-of-N response. Second, Sessa et al. (2024), similar to
ours, uses reinforcement learning to minimize the distance between the language model and the BoN
policy. Different from ours, and to reduce the fine-tuning time, the authors use a crude estimation of
log F and approximate the distance to Best-of-N by iteratively distilling the Best-of-2 model as a
moving anchor.


B    P ROOF OF P ROP. 1

Proposition 1. Suppose r : Σ∗ → R is a one-to-one mapping. Then, the probability of a string y
under πbon is given by

                      N
                      X  N               N −i                       def
         πbon (y) =               F r(y)      πref (y)i ,   F r(y) =         P        (r(y ′ ) < r(y)) .   (4)
                      i=1
                              i                                           y ′ ∼πref


Proof. The proof follows Casella & Berger (2001, Theorem 5.4.3). To compute πbon (y), we first
define two events: (i) the event that all N samples have rewards less than or equal to r(y), and (ii) the


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


event that all N samples have rewards less than r(y). The probability of those events is as follows:20

                                                                                   N
                       def
                p1 (y) = P(all N samples have rewards ≤ r(y)) = F r(y) + πref (y)                           (10a)
                       def                                             N
                p2 (y) = P(all N samples have rewards < r(y)) = F r(y) .                                    (10b)

Note that for Eq. (10a) to hold, we need the assumption that the reward function is a one-to-one
mapping.21 Furthermore, given this assumption, πbon (y) is the probability that at least one of
the sampled strings out of N samples have the reward exactly equal to r(y) and the rest of the
samples have rewards less than or equal to r(y). Given how we defined p1 and p2 , we have
πbon (y) = p1 (y) − p2 (y).

                                         N             N
                                                    N X   N         N −i
                                                                         πref (y)i .

            πbon (y) = F r(y) + πref (y)   − F r(y) =        F r(y)                                          (11)
                                                      i=1
                                                          i


                                                                                                               ■



C        S TRATEGIES FOR N ON -I NJECTIVE R EWARD F UNCTIONS

If the reward function is not injective, we need a tie-breaking strategy for the BoN algorithm. We
formalize this as defining a total order ≺r on Σ∗ as follows: for any two strings y 1 and y 2 , if
r(y 1 ) < r(y 2 ) then we have y 1 ≺r y 2 . If r(y 1 ) = r(y 2 ) then y 1 ≺r y 2 only if y 1 ≺ y 2 , where ≺
is some arbitrary but fixed total order, e.g., lexicographic order. Therefore, we define F(y) as

                                                   def
                                              F(y) = P y ′ ≺r y .

                                                                                                             (12)

We then need to define the two events and their probabilities, p1 and p2 , given this total order on
strings, as follows:

                                                                            N
                               def
                        p1 (y) = P(all N samples are ⪯r y) = F y + πref (y)                                 (13a)
                               def                                N
                        p2 (y) = P(all N samples are ≺r y) = F y                                            (13b)

The rest of the proof is the same as with the one-to-one reward functions.



D        P ROOF OF T HM . 2

Theorem 2. We have J V B O N (θ) ≥ L(θ), where

                                                     h              i
                                 def
                            L(θ) = (N − 1) E             log F r(y) − DKL πθ ∥ πref .                         (8)
                                              y∼πθ



20
     The PMF of BoN is also derived by Beirami et al. (Lemma 1; 2024). In their notation, p1 = F and p2 = F −1 .
21
     If the reward function is not a one-to-one mapping, we need to devise a tie-breaking strategy. See App. C for
     further discussion.


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. First, we prove J V B O N (θ) ≥ L(θ).



                                      h                         i
                   DKL πθ || πbon = E log πθ (y) − log πbon (y)                                (14a)
                                               y∼πθ
                                                      N
                               h                      X  N                N −i           i
                   = E             log πθ (y) − log                F r(y)      πref (y)i       (14b)
                      y∼πθ
                                                      i=1
                                                               i
                                                      N =1
                               h                N     X       N −i           i
                   ≤ E             log πθ (y) − log F r(y)         πref (y)i                   (14c)
                     y∼πθ
                                          i=1
                                                i
                          h                         N −1            i
                   ≤ E log πθ (y) − log N F r(y)          πref (y)1                            (14d)
                     y∼πθ
                          h                       N −1          i
                   ≤ E log πθ (y) − log F r(y)         πref (y)                                (14e)
                     y∼πθ
                          h                                                 i
                   = E log πθ (y) − log πref (y) − (N − 1) log F r(y)                           (14f)
                     y∼πθ
                                                  h                i def
                   = DKL πθ || πref − (N − 1) E log F r(y) = −L(θ).                            (14g)
                                                            y∼πθ


The inequality in Eq. (14c) stems from the fact that we drop positive terms in the summation and
only keep the first term. Therefore, the lower bound for our objective is:


                                                 h          i
     J V B O N (θ) = −DKL πθ || πbon ≥ (N − 1) E log F r(y) − DKL πθ || πref .

                                                                                                (15)
                                                            y∼πθ


                                                                                                   ■


Another approach to deriving a lower bound is by using Jensen’s inequality. By doing so, we arrive at
the following theorem.

                                −1)
Theorem 3. Let α = (N +2)(N  2      , β = N (N2+1) , and γ = N (N2−1) . Then, we have J V B O N (θ) ≥
L1 (θ), where we further define


                                          h              i
                         def
                  L1 (θ) = γ E                log F r(y) − αH πθ − βDKL πθ || πref .            (16)
                                   y∼πθ


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof.

                     h                        i
  DKL πθ || πbon = E log πθ (y) − log πbon (y)                                                             (17a)
                         y∼πθ
                                   N
            h                      X  N                     N −i               i
   = E          log πθ (y) − log                  F r(y)           πref (y)i                               (17b)
     y∼πθ
                                   i=1
                                              i
                            N
            h               X   N             N −i            i
   ≤ E log πθ (y) −        log      F r(y)         πref (y)i                                      (17c)
     y∼πθ
                      i=1
                                i
                       N           X    N                             N
          h           X         N                          N −i X                      i
   = E log πθ (y) −        log       −      log F r(y)            −      log πref (y)i            (17d)
     y∼πθ
                      i=1
                                i      i=1                           i=1
                       N                                N                              N i
          h           X         N                    X                                X
   = E log πθ (y) −        log       − log F r(y)           (N − i) − log πref (y)        i       (17e)
     y∼πθ
                      i=1
                                i                      i=1                            i=1
          h           N (N − 1)                  N (N + 1)                     i
   ≤ E log πθ (y) −               log F r(y) −                     log πref (y)                    (17f)
     y∼πθ                   2                              2
          h           N (N + 1)                  N (N − 1)                     i
   = E log πθ (y) −               log πref (y) −                 log F r(y)                       (17g)
     y∼πθ                   2                            2
     N (N + 1)                     h −(N + 2)(N − 1)                         N (N − 1)               i
   =           DKL πθ || πref + E                            log πθ (y) −                log F r(y)
          2                     πθ             2                                  2
                                                                                                  (17h)
     N (N + 1)                 (N + 2)(N − 1)                       h N (N − 1)                i
   =           DKL πθ || πref +                     H πθ − E                        log F r(y)     (17i)
          2                              2                       πθ         2

In Eq. (17c), because − log(x) is convex for x ≥ 0, we applied Jensen’s inequality to obtain the
upper bound. Abstracting away from the three multiplicative factors, naming them γ, α and β, we
end up with the following function

   J V B O N (θ) = −DKL πθ || πbon ≥ γ E log F r(y) − αH(πθ ) − βDKL (πθ || πref ) ,

                                                                                                            (18)
                                                  y∼πθ


which is a bound for some settings of γ, α and β.                                                             ■



Importantly, L1 is a looser bound compared to L. We formalize this in the following theorem.
Theorem 4. For every θ ∈ Θ, we have L(θ) ≥ L1 (θ).



Proof. We prove −L1 (θ) ≥ −L(θ), meaning that L is a tighter lower bound. According to Eq. (17f),
we have:

                                         h                  N                                          i
                                                            X                       N −i
                   −L1 (θ) ≥ E               log πθ (y) −         log F r(y)               πref (y)i       (19a)
                                y∼πθ
                                                            i=1
                                         h                  N =1                                       i
                                                            X                       N −i
                           ≥ E               log πθ (y) −          log F r(y)              πref (y)i       (19b)
                                y∼πθ
                                                            i=1
                                         h                           N −1         i
                           = E               log πθ (y) − log F r(y)      πref (y) = −L(θ).                (19c)
                                y∼πθ


                                                                                                              ■


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hypterparameter                                               Value
Episodes                                                      10000
Optimizer                                                     AdamW (ϵ = 1e − 5, lr= 3e − 6)
Scheduler                                                     Linear
Batch Size                                                    32
β (Both for vBoN and KL-constrained RL objective)             0.05
γ (Discount Factor)                                           1
λ (for GAE)                                                   0.95
Number of PPO Update Iteration Per Epoch                      4
PPO’s Policy Clipping Coefficient                             0.2
Value Clipping Coefficient                                    0.2
Value Function Coefficient                                    0.2
Value Function Loss Clipping                                  True
Sampling Temperature                                          0.7


E    V B O N P SEUDOCODE


Algorithm 1 The vBoN algorithm
 1: procedure V B ON (πref , r, N , E, B)           ▷ D: the prompt dataset, E: number of epochs, B batch size
 2:   Initialize πθ with πref
 3:   for E epochs :
 4:      for each batch in D :
 5:         y (1) , ... , y (B) ∼ πθ (·)                       ▷ Sample 1 response for each prompt in the batch
 6:         Compute r(y (1) ), ... , r(y (B) )
            Compute F r(y (1) ) , ... , F r(y (B) )

 7:
 8:         Optimize πθ with Eq. (5) (or Eq. (8)) using PPO
 9:   return πθ



F    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Hyperparameter sweep in the sentiment experiment. To visualize the trade-off between the
expected rewards and KL divergence, we vary the degree of the visualization using the following
hyperparameters for each method:

       • BoN -SFT: N ∈ [10, 50, 90, 130, 170, 210, 250, 290, 330, 370, 410, 450, 490, 530, 570, 600]
         with 2 different seeds, resulting in 32 runs.
       • PPO: β ∈ [0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 1., 2., 3., 4., 5.] with 2
         different seeds, resulting in 32 runs.
       • DPO: β ∈ [0.01, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 1., 2., 3., 4., 5.] with 3 different seeds, resulting in
         33 runs.
       • BoNBoN and vBoN : N ∈ [1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512] with 3 different seeds,
         resulting in 33 runs.
       • vBoN with L bound:                     β     ∈      [0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2,
         0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 1., 2., 3., 4., 5.] with 2 different seeds, resulting in 32 runs. Note that
         comparing Eq. (5) and Eq. (1), we have N = β1 + 1.

PPO hyperparameters. In App. F, we include the hyperparameters used with the PPO algorithm
for the summarization experiment.

G    C OMPARING THE V B ON O BJECTIVE AND L L OWER B OUND
We compare the performance of models fine-tuned with the vBoN objective and its lower bound (L)
in Fig. 6. We observe that the performance of the models is very close to each other.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    100                                                 1

     90
                                                       0.9

     80
                                                       0.8
     70
                                                       0.7
     60                                  vBoN-L                                             vBoN-L
                                         vBoN                                               vBoN
                                                       0.6
     50                                  BoN                                                BoN

          0          10          20          30              0         10          20           30



Figure 6: Comparing models trained with the vBoN objective and its lower bound (L). We observe
that the performance of the two methods is very close to each other.


    100                                                 1

     90
                                                       0.9

     80
                                                       0.8
                                        BoN-SFT                                            BoN-SFT
     70                                 BoNBoN                                             BoNBoN
                                        DPO            0.7                                 DPO
     60                                 PPO                                                PPO
                                        vBoN                                               vBoN
     50                                                0.6
                                        BoN                                                BoN

          0          10          20          30              0         10          20           30


(a) 4% of points on Pareto front belong to BoNBoN, (b) 7% of points on Pareto from belong to BoNBoN,
4% to PPO, 42% to DPO, and 50% to vBoN .           10% DPO, 33% PPO, and 50% vBoN .

Figure 7: Steering generated movie reviews towards positive sentiment. Points that are not on the
Pareto front have lower opacity.


H    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS WITH B ON -SFT
We further experiment with training with the maximum likelihood objective on BoN generations
when varying N . The results are depicted in Fig. 7. We observe that BoN diverges too much from
the reference model compared to other fine-tuning methods for alignment.

I   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: An example of summaries sampled at temperature 0.25 and their corresponding reward obtained from
the evaluator reward model.

       Content                                                                                       Reward
       SUBREDDIT: r/relationship advice                                                              -
       TITLE: Stuck in a rut and in need of advice/inspiration!
       POST: My boyfriend and I have been together for 3 years, and living together for 2. I’m
       quite the homebody, and when we first met, he was very outgoing and loved partying
       and socialising (although he was a student at the time). We’re both working now, and
       most nights we find ourselves doing the same things: watching series (luckily we enjoy
       the same shows), playing Minecraft or playing various board games. We’re tired after
       work, and can’t bring ourselves to leave the house. The weekend is much the same – lots
       of sleep, or sitting around staring at one screen or another. We do party occasionally
       (we’ll head to a pub once every few months) and there are a few mutual friends we enjoy
       spending time with, but I worry that we’ve become stuck in our boring ways. I really
       enjoy our lifestyle, and would be quite happy to never leave the house again, but I’m
       starting to feel guilty for turning him into a 50 year-old when he’s only 24. Any ideas for
       shaking things up a little? Bear in mind that we live in a small town in South Africa, and
       neither of us has a car.
                                                                                                     5.83
       SFT: I’m stuck in a rut with my boyfriend, and I’d like to shake things up a little. Any
       ideas?
                                                                                                     4.88
       PPO: In need of inspiration for moving past boring routines and becoming active and
       open minded individuals. Any ideas welcome!
                                                                                                     7.39
       vBoN : Been dating for three years and living together for two. Feeling stuck in rut after
       working hard all week. Looking for ideas to shake things up!
                                                                                                     7.14
       BoN : Been together for 3 years, and living together for 2. We’re both working now,
       and find ourselves doing the same things: watching series, playing games, or having sex.
       We’re tired after work, and can’t bring ourselves to leave


Table 5: An example of summaries sampled at temperature 0.5 and their corresponding reward obtained from
the evaluator reward model.

       Content                                                                                       Reward
       SUBREDDIT: r/relationship advice                                                              -
       TITLE: Stuck in a rut and in need of advice/inspiration!
       POST: My boyfriend and I have been together for 3 years, and living together for 2. I’m
       quite the homebody, and when we first met, he was very outgoing and loved partying
       and socialising (although he was a student at the time). We’re both working now, and
       most nights we find ourselves doing the same things: watching series (luckily we enjoy
       the same shows), playing Minecraft or playing various board games. We’re tired after
       work, and can’t bring ourselves to leave the house. The weekend is much the same – lots
       of sleep, or sitting around staring at one screen or another. We do party occasionally
       (we’ll head to a pub once every few months) and there are a few mutual friends we enjoy
       spending time with, but I worry that we’ve become stuck in our boring ways. I really
       enjoy our lifestyle, and would be quite happy to never leave the house again, but I’m
       starting to feel guilty for turning him into a 50 year-old when he’s only 24. Any ideas for
       shaking things up a little? Bear in mind that we live in a small town in South Africa, and
       neither of us has a car.
                                                                                                     3.08
       SFT: I’m stuck in a rut, and need to shake things up to see if it’ll work out. Any advice?
                                                                                                     4.59
       PPO: In need of inspiration to break out of rut and live life fully! Any ideas welcome!
                                                                                                     6.79
       vBoN : Been happily living together for 2yr+, feeling bored after work regularly, looking
       for ideas to spice things up!
                                                                                                     9.18
       BoN : My boyfriend and I have been together for 3 years, and are both working full time.
       We spend most of our time in the house, and have become boring. What can we do to
       shake things up?


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: An example of summaries sampled at temperature 0.75 and their corresponding reward obtained from
the evaluator reward model.

       Content                                                                                       Reward
       SUBREDDIT: r/relationship advice                                                              -
       TITLE: Stuck in a rut and in need of advice/inspiration!
       POST: My boyfriend and I have been together for 3 years, and living together for 2. I’m
       quite the homebody, and when we first met, he was very outgoing and loved partying
       and socialising (although he was a student at the time). We’re both working now, and
       most nights we find ourselves doing the same things: watching series (luckily we enjoy
       the same shows), playing Minecraft or playing various board games. We’re tired after
       work, and can’t bring ourselves to leave the house. The weekend is much the same – lots
       of sleep, or sitting around staring at one screen or another. We do party occasionally
       (we’ll head to a pub once every few months) and there are a few mutual friends we enjoy
       spending time with, but I worry that we’ve become stuck in our boring ways. I really
       enjoy our lifestyle, and would be quite happy to never leave the house again, but I’m
       starting to feel guilty for turning him into a 50 year-old when he’s only 24. Any ideas for
       shaking things up a little? Bear in mind that we live in a small town in South Africa, and
       neither of us has a car.
                                                                                                     4.41
       SFT: Boyfriend and I are stuck in a rut. We don’t do anything fun, and I’m starting to
       feel guilty for not even trying to get away from it all.
                                                                                                     4.76
       PPO: In rutting boredom with boring life; any ideas for shaking things up a little? Any
       ideas for improving relationships?
                                                                                                     6.02
       vBoN : Been happily cohabiting for three years with boyfriend of two years. Feeling
       guilty for turning him into an old man! Any ideas for shaking things up?
                                                                                                     5.47
       BoN : Boyfriend and I are a little boring, and want to shake things up so we can go out
       and have fun but we’re too stuck on the idea of staying in all day.


Table 7: An example of summaries sampled at temperature 1. and their corresponding reward obtained from the
evaluator reward model.

       Content                                                                                       Reward
       SUBREDDIT: r/relationship advice                                                              -
       TITLE: Stuck in a rut and in need of advice/inspiration!
       POST: My boyfriend and I have been together for 3 years, and living together for 2. I’m
       quite the homebody, and when we first met, he was very outgoing and loved partying
       and socialising (although he was a student at the time). We’re both working now, and
       most nights we find ourselves doing the same things: watching series (luckily we enjoy
       the same shows), playing Minecraft or playing various board games. We’re tired after
       work, and can’t bring ourselves to leave the house. The weekend is much the same – lots
       of sleep, or sitting around staring at one screen or another. We do party occasionally
       (we’ll head to a pub once every few months) and there are a few mutual friends we enjoy
       spending time with, but I worry that we’ve become stuck in our boring ways. I really
       enjoy our lifestyle, and would be quite happy to never leave the house again, but I’m
       starting to feel guilty for turning him into a 50 year-old when he’s only 24. Any ideas for
       shaking things up a little? Bear in mind that we live in a small town in South Africa, and
       neither of us has a car.
                                                                                                     5.89
       SFT: My boyfriend and I used to party all the time and are ending up reverting to the
       boring old lifestyle of a 24-year-old. How can we both break out of a rut and get some
       fun back in our relationship?
                                                                                                     5.91
       PPO: Taken classic boring suburban lifestyle and turned into boring 24yo. Looking for
       ideas for breaking out of rut and refreshing lifestyle. Any ideas welcome!
                                                                                                     6.57
       vBoN : boyfriend and I seem to have fallen into a rut of regularly doing mundane
       activities after working together non-stop for several months! ideas to spice things up?
                                                                                                     6.74
       BoN : in a relationship that’s getting a bit stale, looking for some inspiration to make
       changes on a whim in hopes of rejuvenating it!


                                                         21
