Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S TABLE H ADAMARD M EMORY:
R EVITALIZING M EMORY-AUGMENTED AGENTS FOR
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Hung Le, Dung Nguyen, Kien Do, Sunil Gupta, and Svetha Venkatesh
 Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
 {thai.le,dung.nguyen,k.do,sunil.gupta,svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au



                                           A BSTRACT
         Effective decision-making in partially observable environments demands robust
         memory management. Despite their success in supervised learning, current deep-
         learning memory models struggle in reinforcement learning environments that are
         partially observable and long-term. They fail to efficiently capture relevant past
         information, adapt flexibly to changing observations, and maintain stable updates
         over long episodes. We theoretically analyze the limitations of existing memory
         models within a unified framework and introduce the Stable Hadamard Memory,
         a novel memory model for reinforcement learning agents. Our model dynamically
         adjusts memory by erasing no longer needed experiences and reinforcing crucial
         ones computationally efficiently. To this end, we leverage the Hadamard product
         for calibrating and updating memory, specifically designed to enhance memory
         capacity while mitigating numerical and learning challenges. Our approach
         significantly outperforms state-of-the-art memory-based methods on challenging
         partially observable benchmarks, such as meta-reinforcement learning, long-
         horizon credit assignment, and POPGym, demonstrating superior performance
         in handling long-term and evolving contexts. Our source code is available at
         https://github.com/thaihungle/SHM.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning agents necessitate memory. This is especially true in Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs (Kaelbling et al., 1998)), where past information is crucial
for making informed decisions. However, designing a robust memory remains an enduring
challenge, as agents must not only store long-term memories but also dynamically update them
in response to evolving environments. Memory-augmented neural networks (MANNs)–particularly
those developed for supervised learning (Graves et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017), while offering
promising solutions, have consistently struggled in these dynamic settings. Recent empirical studies
(Morad et al., 2023; Ni et al., 2024) have shown that MANNs exhibit instability and underperform
simpler vector-based memory models such as GRU (Chung et al., 2014) or LSTM (Hochreiter,
1997). The issue is exacerbated in complex and sparse reward scenarios where agents must
selectively retain and erase memories based on relevance. Unfortunately, existing methods fail to
provide a memory writing mechanism that is efficient, stable, and flexible to meet these demands.
In this paper, we focus on designing a better writing mechanism to encode new information into the
memory. To this end, we introduce the Hadamard Memory Framework (HMF), a unified model
that encompasses many existing writing methods as specific cases. This framework highlights
the critical role of memory calibration, which involves linearly adjusting memory elements by
multiplying the memory matrix with a calibration matrix and then adding an update matrix. By
leveraging Hadamard products that operate element-wise on memory matrices, we allow memory
writing without mixing the memory cells in a computationally efficient manner. More importantly,
the calibration and update matrices are dynamically computed based on the input at each step. This
enables the model to learn adaptive memory rules, which are crucial for generalization. For instance,
in meta-reinforcement learning with varying maze layouts, a fixed memory update rule may work for
one layout but fail in another. By allowing the calibration matrix to adjust according to the current


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


maze observation, the agent can learn to adapt to any layout configuration. A dynamic calibration
matrix also enables the agent to flexibly forget and later recall information as needed. For example,
an agent navigating a room may need to remember the key’s location, retain it during a detour, and
later recall it when reaching a door, while discarding irrelevant detour events.
Although most current memory models can be reformulated within the HMF, they tend to be either
overly simplistic with limited calibration capabilities (Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Radford et al.,
2019) or unable to manage memory writing reliably, suffering from gradient vanishing or exploding
issues (Ba et al., 2016; Morad et al., 2024). To address these limitations, we propose a specific
instance of HMF, called Stable Hadamard Memory, which introduces a novel calibration mechanism
based on two key principles: (i) dynamically adjusting memory values in response to the current
context input to selectively weaken outdated or enhance relevant information, and (ii) ensuring
the expected value of the calibration matrix product remains bounded, thereby preventing gradient
vanishing or exploding. Through extensive experimentation on POMDP benchmarks, including
meta reinforcement learning, long-horizon credit assignment, and hard memorization games, we
demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art memory-based models in
terms of performance while also delivering competitive speed. We also provide comprehensive
ablation studies that offer insights into the components and internal workings of our memory models.
In summary, our contributions are: (i) Unified Memory Framework: We propose a unified memory
framework, supported by theoretical analysis, to elucidate its properties as episode length increases.
(ii) Novel Calibration Matrix: We design a calibration matrix with random parameter selection,
mitigating timestep dependencies and theoretically enhancing stability by regulating the expected
gradient norm. (iii) Extensive Empirical Evaluation: Experiments on challenging benchmarks
demonstrate the scalability and superior performance of our approach across various tasks.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING P RELIMINARIES

A Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) is formally defined as a tuple
⟨S, A, O, R, P, γ⟩, where S is the set of states, A is the set of actions, O is the observation space,
R : S × A → R is the reward function, P : S × A → ∆(S) defines the state transition probabilities,
and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. Here, the agent does not directly observe the true environment
state st . Instead, it receives an observation ot ∼ O(st ), which provides partial information about
the state, often not enough for optimal decision making. Therefore, the agent must make decisions
based on its current observation ot and a history of previous observations, actions, and rewards
(a0 , r0 , o1 , . . . , at−1 , rt−1 , ot ). The history may exclude past rewards or actions.
Let us denote the input context at timestep t as xt = (ot , at−1
                                                                , rt−1 ) and assume that we can encode
                                                           t
the sequence of contexts into a memory Mt = f {xi }i=1 . The goal is to learn a policy π(at |Mt )
that maximizes the expected cumulative discounted reward:
                    "∞                                                                          #
                     X
                             t
        J(π) = Eπ           γ R(st , at )|at ∼ π(at |Mt ), st+1 ∼ P (st+1 |st , at ), ot ∼ O(st )   (1)
                      t=1
Thus, a memory system capable of capturing past experiences is essential for agents to handle the
partial observability of the environment while maximizing long-term rewards.

2.2   M EMORY-AUGMENTED N EURAL N ETWORKS

We focus on matrix memory M , and to simplify notation, we assume it is a square matrix. Given a
memory M ∈ RH×H , we usually read from the memory as:

                                          ht = Mt q (xt )                                     (2)
where q is a query network q : RD 7→ RH to map an input context xt ∈ RD to a query vector.
The read value ht later will be used as the input for policy/value functions. Even more important
than the reading process is the memory writing: How can information be written into the memory


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to ensure efficient and accurate memory reading? A general formulation for memory writing is
Mt = f (Mt−1 , xt ) with f as the update function that characterizes the memory models.
The simplest form of memory writing traces back to Hebbian learning rules: Mt = Mt−1 + xt ⊗
xt where ⊗ is outer product (Kohonen & Ruohonen, 1973; Hebb, 2005). Later, researchers have
proposed “fast weight” memory (Marr & Thach, 1991; Schmidhuber, 1992; Ba et al., 2016):
                           Mt = Mt−1 λ + ηg (Mt−1 , xt ) ⊗ g (Mt−1 , xt )                          (3)
where g is a non-linear function that take the previous memory and the current input data as the input;
λ and η are constant hyperparameters. On the other hand, computer-inspired memory architectures
such as Neural Turing Machine (NTM, (Graves et al., 2014)) and Differentiable Neural Computer
(DNC, (Graves et al., 2016)) introduce more sophisticated memory writing:
        Mt = Mt−1 ⊙ (1 − w (Mt−1 , xt ) ⊗ e (Mt−1 , xt )) + w (Mt−1 , xt ) ⊗ v (Mt−1 , xt )        (4)
where w, e and v are non-linear functions that take the previous memory and the current input data
as the input to produce the writing weight, erase and value vectors, respectively. ⊙ is the Hadamard
(element-wise) product. The problem with non-linear f w.r.t M is that the computation must be done
in recursive way, and thus being slow. Therefore, recent memory-based such as Linear Transformer
models adopt simplified linear update (Katharopoulos et al., 2020):
                                                      ϕ (k (xt ))
                               Mt = Mt−1 + v (xt ) ⊗ P                                             (5)
                                                       t ϕ (k (xt ))

where ϕ is an activation function; k and v are functions that transform the input to key and value. In
another perspective inspired by neuroscience, Fast Forgetful Memory (FFM, (Morad et al., 2024))
employs a parallelable memory writing, which processes a single step update as follows:

                            Mt = Mt−1 ⊙ γ + v (xt ) ⊗ 1⊤ ⊙ γ t−n

                                                                                                  (6)
where γ is a trainable matrix, v is an input transformation function, and n is the last timestep (see
more memory models in Appendix D).

3     M ETHODS
In this section, we begin by introducing a unified memory writing framework that incorporates
several of the memory writing approaches discussed earlier. Next, we examine the limitations of
current memory writing approaches through an analysis of this framework. Following this analysis,
we propose specialized techniques to address these limitations. For clarity and consistency, all
matrix and vector indices will be referenced starting from 1, rather than 0. Constant matrices are
denoted by bold numbers.

3.1   H ADAMARD M EMORY F RAMEWORK (HMF)

We propose a general memory framework that uses the Hadamard product as its core operation. The
memory writing at time step t is defined as:


                                  Mt = Mt−1 ⊙ Cθ (xt ) + Uφ (xt )
                                              | {z } | {z }
                                                      Ct       Ut
                                                                                                 (7)
              D      H×H              D       H×H
where Cθ : R 7→ R          and Uφ : R 7→ R          are parameterized functions that map the current
input xt to two matrices Ct (calibration matrix) and Ut (update matrix). Here, θ and φ are referred
to as calibration and update parameters. Intuitively, the calibration matrix Ct determines which
parts of the previous memory Mt−1 should be weakened and which should be strengthened while
the update matrix Ut specifies the content to be encoded into the memory. We specifically choose
the Hadamard product (⊙) as the matrix operator because it operates on each memory element
individually. We avoid using the matrix product to prevent mixing the content of different memory
cells during calibration and update. Additionally, the matrix product is computationally slower.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


There are many ways to design Ct and Ut . Given proper choices of Ct and Ut , Eqs. 3-6 can be
reformulated into Eq. 7. Inspired by prior “fast weight” works, we propose a simple update matrix:



                                   Uφ (xt ) = ηφ (xt ) [v (xt ) ⊗ k (xt )]
                                                                                                         (8)

where k and v are trainable neural networks that transform the input xt to key and value
representations. ηφ : RD 7→ R is a parameterized function that maps the current input xt to an
update gate that controls the amount of update at step t. For example, if ηφ (xt ) = 0, the memory
will not be updated with any new content, whereas ηφ (xt ) = 1 the memory will be fully updated
with the content from the t-th input like Linear Transformer. We implement ηφ (xt ) as a neural
network with sigmoid activation function.
We now direct our focus towards the design of Ct , which is the core contribution of our work.
The calibration matrix selectively updates the memory by erasing no longer important memories
and reinforcing ongoing critical ones. In a degenerate case, if Ct = 1 for all t, the memory will
not forget or strengthen any past information, and will only memorize new information over time,
similar to the Hebbian Rule and Linear Transformer. To analyze the role of the calibration matrix, it
is useful to unroll the recurrence, leading to the closed-form equation (see proof in Appendix A.1):


                                             t
                                             Y            t
                                                          X             t
                                                                        Y
                                 Mt = M0           Ci +         Ui ⊙           Cj                        (9)
                                             i=1          i=1          j=i+1

        Q                                                                                 Qt
where        represents element-wise products. Then, ht = Mt q (xt ) = M0 i=1 Ci q (xt ) +
Pt              Qt
   i=1 Ui ⊙         j=i+1 Cj q (xt ). Calibrating the memory is important because without calibration
                                                                      Pt
(Ct = 1 ∀t), the read value becomes: ht = M0 q (xt ) + i=1 Ui q (xt ) . In P             this case, making
ht to reflect a past context at any step j requires that q (xt ) ̸= 0 and                  i̸=j Ui q (xt ) =
P
        η
   i̸=j φ   (x i ) v (x i ) [k (x i ) · q (xt )] ≈ 0, which can be achieved if we can find q  (xt ) such that
k (xi ) · q (xt ) ≈ 0 ∀i ̸= j. Yet, this becomes hard when T ≫ H and ηφ (xi ) ̸= 0 as it leads to an
overdetermined system with more equations than variables. We note that avoiding memorizing any
i-th step with ηφ (xi ) = 0 is suboptimal since xi may be required for another reading step t′ ̸= t.
Therefore, at a certain Qtimestep t, it is critical to eliminate no longer relevant timesteps from Mt by
                           t
calibration, i.e., Ui ⊙ j=i+1 Cj ≈ 0 for unimportant i (forgetting). For example, an agent may
first encounter an important event, like seeing a color code, before doing less important tasks, such
as picking apples. When reaching the goal requiring to identify a door matching the color code, it
would be beneficial for the agent to erase memories related to the apple-picking task, ensuring a
clean retrieval of relevant information–the color code. Conversely, if timestep i becomes relevant
                                                                                        Qt′
again at a later timestep t′ , we need to recover its information, ensuring Ui ⊙ j=i+1 Cj ̸= 0
(strengthening), just like the agent, after identifying the door, may return to collecting apple task.
Remark 1. In the Hadamard Memory Framework, calibration should be enabled (Ct ̸= 1) and
conditioned on the input context.

Regarding computing efficiency, if Ct and Ut are not functions of M<t , we can compute the memory
                                                                                     nQ         ot
                                                                                       t
using Eq. 9 in parallel, ensuring fast execution. In particular, the set of products   j=i+1 Cj
                                                                                                         i=1
can be calculated in parallel in O (log t) time. The summation can also be done in parallel in
O (log t) time. Additionally, since all operations are element-wise, they can be executed in parallel
with respect to the memory dimensions. Consequently, the total time complexity is O (log t).
Appendix Algo. 1 illustrates an implementation supporting parallelization.
Remark 2. In the Hadamard Memory Framework, with optimal parallel implementation, the time
complexity for processing a sequence of t steps is O (log t). By contrast, without parallelization, the
time complexity is O tH 2 .


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   C HALLENGES ON M EMORY C ALIBRATION

The calibration matrix enables agents to either forget or enhance past memories. However, it
complicates learning due to the well-known issues of gradient vanishing or exploding. This can
be observed when examining the policy gradient over T steps, which reads:


                                            T
                                            X
                    ∇Θ J (πΘ ) = Es,a∼πΘ           ∇Θ log πΘ (at |Mt ) Adv (st , at , γ)             (10)
                                            t=0
                                                   |       {z       }
                                                             Gt (Θ)

where Θ is the set of parameters, containing {θ, φ}, Adv represents the advantage function, which
                                                                 Θ (at |Mt ) ∂Mt
integrates reward information R (st , at ), and Gt (Θ) = ∂ log π∂M  t         ∂Θ captures information
related to the memory. Considering main gradient at step t, required to learn θ and φ:

                                 Qt                    t                      Qt
                  ∂Mt      ∂        i=1 Cθ (xi )
                                                       X                  ∂    j=i+1 Cθ (xj )
                      = M0                         +         Uφ (xi ) ⊙                          ;   (11)
                   ∂θ                 ∂θ               i=1                |           ∂θ
                                                                                      {z        }
                                                                                   G1 (i,t,θ)
                           t                   t
                  ∂Mt      X∂Uφ (xi )          Y
                      =               ⊙       Cθ (xj )                                               (12)
                   ∂φ   i=1
                              ∂φ        j=i+1
                                        |    {z     }
                                                   G2 (i,t,θ)

We collectively refer G1 (i, t, θ) and G2 (i, t, θ) as G1,2 (i, t, θ) ∈ RH×H . These terms are critical as
they capture the influence of state information at timestep i on the learning parameters θ and φ. The
training challenges arise from these two terms as the number of timesteps t increases: (i) Numerical
Instability (Gradient Exploding): if ∃m, k ∈ [1, H] s.t. G1,2 (i, t, θ) [m, k] → ∞, this leads to
overflow, causing the gradient to become “nan”; (ii) Learning Difficulty (Gradient Vanishing): if
t ≫ i0 , ∥G1,2 (i, t, θ)∥ ≈ 0 ∀i < i0 , meaning no signal from timesteps i < i0 contributes to
learning the parameters. This is suboptimal, especially when important observations occur early in
the episode, and rewards are sparse and given at the episode end, .i.e., R (st , at ) = 0 ∀ t ̸= T .
How to design the calibration matrix Cθ (x) to overcome the training challenges? A common
approach is to either fix it as hyperparameters or make it learnable parameters independent on the
input xt (e.g., Eqs. 3 and 6). Unfortunately, we can demonstrate that this leads to either numerical
instability or learning difficulties as formalized in Proposition 3. In the next section, we will provide
a better design for the calibration matrix.
Proposition 3. If calibration is enabled such that Cθ (xt ) ̸= 1, and the calibration matrix remains
fixed and independent of the input xt (i.e., ∀t : Cθ (xt ) = θ ∈ RH×H ), this will lead to either
numerical instability or learning difficulties.

Proof. See Appendix A.2

3.3   S TABLE H ADAMARD M EMORY (SHM)

To avoid numerical and learning problems, it is important to ensure each element of Ct is not
always
  hQ greater i than 1 or smaller than 1, which ends up in their product will be bounded such that
      T
E     t=1 Ct ̸= {0, ∞} as T → ∞. At the same time, we want Ct to be a function of xt to enable
calibration conditioned on the current context. To this end, we propose the calibration matrix:


                                  Cθ (xt ) = 1 + tanh (θt ⊗ vc (xt ))
                                                                                          (13)
where vc : RD 7→ RH is a mapping function, and θt ∈ RH represents the main calibration
parameters. Here, we implement vc as a linear transformation to map the input to memory space.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notably, the choice of θt determines the stability of the calibration. We propose to design θt as
trainable parameters that is randomly selected from a set of parameters θ. In particular, given
         L
θ = {θl }l=1 , where θl ∈ RH and L is the set size, we sample uniformly a random parameter from
θ: θt ∼ U (θ). We name the design as Stable Hadamard Memory (SHM). Given the formulation,
the range of an element ztm,k = Cθ (xt ) [m,          i 2] where m, k ∈ [1, H]. We can show one
                                            hQ k] is [0,
                                              T
important property of this choice is that E   t=1 Ct ≈ 1 under certain conditions.

Proposition 4. Assume: (i) xt ∼ N (0, Σt ), (ii) vf is a linear transformation, i.e.,vc (xt ) = W xt ,
                          T
(iii) {zt = θt ⊗ vc (xt )}t=1 are independent across t. Given Cθ (xt ) defined in Eq. 13 then :
                  "T     #    "T                #
                   Y m,k       Y
                E    zt    =E    Cθ (xt ) [m, k] = 1 ∀T ≥ 0, 1 ≤ m, k ≤ H
                   t=1               t=1


Proof. see Appendix A.3

Assumption (i) is reasonable as xt can be treated as being drawn from a Gaussian distribution, and
LayerNorm can be applied to normalize xt to have a mean of zero. Assumption (ii) can be realized
                                                                                                 T
as we implement vc as a linear transformation. Assumption (iii) is more restrictive because {xt }t=1
                                                                       T
        hQdependenti in RL setting, which means {zt = θt ⊗ vc (xt )}t=1 are not independent and
are often
           T      m,k
thus, E    t=1 zt     ̸= 1. However, by reducing the linear dependence between zt through random
                                  hQ          i
                                     T    m,k
selection of θt , we can make E         z
                                     t=1 t      closer to 1, and thus being bounded. Specifically,
we will prove that by using θt ∼ U (θ), the Pearson Correlation Coefficient between timesteps is
minimized, as stated in the following proposition:
Proposition 5. Let ztm,k = um         k
                                  t vt where zt
                                                   m,k
                                                        = (θt ⊗ vc (xt )) [m, k], um               k
                                                                                   t = θt [m] and vt =
vc (xt ) [k]. Given the Pearson correlation coefficient of two random variables X and Y is defined
as ρ (X, Y ) = √ Cov(X,Y √ )      , then ∀vtk , vtk′ :
                   Var(X) Var(Y )

                                     ρ um    k      m k
                                                          ≤ ρ vtk , vtk′

                                         t vt , ut′ vt′


Proof. See Appendix A.4

As a result, our choice of θt outperforms other straightforward designs for minimizing dependencies
between timesteps. For instance, a fixed θt (θt = θ ∈ RH ) results in higher dependencies     hQ becausei
                                                                                                T    m,k
ρ(θ [m] vtk , θ [m] vtk′ ) = ρ(vtk , vtk′ ) ≥ ρ um v
                                                 t t
                                                     k
                                                       , um k
                                                           ′
                                                          t tv ′   . In practice, even when E   t=1 zt
is bounded, the cumulative product can occasionally become very large for certain episodes and
timesteps, leading to overflow and disrupting the learning process. This can be avoided by clipping
the gradients. In experiments, we implement SHM using nonparallel recursive form (Eq. 7). The
memory is then integrated into policy-gradient RL algorithms to optimize Eq. 1, with the read value
ht (Eq. 2) used as input for value/policy networks.
The proposed update rule improves memory management and stability through several key benefits.
The dynamic calibration matrix Ct adjusts memory elements based on the input context, allowing the
model to prioritize relevant data while forgetting outdated information. This ensures that transient
details, like detour events, are discarded while critical information, like landmarks, is retained.
Moreover, the random parameter selection in the calibration matrix breaks timestep dependencies
and controls the expected gradient norm, preventing numerical instabilities like gradient explosion
or vanishing, and ensureing robust performance over long episodes.

4   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We evaluate our method alongside notable memory-augmented agents in POMDP environments.
Unless stated otherwise, the context consists of the observation and previous action. All training


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Figure 1: Meta-RL: Wind and Point Robot learning curves. Mean ± std. over 5 runs.


Figure 2: Credit Assignment: Visual Match, Key-to-Door learning curves. Mean ± std. over 3 runs.



uses the same hardware (single NVDIA H100 GPU), RL architecture, algorithm, training protocol,
and hyperparameters. The baselines differ only in their memory components: GRU (Chung et al.,
2014), FWP (Schlag et al., 2021), GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), S6 (Gu & Dao, 2023), mLSTM
(Beck et al., 2024b), FFM (Morad et al., 2024) and SHM (Ours). For tasks with a clear goal, we
measure performance using the Success Rate, defined as the ratio of episodes that reach the goal
to the total number of evaluation episodes. For tasks in POP-Gym, we use Episode Return as the
evaluation metric. We fix SHM’s number of possible θt , L = 128, across experiments.


4.1   S AMPLE -E FFICIENT M ETA R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Meta-RL targets POMDPs where rewards and environmental dynamics differ across episodes,
representing various tasks (Schmidhuber, 1987; Thrun & Pratt, 1998). To excel in all tasks, memory
agents must learn general memory update rules that can adapt to any environments. We enhanced
the Wind and Point Robot environments from Ni et al. (2022) to increase difficulty. In these
environments, the observation consists of the agent’s 2D position pt , while the goal state pg is
hidden. The agent takes continuous actions at by moving with 2D velocity vector. The sparse
reward is defined as R(pt+1 , pg ) = 1(∥pt+1 − pg ∥2 ≤ r) where r = 0.01 is the radius. In Wind,
the goal is fix pg = [0, 1], yet there are noises in the dynamics: pt+1 = pt + at + w, with the “wind”
w sampled from U [−0.1, 0.1] at the start and fixed thereafter. In Point Robot, the goal varies across
episodes, sampled from U [−10, 10]. To simulate real-world conditions where the training tasks
are limited, we create 2 modes using different number of training and testing tasks: [50, 150] and
[10, 190], respectively. Following the modifications, these simple environments become significantly
more challenging to navigate toward the goal, so we set the episode length to 100.
We incorporate the memory methods to the Soft Actor Critic (SAC, (Haarnoja et al., 2018)), using
the same code base introduced in Ni et al. (2022). We keep the SHM model sizes and memory
capacities small, at around 2MB for the checkpoint and 512 memory elements, which is roughly
equivalent to a GRU (see Appendix C.1). We train all models for 500,000 environment steps, and
report the learning curves in Fig. 1. In the easy mode (50-150), our SHM method consistently
achieves the best performance, with a near-optimal success rate, while other methods underperform
by 20-50% on average in Wind and Point Robot, respectively. In the hard mode (10-190), SHM
continues to outperform other methods by approximately 20%, showing earlier signs of learning.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Model            GRU          FFM        SHM (Ours)
                      Average Return     -28.4±1.3    -24.2±1.2     -5.1±6.3

Table 1: PopGym Hardest Tasks: Mean return ± std. (×100) at the end of training over 3 runs. The
range of return (×100) is [−100, 100].


4.2   L ONG - TERM C REDIT A SSIGNMENT

In this task, we select the Visual Match and Key-to-Door environments, the most challenge tasks
mentioned in Ni et al. (2024). Both have observation as the local view of the agent, discrete actions
and sparse rewards dependent on the full trajectory, requiring long-term memorization. In particular,
the pixel-based Visual Match task features an intricate reward system: in Phase 1, observing color
codes yields no rewards, while in Phase 2, picking an apple provides immediate reward of one,
relying on short-term memory. The final reward–a bonus for reaching the door with the matching
color code is set to 10. Key-to-Door also involves multiple phases: finding the key, picking apples,
and reaching the door. The terminal reward is given if the key was acquired in the first phase and used
to open the door. Both tasks can be seen as decomposed episodic problems with noisy immediate
rewards, requiring that in the final phase, the agent remembers the event in the first phase. We create
2 configurations using different episode steps in the second phases: 250 and 500, respectively.
We use SAC-Discrete (Christodoulou, 2019) as the RL algorithm. We train the same set of baselines
as in Sec. 4.1 for 2 million environment steps. The results in Fig. 2 show that SHM significantly
outperforms all other methods in success rate. Notably, SHM is the only method that can perfectly
solve both 250 and 500-step Visual Match while the second-best performer, FFM, achieves only a
77% and 25% success rate, respectively. In Key-To-Door, our method continues showing superior
results with high success rate. By contrast, no meaningful learning is observed from the others,
which perform similarly to GPT-2, as also noted by Ni et al. (2024).

4.3   POPG YM H ARDEST G AMES

We evaluate SHM on the POPGym benchmark (Morad et al., 2023), the largest POMDP benchmark
to date. Following previous studies (Morad et al., 2023; Samsami et al., 2024), we focus on the most
memory-intensive tasks: Autoencode, Battleship, Concentration and RepeatPrevious. These tasks
require ultra long-term memorization, with complexity increasing across Easy, Medium, and Hard
levels. All tasks use categorical action and observation spaces, allowing up to 1024 steps.
For comparison, we evaluate SHM against state-of-the-art model-free methods, including GRU and
FFM. Other memory models, such as DNC, Transformers, FWP, and SSMs, have been reported to
perform worse. The examined memory models are integrated into PPO (Schulman et al., 2017),
trained for 15 million steps using the same codebase as Morad et al. (2023) to ensure fairness. The
models differ only in their memory, controlled by the memory dimension hyperparameter H. We
tune it for each baseline, adjusting it to optimize performance, as larger H values typically improve
results. The best-performing configurations are reported in Table 1 and Appendix Table 6, where
SHM demonstrates a relative improvement of ≈10-12% over FFM and GRU on average. Notably,
the learning curves in Appendix Fig. 4 show that only SHM demonstrates signs of learning in
several tasks, including RepeatPrevious-Medium/Hard, and Autoencode-Easy/Medium. Detailed
hyperparameter setting and additional results are provided in Appendix C.2.
In terms of running time, the average batch inference time in milliseconds for GRU, FFM, and SHM
is 1.6, 1.8, and 1.9, respectively, leading to a total of 7, 8, and 9 hours of training per task. While
SHM is slightly slower than GRU and FFM, the difference is a reasonable trade-off for improved
memory management in partially observable environments. Last but not least, our model’s runtime
was measured using a non-parallel implementation, while GRU benefits from hardware optimization
in the PyTorch library. SHM’s running time could be further improved with proper parallelization.

4.4   M ODEL A NALYSIS AND A BLATION S TUDY

Choice of Calibration Prop. 5 suggests that selecting random θt ∈ RH in Eq. 13 will reduce the
                                  QT
dependencies between Ct , bringing t=1 Ct closer to 1 to avoid gradient issues. In this section, we


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a)                                   t            (b)
                      t         t

  0.5                           1.0
                                0.8
  0                             0.6
                                0.4
 -0.5                           0.2
                                    0
                                        0          100
                                                                    Autoencode-Easy             Battleship-Easy
             Important memory                                   (c)
                                t=20                                                                 t=124
                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                              M
      t=0             t=15                  t=50         t=80           t=110   t=115   t=120
                                                                                                              -100
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                              0
            Phase 1          Forget Remember         Phase 2                            Phase 3

Figure 3: (a) Left: Return of calibration designs over 3 runs; Right: Calibration matrix cumulative
product over 100 episodes. (b) Return of memory sizes H on Autoencode-Easy (left) and Battleship-
Easy (right). (c) Memory (M , top) and calibration (C, bottom) matrices over timesteps in Visual
Match: SHM erases memory that are no longer required and strengthens the important ones.



empirically verify that by comparing our proposed Random θt with the following designs: C = 1,
no calibration is used; Random C, where   hQ a random  i calibration matrix is sampled from normal
                                              T    m,k
distribution at each timestep, having E          z
                                              t=1 t      = 1 under mild assumptions, but preventing
learning meaningful calibration rules; Fixed C, a simpler method for learning calibration, but prone
to gradient problems (Prop. 3); Fixed θt , where we learn fixed parameter θt , which is proven to be
less effective than Random θt in reducing linear dependencies between timesteps (Prop. 5); Neural
θt , where θt = F F W (xt ), generated by a feedforward neural network like mLSTM, but with no
guarantee of reducing timestep dependencies. We trained RL agents using the above designs of the
calibration matrix with H = 72 on the Autoencode-Easy task and present the learning curves in
Fig. 3 (a, left). The results show that our proposed Random θt outperforms the other baselines by a
substantial margin, with at least a 30% improvement in performance. This confirms the effectiveness
of our calibration design in enhancing the final results.
Vanishing Behavior In practice, exploding gradients can be mitigated by clipping. Thus, we focus
                                                                              Qj
on the vanishing gradient, which depends on the cumulative product Cj = t=1 Ct . Our theory
suggests that Random θt should be less susceptible to the vanishing phenomenon compared to other
methods such as Fixed C, Fixed θt and Neural θt . To verify that, for each episode, we compute the
average value of elements in the matrix Cj that are smaller than 1 (Cj [< 1]), as those larger than
1 are prone to exploding and are not appropriate for averaging with the vanishing values. We plot
Cj [< 1] for j = 1, 2, ...100 over 100 episodes in Fig 3 (a, right).
The results are consistent with theoretical predictions: Fixed C leads to rapid vanishing of the
cumulative product in just 10 steps. Neural θt also perform badly, likely due to more complex
dependencies between timesteps because ztm,k now becomes non-linear function of xt , causing
QT       m,k
   t=1 zt     to deviate further from 1. While Fixed θt is better than Neural θt , it still exhibits quicker
vanishing compared to our approach Random θt . As expected, Random C shows little vanishing,
but like setting C = 1, it fails to leverage memory calibration, resulting in underperformance (Fig.
3 (a, left)). Random θt , although its Cj also deviates from 1, shows the smallest deviation among the
calibration learning approaches. Additionally, the vanishing remain manageable after 100 timesteps,
allowing gradients to still propagate effectively and enabling the calibration parameters to be learned.
Memory Size The primary hyperparameter of our method is H, determining the memory capacity.
We test SHM with H ∈ {24, 72, 128, 156} on the Autoencode-Easy and Battleship-Easy tasks.
Fig. 3 (b) shows that larger memory generally results in better performance. In terms of speed,


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the average batch inference times (in milliseconds) for different H values are 1.7, 1.8, 1.9, and 2.1,
respectively. We choose H = 128 for other POPGym tasks to balance performance and speed.
Forgetting and Remembering We study the learned calibration strategy of SHM on Visual Match
with 15,100, and 10 steps in Phase 1, 2 and, 3, respectively. We sample several representative Mt
and Ct from 3 phases and visualize them in Fig. 3 (c). In Phase 1, the agent identifies the color
code and stores it in M , possibly in two columns of M , marked as “important memory”. In Phase
2, unimportant memory elements are erased where Ct ≈ 0 (e.g., those within the blue rectangle).
However, important experiences related to the Phase 1’s code are preserved across timesteps until
Phase 3 (e.g., those within the red rectangle where Ct ≳1), which is desirable.


5   R ELATED WORKS

Numerous efforts have been made to equip RL agents with memory mechanisms for handling
POMDPs. Memory models can be broadly categorized into vector-based and matrix-based
approaches. Vector-based memory, like RNNs (Elman, 1990), processes inputs sequentially and
stores past inputs in their hidden states. While RNNs are slower to train, they are efficient
during inference. Advanced variants, such as GRU and LSTM, have shown strong performance
in POMDPs, often outperforming more complex RL methods (Ni et al., 2022; Morad et al., 2023).
Others focus on the use of permutation-invariant sequence models in meta-reinforcement learning,
demonstrating their advantage even without task inference objectives (Beck et al., 2024a). Recently,
faster alternatives like convolutional and structured state space models (SSM) have gained attention
(Bai et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2020), though their effectiveness in RL is still under exploration. Initial
attempts with models like S4 underperformed in POMDP tasks (Morad et al., 2023), but improved
SSM versions using S5, S6 or world models have shown promise (Lu et al., 2024; Gu & Dao, 2023;
Samsami et al., 2024). Despite these advancements, vector-based memory is limited, as compressing
history into a single vector makes it challenging to scale for high-dimensional memory space.
Matrix-based memory, on the other hand, offers higher capacity by storing history in a matrix
but at the cost of increased complexity. Attention-based models, such as Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017), have largely replaced RNNs in SL, also delivering good results in standard POMDPs
(Parisotto et al., 2020). However, their quadratic memory requirements limit their use in
environments with long episodes. Empirical studies have also shown that Transformers struggle
with long-term memorization and credit assignment tasks (Ni et al., 2024). While classic memory-
augmented neural networks (MANNs) demonstrated good performance in well-crafted long-term
settings (Graves et al., 2016; Hung et al., 2019; Le et al., 2020), they are slow and do not scale
well in larger benchmarks like POPGym (Morad et al., 2023). New variants of LSTM (Beck et al.,
2024b), including those based on matrices, have not been tested in reinforcement learning settings
and lack theoretical grounding to ensure stability.
Simplified matrix memory models (Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Schlag et al., 2021), offer scalable
solutions but have underperformed compared to simple RNNs in the POPGym benchmark,
highlighting the challenges of designing efficient matrix memory for POMDPs. Recently, Fast and
Forgetful Memory (FFM, (Morad et al., 2024)), incorporating inductive biases from neuroscience,
has demonstrated better average results than RNNs in the benchmark. However, in the most
memory-intensive environments, the improvement remains limited. Compared to our approach,
these matrix-based memory methods lack a flexible memory calibration mechanism and do not have
robust safeguards to prevent numerical and learning issues in extremely long episodes.


6   D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we introduced the Stable Hadamard Framework (SHF) and its effective instance, the
Stable Hadamard Memory (SHM), a novel memory model designed to tackle the challenges of
dynamic memory management in partially observable environments. By utilizing the Hadamard
product for memory calibration and update, SHM provides an efficient and theoretically grounded
mechanism for selectively erasing and reinforcing memories based on relevance. Our experiments
on the POPGym and POMDP benchmarks demonstrate that SHM significantly outperforms state-of-
the-art memory-based models, particularly in long-term memory tasks, while being fast to execute.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey E Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. Using fast
  weights to attend to the recent past. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  4331–4339, 2016.
Shaojie Bai, J Zico Kolter, and Vladlen Koltun. An empirical evaluation of generic convolutional
  and recurrent networks for sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01271, 2018.
Jacob Beck, Matthew Jackson, Risto Vuorio, Zheng Xiong, and Shimon Whiteson. Splagger: Split
  aggregation for meta-reinforcement learning. In Reinforcement Learning Conference, 2024a.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=O1Vmua4RVW.
Maximilian Beck, Korbinian Pöppel, Markus Spanring, Andreas Auer, Oleksandra Prudnikova,
 Michael Kopp, Günter Klambauer, Johannes Brandstetter, and Sepp Hochreiter. xlstm: Extended
 long short-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04517, 2024b.
Petros Christodoulou. Soft actor-critic for discrete action settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07207,
  2019.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of
  gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
Jeffrey L Elman. Finding structure in time. Cognitive science, 14(2):179–211, 1990.
Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka.             Neural turing machines.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, Malcolm Reynolds, Tim Harley, Ivo Danihelka, Agnieszka Grabska-
  Barwińska, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Edward Grefenstette, Tiago Ramalho, John Agapiou,
  et al. Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external memory. Nature, 538
  (7626):471–476, 2016.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hippo: Recurrent memory
  with optimal polynomial projections. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  1474–1487, 2020.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-
  policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Donald Olding Hebb. The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological theory. Psychology
  press, 2005.
S Hochreiter. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation MIT-Press, 1997.
Chia-Chun Hung, Timothy Lillicrap, Josh Abramson, Yan Wu, Mehdi Mirza, Federico Carnevale,
  Arun Ahuja, and Greg Wayne. Optimizing agent behavior over long time scales by transporting
  value. Nature communications, 10(1):5223, 2019.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 5156–5165. PMLR, 2020.
Teuvo Kohonen and Matti Ruohonen. Representation of associated data by matrix operators. IEEE
  Transactions on Computers, 100(7):701–702, 1973.
Hung Le, Truyen Tran, and Svetha Venkatesh. Self-attentive associative memory. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 5682–5691. PMLR, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chris Lu, Yannick Schroecker, Albert Gu, Emilio Parisotto, Jakob Foerster, Satinder Singh, and
  Feryal Behbahani. Structured state space models for in-context reinforcement learning. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
David Marr and W Thomas Thach. A theory of cerebellar cortex. In From the Retina to the
  Neocortex, pp. 11–50. Springer, 1991.
Steven Morad, Ryan Kortvelesy, Matteo Bettini, Stephan Liwicki, and Amanda Prorok. Popgym:
  Benchmarking partially observable reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01859,
  2023.
Steven Morad, Ryan Kortvelesy, Stephan Liwicki, and Amanda Prorok. Reinforcement learning
  with fast and forgetful memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Recurrent model-free rl can be a
  strong baseline for many pomdps. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16691–
  16723. PMLR, 2022.
Tianwei Ni, Michel Ma, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Pierre-Luc Bacon. When do transformers shine
  in rl? decoupling memory from credit assignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Emilio Parisotto, Francis Song, Jack Rae, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Siddhant Jayakumar,
  Max Jaderberg, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Aidan Clark, Seb Noury, et al. Stabilizing transformers
  for reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 7487–7498.
  PMLR, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Mohammad Reza Samsami, Artem Zholus, Janarthanan Rajendran, and Sarath Chandar. Mastering
 memory tasks with world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04253, 2024.
Imanol Schlag, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Linear transformers are secretly fast weight
  programmers. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9355–9366. PMLR, 2021.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on learning how to
   learn: the meta-meta-... hook. PhD thesis, Technische Universität München, 1987.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Learning to control fast-weight memories: An alternative to dynamic recurrent
   networks. Neural Computation, 4(1):131–139, 1992.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Pratt. Learning to learn: Introduction and overview. In Learning to
  learn, pp. 3–17. Springer, 1998.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam M. Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13756489.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX
A      T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

A.1     C LOSED - FORM M EMORY U PDATE
Given
                                              Mt = Mt−1 ⊙ Ct + Ut                                              (14)
then

                                                 t
                                                 Y            t
                                                              X               t
                                                                              Y
                                   Mt = M0             Ci +         Ui ⊙              Cj                       (15)
                                                 i=1          i=1           j=i+1


Proof. We prove by induction.
Base case: for t = 1, the equation becomes for both Eqs. 14 and 15:
                                               M1 = M0 · C1 + U1
Thus, the equation holds for t = 1.
Inductive hypothesis: Assume the equation holds for t = n:
                                                 n
                                                 Y            n
                                                              X                n
                                                                               Y
                                   Mn = M0             Ci +          Ui ⊙             Cj
                                                 i=1          i=1             j=i+1


Inductive step: We now prove the equation holds for t = n + 1. From the update rule in Eq. 14:
                                        Mn+1 = Mn ⊙ Cn+1 + Un+1
SubstituteMn using the inductive hypothesis:
                                                      
                                 Yn      X n      n
                                                  Y
                 Mn+1 = M0         Ci +     Ui ⊙   Cj  ⊙ Cn+1 + Un+1
                                        i=1        i=1            j=i+1
                                    n+1
                                    Y            n
                                                 X               n+1
                                                                 Y
                          = M0            Ci +         Ui ⊙              Cj + Un+1
                                    i=1          i=1             j=i+1
                                    n+1
                                    Y            n+1
                                                 X               n+1
                                                                 Y
                          = M0            Ci +         Ui ⊙              Cj
                                    i=1          i=1             j=i+1

This matches the form of the closed-form Eq. 15 for t = n + 1, completing the proof by induction.


A.2     P ROPOSITION 3
Definition 6. Critical Memory Gradients: In the Hadamard Memory Framework, we define the
critical memory gradients of memory rules as follows:

                                   Qt                         t                            t
                               ∂    j=i+1 Cθ (xj )
                                                             X    ∂Cθ (xj )                Y
              G1 (i, t, θ) =                            =                   ⊙                       Cθ (xk )
                                          ∂θ                j=i+1
                                                                    ∂θ
                                                                                       k=i+1,k̸=j

                                                                 t
                                                                 Y
                                          G2 (i, t, θ) =               Cθ (xj )
                                                              j=i+1

Now we can proceed to the proof for Proposition 3.


                                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. In the case Cθ (xt ) = θ ∈ RH×H , the critical gradients read:
                                                                t
                                                                X           t
                                                                            Y
                                    G1 (i, t, θ) =                                       θ
                                                               j=i+1 k=i+1,k̸=j

                                                       = (t − i) θt−i−1

                                              G2 (i, t, θ) = θt−i

                                                                          t−i−1
If ∃ 0 ≤ m, k < H s.t. |θ [m, k]| > 1, G1,2 (i, t, θ) [m, k] ∼ o θ [m, k]         , and thus → ∞, i.e.,
numerical problem arises. Let ∥·∥ denote the infinity norm, we also have:
                                                                                               t−i−1
                        ∥G1 (i, t, θ)∥ = (t − i) θt−i−1 ≤ (t − i) ∥θ∥
                                                                                     t−i
                                   ∥G2 (i, t, θ)∥ = θt−i ≤ ∥θ∥
Note that if ∀m, k |θ [m, k]| < 1 , ∥θ∥ < 1, both terms become 0 as t − i increases, thus learning
problem always arises. In conclusion, in this case, to avoid both numerical and learning problems,
∀m, k |θ [m, k]| = 1, which is not optimal in general.

A.3   P ROPOSITION 4
Proof. Let ztm,k = um     k
                       t vt where zt
                                     m,k
                                         = (θt ⊗ vc (xt )) [m, k], um                  k
                                                                     t = θt [m]  and vt = vc (xt ) [k].
Using assumption (i) and (ii), vtk is a Gaussian variable, i.e., vtk ∼ N 0, µkt . By definition, um
                                                                                                  t is
                                                                  L
a categorical random variable that can take values {θ [m, lt ]}lt =1 with equal probability 1/L. For
now, we drop the subscripts m, k and t for notation ease. The PDF of z = uv can be expressed
                                                                                   L
as a mixture distribution since u is categorical and can take discrete values {ul }l=1 . The PDF of z,
denoted as f (z), is given by:


                                                  L
                                                  X
                                     f (z) =               P (u = ul )ful v (z)
                                                  l=1
                                                           L
                                                  1X
                                              =      ful v (z)
                                                  L
                                                       l=1

where ful v (z) is the PDF of ul v, and ul is a constant for each l. Thus, ful v (z) is the scaled PDF of
u:

                                                       1                    z
                                          ful v (z) =       fv
                                                      |ul |                 ul
Since v ∼ N (0, µ), the PDF of v, denoted as fv (x), is symmetric about 0, we have:

                                    1             z           1               −z
                       ful v (z) =       fv                =       fv                    = ful v (−z).
                                   |ul |          ul         |ul |            ul
This shows that ful v (z) is symmetric around 0 for each l. Therefore, the PDF f (z) is also
symmetric:

                                      L                             L
                                 1X             1X
                         f (z) =    ful v (z) =    ful v (−z) = f (−z)
                                 L              L
                                     l=1                            l=1

Since tanh is an odd function and the PDF of z m,k is symmetrichabout 0, E itanh z m,k h = 0 iand
                                                                QT      m,k    QT
                                                                              = t=1 E ztm,k =

thus E 1 + tanh z m,k = 1. Finally, using assumption (iii), E     t=1 zt
1.


                                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Task         Input type           Policy/Value networks                       RL algorithm   Batch size
                                         3-layer FFW + 1 Memory
       Meta-RL          Vector                                                               SAC         32
                                          layer (128, 128, 128, H)
        Credit                          2-layer CNN + 2-layer FFW
                        Image                                                              SAC-D         32
      Assignment                      + 1 Memory layer (128, 128, H)
                                         3-layer FFW + 1 Memory
      POPGym            Vector                                                               PPO       65,536
                                            layer (128, 64, H, 64)

                    Table 2: Network architecture shared across memory baselines.


A.4    P ROPOSITION 5
Proof. Without loss of generalization, we can drop the indice m and k for notation ease. Since
θt ∼ U (θ), it is reasonable to assume that each of {ut , ut′ }, {ut , vt }, {ut , vt′ }, {ut′ , vt }, {ut′ , vt′ }
are independent. In this case, let us denote X = ut vt and X ′ = ut′ vt′ , we have


                      Cov(X, X ′ ) = Cov(ut vt , ut′ vt′ )
                                   = E[ut vt · ut′ vt′ ] − E[ut vt ] · E[ut′ vt′ ]
                                   = E(ut vt )E(ut′ vt′ ) − E(ut )E(vt )E(ut′ )E(vt′ )
                                   = E(ut )E(vt )[E(ut′ vt′ ) − E(ut′ )E(vt′ )]
                                   = E[ut ]E[ut′ ]Cov(vt , vt′ )
The variances read:

      Var(X) = Var(ut vt ) = E[u2t vt2 ] − E[ut vt ]2 = E[u2t ] E[vt2 ] − E[vt ]2 = E[u2t ] · Var(vt )


Similarly:

                                  Var(X ′ ) = Var(ut′ vt′ ) = E[u2t′ ] · Var(vt′ )
Given ρ as the Pearson Correlation Coefficient, consider the ratio:


                                                     √ |E[u t ]E[ut′ ]Cov(vt ,vt′ )|
                                  |ρ(X, X ′ )|            2               2
                                                       E[ut ]·Var(vt )·E[ut′ ]·Var(vt′ )
                                                 =
                                  |ρ(vt , vt′ )|            √ |Cov(vt ,vt′ )|
                                                               Var(vt )·Var(vt′ )

                                                 |E[ut ]E[ut′ ]|
                                                =p
                                                   E[u2t ]E[u2t′ ]
By the independence of ut and ut′ and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality:
                                                                      q
                                 |E[ut ]E[ut′ ]| = |E[ut ut′ ]| ≤         E[u2t ]E[u2t′ ],
which implies

                    |ρ(ut vt , ut′ vt′ )|
                                          ≤ 1 ⇐⇒ |ρ (ut vt , ut′ vt′ )| ≤ |ρ (vt , vt′ )|
                       |ρ(vt , vt′ )|
The equality holds when ut = βut′ .

B     D ETAILS ON M ETHODOLOGY

In this section, we describe RL frameworks used across experiments, which are adopted exactly
from the provided benchmark. Table 2 summarizes the main configurations. Further details can be
found in the benchmark papers (Ni et al., 2022; Morad et al., 2023).


                                                          15
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Algorithm 1: Theoretical Parallel Hadamard Memory Framework.
  Input: M0 ∈ RB×H×H , C ∈ RB×T ×H×H , U ∈ RB×T ×H×H
  Operator: ⊕ parallel prefix sum, ⊗ parallel prefix product, ⊙ Hadamard product
  Ouput: M = {M }nt=1 ∈ RB×T ×H×H
  /* Parallel prefix product along T. Complexity: O(log(t)).                                   */
1 Cp = ⊗(C, dim = 1)
  /* Concatenation along T. Complexity: O(1).                                                  */
2 D = concat([M0 , C] , dim = 1)
  /* Parallel prefix product along T. Complexity: O(log(t)).                                   */
3 Dp = ⊗(D, dim = 1)
  /* Parallel Hadamard product (Cp ̸= 0). Complexity: O(1).                                    */
            1
4 E = U ⊙
           Cp
  /* Parallel prefix sum along T. Complexity: O(log(t)).                                       */
5 Ep = ⊕(E, dim = 1)
  /* Parallel sum. Complexity: O(1).                                                           */
6 M = Dp [:, 1 :] + Ep



          Task                              URL                                              License
       Meta-RL          https://github.com/twni2016/pomdp-baselines                           MIT
   Credit Assignment       https://github.com/twni2016/Memory-RL                              MIT
      POP-Gym               https://github.com/proroklab/popgym                               MIT

                         Table 3: Benchmark repositories used in our paper.


 C     D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTS

 We adopt public benchmark repositories to conduct our experiments. The detail is given in Table 3

 C.1    S AMPLE -E FFICIENCY IN M ETA R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING AND L ONG - TERM C REDIT
        A SSIGNMENT D ETAILS
 We report the choice of memory hyperparameter H in Table. 4. Due to the lack of efficient parallel
 processing in the codebase from Ni et al. (2022), running experiments with larger memory sizes is
 prohibitively slow. As a result, we were only able to test models with 512 memory elements, limiting
 the potential performance of our SHM. This constraint contrasts with the POPGym benchmark
 with better parallel processing, where our method scales comfortably with larger memory sizes,
 as demonstrated later in C.2.
 We also report the running time and final performance for Visual Match and Key-to-Door
 experiments for different episode lengths. The results in Table 5 demonstrate that SHM can scale
 reasonably in both computation efficiency and performance as the task complexity increases.

 C.2    POPG YM H ARDEST G AMES D ETAILS
 In this experiment, we tuned the memory model size to ensure optimal performance. Specifically, for
 GRU, we tested hidden sizes of 256, 512, 1024, and 2048 on the Autoencode-Easy task. Increasing
 GRU’s hidden size did not lead to performance gains but resulted in a significant rise in computation


           Model            GRU     FWP     GPT-2∗      S6     mLSTM       FFM     SHM (Ours)
             H              512      24       512       512      24        128        24
        Memory elements     512      512    512 × T     512     512        512        512

 Table 4: Memory dimension for Meta-RL and Credit Assignment tasks. GRU and S6 use vector
 memory of size H. GPT-2 does not have a fixed size memory and attend to all previous T timesteps
 in the episode. H = 512 is the dimension of Transformer’s hidden layer. FFM’s memory shape is
 2 × m × c where c = 4, H = m = 128. FWP and SHM’s memory shape is H × H.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Total Training     Success Rate (%)     Success Rate (%)
            Episode Length      Time (hours)        Visual Match         Key To Door
                               SHM GPT-2          SHM      GPT-2       SHM      GPT-2
                  100           20       18        100       83         100       59
                  250           27       23        100       72         78        21
                  500           41       36        100       47         55        22

              Table 5: Average running time and success rate across episode lengths.


                  Figure 4: POPGym learning curves: Mean ± std. over 3 runs.


cost. For instance, at H = 2048, the average batch inference time was 30 milliseconds, compared
to 1.6 milliseconds at H = 256. Thus, we set GRU’s hidden size to 256, as recommended by the
POPGym documentation. For FFM, we set the context size to c = 4, as the authors suggest that
a larger context size degrades performance. We tuned the trace size m ∈ {32, 128, 256, 512} on
the Autoencode-Easy task and found that m = 128 provided slightly better results, so we used this
value for all experiments. For our method, we tested H ∈ {24, 72, 128, 156} on the same task and
observed that larger values of H led to better performance, as shown in the ablation study in Sec.
4.4. However, to balance runtime, memory cost, and performance, we set H = 128 for all POPGym
experiments. The learning curves are given in Fig. 4. The final results are reported fully in Table 6.

D   M ORE R ELATED M EMORY M ODELS

Recently, Beck et al. (2024b) have proposed matrix-based LSTM (mLSTM):

                            Mt = f (xt ) Mt−1 + i (xt ) v (xt ) ⊗ k (xt )                        (16)
where f and i are the forget and input gates, respectively.



                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Task         Level     Linear Transformer∗      GRU         FFM      SHM (Ours)
                        Easy           -44.7±1.4        -37.9±7.7   -32.7±0.6    49.5±23.3
        Autoencode     Medium          -47.8±0.2        -43.6±3.5   -32.7±0.6   -28.8±14.4
                        Hard           -48.1±0.1        -48.1±0.7   -47.7±0.5    -43.9±0.9
                        Easy           -41.3±0.5        -41.1±1.0   -34.0±7.1    -12.3±2.4
         Battleship    Medium          -39.2±0.3        -39.4±0.5   -37.1±3.1    -16.8±0.6
                        Hard           -38.4±0.2        -38.5±0.5   -38.8±0.3    -21.2±2.3
                        Easy           -18.5±0.2        -10.9±1.0    10.7±1.2     -1.9±2.4
       Concentration   Medium          -18.6±0.2        -21.4±0.5   -24.7±0.1    -21.0±0.8
                        Hard           -83.0±0.1        -84.0±0.3   -87.5±0.5    -83.3±0.1
                        Easy            6.0±4.0          99.9±0.0    98.4±0.3    88.9±11.1
      RepeatPrevious   Medium          -46.8±1.1        -34.7±1.7   -24.3±0.4     48.2±7.2
                        Hard           -48.5±0.3        -41.7±1.8   -33.9±1.0    -19.4±9.9
          Average        All           -39.1±0.4        -28.4±1.3   -24.2±1.2     -5.1±6.3

Table 6: PopGym: Mean return ± std. (×100) at the end of training over 3 runs. The range of return
(×100) is [−100, 100]. ∗ is reported from Morad et al. (2023).


                                                18
