Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S CALING L AWS F OR P RECISION
 Tanishq Kumar∗ 1 Zachary Ankner* 3,4 Benjamin F. Spector2 Blake Bordelon1
 Niklas Muennighoff2 Mansheej Paul4 Cengiz Pehlevan1 Christopher Ré2
 Aditi Raghunathan5
 1                           2
     Harvard University          Stanford University
    3
     MIT 4 Databricks            5
                                  Carnegie Mellon University



                                                A BSTRACT
             Low precision training and inference affect both the quality and cost of language
             models, but current scaling laws do not account for this. In this work, we devise
             “precision-aware” scaling laws for both training and inference. We propose that
             training in lower precision reduces the model’s effective parameter count, allow-
             ing us to predict the additional loss incurred from training in low precision and
             post-train quantization. For inference, we find that the degradation introduced by
             post-training quantization increases as models are trained on more data, eventu-
             ally making additional pretraining data actively harmful. For training, our scaling
             laws allow us to predict the loss of a model with different parts in different preci-
             sions, and suggest that training larger models in lower precision may be compute
             optimal. We unify the scaling laws for post and pretraining quantization to arrive
             at a single functional form that predicts degradation from training and inference in
             varied precisions. We fit on over 465 pretraining runs and validate our predictions
             on model sizes up to 1.7B parameters trained on up to 26B tokens.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Scale has emerged as a central driver of progress in deep learning (Brown et al., 2020). Key work
on scaling (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) studied tradeoffs between model/dataset
size to balance performance and compute. However, the precision in which models are trained and
served is an important third factor that contributes to both cost and performance. Deep learning
is trending towards lower precision: current frontier models like the Llama-3 series are trained in
BF16 (Dubey et al., 2024), and there is widespread effort to move the pretraining paradigm to FP8
(Micikevicius et al., 2022). The next generation of hardware will support FP4, and advances in
weight-only quantization have led to training in binary and ternary at scale (Ma et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2023). How far will these paradigms go? Specifically, we ask:

                     What are the tradeoffs between precision, parameters, and data?
                          How do they compare for pretraining and inference?

Studying scaling in precision is challenging because work on scaling laws generally aims to drop
fine-grained implementation details in pursuit of universal functional forms while work on quantiza-
tion generally does the opposite, focuses on the details: how quantization is done, with what type, to
what part of the model. In seeking a balance, we consider a variety of plausible functional forms, and
choose one that abstracts implementation details of quantization away from loss scaling, allowing
us to predict loss scaling in many situations of practical interest. This functional form that posits bit
precision and parameter count interchangeably contribute to a model’s “effective parameter count,”
Neff , and implementation details like which parts of a model are quantized to what precision, interact
with loss scaling only through their effect on this quantity.
Overall, we study the scaling of the effects of precision on loss as we vary data and parameters,
both during and after training. We first study how the degradation induced by post-train quantiza-
tion scales with parameters and data. We find that the degradation increases with data, so that for
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Correspondence to tkumar@college.harvard.edu.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Scaling: Post-Train Quantization                                                Scaling: Quantized Training
                                                                                                       Training larger models in lower
Val Loss (Post-Quant)                                                                                 precision can be compute optimal
                                                                                                 3.233
                                                                                                                                                   3.198


                                                                                Final Val Loss
                                                  More pretraining compute                                                                3.057
                          INT3                     worse at inference time
                          INT4                                                                                 2.997          3.009
                          INT5
                          INT6
                          No PTQ
                                     100                                1000                       FP4           FP6           FP8         BF16     FP32
                                                                                                 (1.76B)       (1.17B)       (880M)       (440M)   (220M)
                                    Token/Parameter Ratio
                                                                                                               Training Precision (Model Size)

Figure 1: Schematic of key findings. (Left) Training a fixed model size to various data budgets
in BF16 and quantizing weights at the end. We find that degradation due to post-train quantization
increases with tokens seen during pretraining, so that eventually additional pretraining data can be
harmful. (Right) Our scaling suggests training larger models in lower precision can be compute-
optimal according to the cost model in Section 4.3. Weights, activations, attention quantized, all
models trained on the same data budget, details in Appendix J.


a fixed model, training on additional data after a certain point can be actively harmful if the model
will be quantized after training. We then shift our focus to quantized training, examining both
the quantization-aware-training (weights only) and low-precision training (weights, activations, at-
tention all quantized) settings. Our scaling laws for pretraining suggest that the compute-optimal
pretraining precision is in general independent of compute budget. Surprisingly, however, this inde-
pendence ceases to be true if model size is constrained, in which case the compute-optimal precision
grows slowly in compute.
In all, we pretrain a suite of 465 language models in 3 to 16 bit precisions, as well as post-train
quantize each to multiple precisions. For a language model with N parameters, trained on D tokens
with training precision Ptrain , and post-train weight precision Ppost , we ultimately find a unified
scaling law that takes the following form:

                          L(N, D, Ptrain , Ppost ) =        AN −α              +BD−β + E + δPTQ (Neff , D, Ptrain , Ppost )                                 (1)
                                                            | {zeff }                      |            {z               }
                                                       Training-time Effects                                             Post-Training Effects
                                                       |                  {z                               }
                                                                Usual Chinchilla form

where A, B, E, α, β are positive fitted constants, and δPTQ refers to the loss degradation induced by
post-training quantization before inference. Altogether, our results for post-train quantization illus-
trate how more pretraining FLOPs do not always lead to better models at inference-time, and our
results for low-precision pretraining suggest that both the standard practice of training models
in 16-bit, and the race to extremely low (sub 4-bit) pretraining precision, may be suboptimal.


2                       BACKGROUND , R ELATED W ORK , AND S ETUP

Notation. Throughout, D denotes dataset size in tokens and N denotes model size in parameters.
Pw , Pa , Pkv refer to the bit precision, in integer-type, of the weights, activations, and key-value cache
(“attention”)1 during training, and Ppost refers to the precision we post-train quantize (PTQ) weights
to at the end for model inference. When P or Ptrain is used without reference to a part of the model,
all three model parts are tied to the same precision. The inference-time loss degradation induced
by post-train quantization will be denoted δPTQ (N, D, Ptrain , Ppost ), and it is defined as the change in
loss from performing post-training quantization compared to the end of pretraining. We use “high
precision” to mean 16-bit or above.
    1
      We study KV, rather than QKV, because understanding scaling in the KV cache alone is important for
many inference settings. For pretraining claims in Section 4.3, we quantize the entire attention computation,
including queries, finding additionally quantizing the query vectors makes a negligible difference to scaling.


                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.1   Q UANTIZATION F UNDAMENTALS : H OW, W HAT, W HEN

The Problem: Compute vs Memory-Bound Workloads. Most deep learning workloads are bot-
tlenecked by either compute, in the form of matrix multiplications, or memory bandwidth, in the
form of data movement between different parts of the GPU. Different types of workloads have dif-
ferent bottlenecks: most time is spent doing large matrix multiplications during pretraining, so it
is compute-bound; in contrast, small-batch inference is bandwidth-bound by model weights; long-
sequence decoding is bandwidth-bound by KV cache, etc. This motivates studying scaling in the
training precision of the (weights, activations, KV cache) both in isolation and in combination.
Quantization: How. Quantization of an operation typically refers to rounding of values in matrices
involved in some computation on the forward or backward pass, depending on what is quantized,
and when. Quantization is usually done to integer or floating-point type.
Quantization: What. Only weights. “Quantization-aware training” Quantizing only weights dur-
ing training does not offer any compute savings because matrix multiplications are still done in high
precision. However, this is commonly done to allow weights to adapt to low precision so they can
be served at very low precision at inference-time, thereby alleviating memory bottlenecks (Ma et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2023). We will refer to this as “quantization-aware-training” and defer additional
discussion to Appendix D.
Weights, activations, attention. “Low-precision training” Quantizing and activations and attention
in addition to weights allows for compute gains because matrix multiplications can be done in low
precision (if the hardware supports it) since everything is in the same precision. We will refer to this
setting as “low-precision training” to distinguish it from quantization-aware training.
Quantization: When. Quantization can be done during or after training. In practice, when seek-
ing to reduce inference-time memory costs, one first attempts post-train quantization. If that de-
grades the model too much, quantization-aware-training is used. Post-train quantization is typically
only applied to model weights (Frantar et al., 2022; Dettmers et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Xiao
et al., 2023). To reduce pretraining costs, low-precision-training is needed. We will study scal-
ing laws for post-training quantization in Section 3, for quantized training in Section 4 (examining
both quantization-aware training and low precision training) and unify the two in Section 5. The
numerical values of all our fitted constants can be found in Appendix K.


2.2   S CALING L AWS AND PARAMETRIC F ITS

Scaling Laws. Hoffmann et al. (2022) model loss scaling using the functional form L(N, D) =
AN −α + BD−β + E where A, B, α, β, E are positive fitted constants, finding that data and param-
eters should be scaled in roughly equal proportion as more compute becomes available. We will refer
to the scaling of (Hoffmann et al., 2022) as “Chinchilla-optimal” or just “Chinchilla” and note this is
often used colloquially as D/N ≈ 20 being pretraining compute-optimal. On the theoretical front,
work on scaling laws (Bahri et al., 2024; Bordelon et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024b) finds that noise to
various parts of model or data affects loss in a predictable way. While previous works have explored
the scaling behavior of post-training quantization in terms of total model bits (Dettmers & Zettle-
moyer, 2023) and knowledge capacity (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2024), we focus instead on data scaling.
We note that in general the exact fitted values of all coefficients and exponents can vary drastically
based on small implementation differences: Besiroglu et al. (2024) find different constants when
attempting to replicate (Hoffmann et al., 2022), Sardana & Frankle (2023) fit coefficients A, B of
different orders of magnitude. For this reason, we emphasize our contribution is not the numerical
values we fit, but the trends and functional forms we identify.
Overtraining. In practice, accounting for inference costs means training smaller models for sub-
stantially longer than Chinchilla-optimal (Sardana & Frankle, 2023; Gadre et al., 2024). For in-
stance, Llama-3-8B is trained to D/N ≈ 2000 (Dubey et al., 2024) and the Gemma-2 series up
to D/N > 1000 (Team et al., 2024). We refer to such models as “overtrained” in this paper, with
the token/parameter ratio D/N being a key quantity throughout. Work on inference-time compute
(Snell et al., 2024; Brown et al., 2024) and on synthetic and multimodal data (Yang et al., 2024; Fan
et al., 2024; Bauer et al., 2024) suggests future models may be even more overtrained. Therefore,
modern work on scale must consider ratios much larger than Chinchilla-optimal, and in this work


                                                   3
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      N = 30M             N = 60M              N = 110M      N = 220M
                                                                                                     INT6
 Val Loss (Post-Quant)
                         4.25                                                                        INT5
                         4.00                                                                        INT4
                                                                                                     INT3
                         3.75                                                                        No PTQ
                         3.50
                         3.25        100           1000         100       10          100       10
Degradation, PTQ


                         10 1

                         10 2

                         10 3
                                     100           1000         100       10          100       10
                                Token/Parameter Ratio
    Figure 2: Loss degradation from PTQ increases with data. Top row is loss after PTQ, bottom row
    is loss degradation compared to end of training, before PTQ. The top row is thus the gray line in
    each plot plus the corresponding value in the bottom row. We can see that degradation grows with
    data, bottom row is fitted with Equation 2. For D/N sufficiently large (left), loss can increase in
    data. Even at lower D/N , where post-quant loss continues to decrease with data, the value of data
    is reduced compare to the baseline. R2 = 0.97 over all fitted points (bottom row).


    we perform experiments up to D/N ≈ 103 and analyze the predictions found by our scaling law for
    up to D/N ≈ 105 . See Appendix B for additional related work.

    2.3                     S ETUP

    We train and evaluate a suite of OLMo-style models on the Dolma V1.7 dataset (Groeneveld et al.,
    2024; Soldaini et al., 2024), using a standard Transformer++ implementation; see Appendix A for
    hyperparameters and ablations. Our experiments consist of a sweep of language model pretraining
    runs over N ∈ [30, 60, 110, 220] million parameters (non-embedding) and D ∈ [1.5, 3, 6, 13, 26]
    billion tokens. Our model sizes are relatively small because we train up to a very high D/N ≈ 103
    to study data scaling and set off over 20 runs at every (N, D): we sweep 8 values of precision for
    each of the (weights, activations, attention).

    3                     S CALING L AWS FOR P OST-T RAIN Q UANTIZATION
    The easiest and most common quantization technique is post-train quantizing a model off-the-shelf
    (Chee et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Dettmers et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2023). In
    this section, we consider models trained in BF16 and use GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022) to post-train
    quantize them, replicating our findings with two other methods in Appendix F. We quantify the
    resulting loss degradation δPTQ , finding that post-train quantization scales poorly in data.

    3.1                     OVERTRAINED M ODELS D EGRADE MORE WHEN P OST-T RAIN Q UANTIZED

    We consider different model sizes (columns) trained on various data budgets (x-axis of each plot)
    and plot in Figure 2 both the loss after post-train quantization (top row) and the degradation incurred
    relative to end of training (bottom row). We find that the degradation δPTQ increases in training data
    size across all model sizes, but that for a fixed dataset size larger models incur a smaller degradation.
    We additionally observe that δPTQ increases exponentially as we decrease the precision we quantize
    to. Based on these observations we model δPTQ as taking the form:
                                                              γD
                                                               D
                                 δPTQ (N, D, Ppost ) = CT              e−Ppost /γpost                     (2)
                                                               N γN

                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where CT , γD , γN , γpost are positive fitted constants. As we find the fitted values of γD and γN to be
similar (see Appendix K for numerical values), we can think of this as an approximate power law in
the token/parameter ratio D/N . The intuition for this poor data scaling might be that as models train
on more data, they compress more information into their weights, so that perturbations to weights
in the form of quantization are more harmful to loss, all else equal. We discuss formal theoretical
interpretations in Appendix H.
This finding implies that for models that will be post-train quantized, there exists an amount of
pretraining data beyond which additional data is actively harmful to performance at inference-time
(see top-left, Figure 2). This can be defined as the point where additional data increases post-train
degradation more than it decreases loss during pretraining. We solve analytically for this critical
data size in Appendix E, as well analyze a cost model for workloads where inference-cost is the
primary concern. We thus summarize our first scaling finding as follows.

      Finding 1. Overtrained language models are more sensitive to post-training quantization.
      For models trained in BF16 or above, we can model this loss degradation as
                                                        γD
                                                       D
                             δPTQ (N, D, Ppost ) = CT         e−Ppost /γpost
                                                       N γN
      where CT , γD , γN , γpost are positive fitted constants. This implies that when D/N is suffi-
      ciently large, or Ppost sufficiently small, loss after quantization can increase as models are
      pretrained for longer, as in Figure 2. We will revisit and modify Equation 2 in Section 5 to
      account for the effects of training in low-precision on δPTQ .


4     S CALING L AWS FOR Q UANTIZED T RAINING
In this section we study pretraining with weights, activations, and KV cache in various precisions.
Importantly, only training precision, not test-time precision, is varied in this section; we discuss the
interaction between train and test-time precision in Section 5. We sweep the training precisions of
the weights, activations, and KV cache Pw , Pa , Pkv ∈ [3, 12] individually, as well as training BF16
baselines. We also pretrain models with arbitrary combinations of Pw , Pa , Pkv to validate our scaling
laws. To perform quantization during training, we quantize the forward pass in integer type unless
otherwise noted, see Appendix D for implementation details.

4.1     Q UANTIZATION -AWARE -T RAINING : Q UANTIZING W EIGHTS D URING T RAINING HAS A
        C ONSISTENT AND P REDICTABLE E FFECT

We first examine the trade-off between weight precision Pw and parameters N while holding Pa =
Pkv fixed at high precision. We fix D = 13B tokens and perform a grid sweep over combinations
of N and Pw . We plot the resulting IsoLoss contours where we linearly interpolate the final loss
values in Figure 3. We observe that the bit precision of the weights can be traded off for the number
of parameters, i.e., a model with smaller N but larger Pw can achieve the same loss as a model with
larger N but smaller Pw . Additionally, we find that the gains from increasing the bit precision of the
weights are large at lower precisions but saturate at higher precisions (typically around 6-7 bits per
weight).
In line with the empirical trends in Figure 3, we find the best fit for the tradeoff between weight
precision and parameters is Neff (N, Pw ) = N (1 − e−Pw /γw ), where γw is a fitted constant measuring
the sensitivity of model weights (alternative fits explored in Appendix K). We therefore modify
Chinchilla scaling to account for Neff by making the substitution N 7→ Neff (N, Pw ), giving the
modified form:

                           L(N, D) = A[N (1 − e−Pw /γw )]−α + BD−β + E                                 (3)

where we recall that A, B, E, α, β are fitted positive constants in the usual Chinchilla scaling form,
and γw is a fitted constant we introduce. We plot the predictions of our fit compared to observed
values in Figure 4 for a range of (N, D).


                                                    5
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Neff/N vs Precision                                             Empirical IsoLoss Contours                                              Predicted Loss Contours
                                                                                        12                                                              12
                 1.0
                                                                                        11                                                              11
                 0.8                                                                    10                                                              10
                                                                                        9                                                               9


                                                                            Pw (bits)


                                                                                                                                            Pw (bits)
                 0.6
 Neff/N
                                                                                        8                                                               8
                 0.4                                                                    7                                                               7
                                                                                        6                                                               6
                 0.2                                          Weights
                                                              Activations               5                                                               5
                                                              KV Cache                  4                                                               4
                 0.0                                          Tied
                           4   6     8     10        12       14       16               3 30   40    50   60       70       80   90   100               3 30      40       50       60    70   80      90   100
                                   Precision (bits)                                                       N (millions)                                                              N (millions)

    Figure 3: (Left) Neff /N from our final scaling law. Our fit of Neff (N, Pw ) in this section is the first
    step towards this (blue). Empirical (center) and predicted (right) IsoLoss contours illustrating the
    precision-parameter tradeoff. Y-axis is weight precision during quantized training. All runs plotted
    trained on D = 13B tokens. Predictions from a fitted version of Equation 3, darker lines correspond
    to lower loss.

                                   3.3B tokens                                                      13.1B tokens                                                 26.2B tokens
Final Val Loss


                 4.2                                                        4.2                                                       4.2
                 4.0                                                        4.0                                                       4.0                                                               Model Size
                 3.8                                                        3.8                                                       3.8                                                                   30M
                                                                                                                                                                                                            60M
                 3.6                                                        3.6                                                       3.6                                                                   110M
                 3.4                                                        3.4                                                       3.4                                                                   220M
                 3.2                                                        3.2                                                       3.2
                       3       4      5         6         7        8                    3      4      5        6        7        8          3                4         5        6        7         8
                       Pw (training precision, bits)                                    Pw (training precision, bits)                       Pw (training precision, bits)
    Figure 4: Predicting final validation losses L(N, D, Pw ) for various N, D, Pw to test our proposed
    functional form. Points are experimental values, lines are predictions of a single parametric fit of
    the form in Equation 3. We train only two model sizes at 26B due to compute constraints.


    4.2                L OW-P RECISION -T RAINING : T HE E FFECTS OF Q UANTIZING W EIGHTS , ACTIVATIONS ,
                       AND ATTENTION ARE C OMPOSITIONAL AND M ULTIPLICATIVE

    Quantization-aware training does not change the cost of pretraining. This is because modern GPUs
    require inputs to a matrix multiplication to have the same precision, i.e. Pw = Pa = Pkv (Micikevi-
    cius et al., 2022). To understand the interplay between precision and pretraining compute we must
    now analyze the scaling behavior of Pa and Pkv as well. Note that in our training experiments, we
    only quantize on the forward pass to ensure a fair comparison between quantization-aware-training
    (weights only) and the additional quantization to activations/KV cache, see Appendix D.
    Precision of activations and KV cache affect loss in a similar way. We first verify in Appendix
    Figure 20 that varying Pa and Pkv in isolation give rise to scaling behavior that is best fit by a
    functional form analogous to the form for Pw (Equation 3, Figure 5, left).
    We refer to the scaling coefficients computed by varying the precision of just one part of the model at
    a time as marginally fitted constants, and those found by fitting on runs that include multiple model
    components in low precision at the same time as jointly fitted constants.
    Constants fitted marginally and jointly make similarly good predictions. We now turn our
    attention to understanding the interactions between weights, activations, and attention. If the effects
    of quantizing weights, activations, and attention are independent, then a factorized, multiplicative
    interaction of the following form is a natural proposal.

                                                    Neff (P ) = N (1 − e−Pw /γw )(1 − e−Pa /γa )(1 − e−Pkv /γkv )                                                                                             (4)

    We test whether this independence approximately holds by comparing the predictive power of a
    model with marginally fitted constants and a model with jointly fitted constants. We show the
    predictive power of both models in Figure 5(b, c), finding that both methods for fitting constants have
    approximately the same predictive power. These results suggest that the independence assumption
    is reasonable. We both present further evidence that this “factorized” functional form is a strong fit
    to the data as well as discuss alternative factorization schemes in Appendix M.


                                                                                                               6
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Pw Marginal Sweep                            Joint fit, f(Pw, Pa, Pkv)                Combined Marginals, f(Pw)f(Pa)f(Pkv)
            5.0
                            MSE: 0.0028, R²: 0.9655                       MSE: 0.0086, R²: 0.9006                       MSE: 0.0089, R²: 0.8973
Predicted   4.5

            4.0

            3.5

            3.0
                  3.2     3.4   3.6    3.8      4.0   4.2   4.4   3.2   3.4   3.6   3.8    4.0   4.2   4.4   4.6   3.2   3.4   3.6   3.8    4.0   4.2   4.4   4.6
                                       Actual                                         Actual                                           Actual

  Figure 5: (Left) Predicted loss based on fitted values with Equation 4. (center) Fitting γ parameters
  jointly on sweeps with combinations of precisions vs (right) fitting them on “marginal” sweeps
  where only one model part is in low precision at a time. Outliers are those at extremely low precision
  whose training runs are sometimes unstable.



                  Finding 2. The effects of quantizing the weights, activations, and KV cache during training
                  are well modeled as independent and multiplicative so that
                                                                                  −α
                                                      L(N, D, Pw , Pa , Pkv ) = ANeff + BD−β + E
                  where
                                      Neff (Pw , Pa , Pkv ) = N (1 − e−Pw /γw )(1 − e−Pa /γa )(1 − e−Pkv /γkv )
                  for which we fit constants γw , γa , γkv that reflect the different sensitivities of weights, acti-
                  vations, and KV cache. If the three precisions are set to the same value P , as in pretraining,
                  this simplifies to Neff (P ) ≈ N (1 − e−P/γ̄ )3 where γ̄ is the average of the three parameters.
                  We visualize this functional form with our fitted values in Figure 3 (left).


  4.3                   I MPLICATIONS F OR P RETRAINING

  When training in a precision P , meaning Pw = Pa = Pkv = P , compute cost scales linearly in P
  (Abdelkhalik et al., 2022)2 . Hoffmann et al. (2022) performed all experiments in 16-bit precision
                                                                             6
  and use a cost model of C = 6N D FLOPs. We generalize this to C = 16         N DP to account for
  the linear relation between compute and precision, which reduces to the Chinchilla cost function for
  P = 16. We now examine three practically relevant variants of the following optimization problem.
                                                                                                                                            6
                         min L(N, D, P ) = A[N (1 − e−P/γ )3 ]−α + BD−β + E subject to C =                                                    N DP            (5)
                        N,D,P                                                                                                              16
  Since derivations are algebraically involved, we will work up to proportionality and verify proposed
  solutions numerically. See Appendix E for mathematical details. We note that the implications
  of our functional form are true no matter the scale at which future experiments are done, but the
  numerical values we predict depend on our fitted constants which are fitted on smaller-scale, integer-
  type experiments.

  4.3.1                  I F YOU M UST T RAIN IN L OW P RECISION , I NCREASE PARAMETERS B EFORE DATA
  Minimizing L(N, D) with P fixed, subject to C ∝ N DP . We get with some algebra that at
  precision P and compute budget C, the optimal allocations N ∗ , D∗ of parameters and data relative
  to Chinchilla-optimal NCh , DCh will be given by
          N ∗ (P, C) h                  3α
                                   i− α+β       β      D∗ (P, C) h                3α
                                                                               i α+β    β
                     ∝ 1 − e−P/γ̄          P − α+β and            ∝ 1 − e−P/γ̄       P α+β       (6)
           NCh (C)                                     DCh (C)
  which suggests as precision of training decreases at fixed compute, we should increase param-
  eters and decrease data. The interpretation of this is that at very low precisions, our effective
  parameter count vanishes so that increasing parameter count is compute-optimal since data egre-
  giously outstrips effective parameters.
              2
                  In practice, the gains are less than linear due to systems overhead.


                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Predicted: Quantized Training (INT)                                          Empirical: Quantized Training (FP)                                                 P * (D) for Various N
                     3.3                                                                         3.3                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.7


                                                                                                                                                            P (Model Precision)
                                                                                                                                                                                  14
Predicted Val Loss
                                                                                                 3.2                                                                                                                              0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Irreducible Loss
                     3.2


                                                                                Final Val Loss
                                                                                                                                                                                  12                                              0.5
                                                                                                 3.1
                     3.1                                                                                                                                                          10                                              0.4
                                                                                                 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                  8                                               0.3
                     3.0                                                                         2.9                                                                              6                                               0.2
                                                                                                 2.8                                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                     2.9    INT4         INT6      INT8     INT16       INT32                            FP4          FP6       FP8     BF16        FP32                                   0.1     1      10     100       1000   0.0
                           (1.76B)      (1.17B)   (880M)   (440M)      (220M)                          (1.76B)      (1.17B)   (880M)   (440M)      (220M)
                                     Training Precision (Model Size)                                             Training Precision (Model Size)                                       D (Dataset Size, Trillion Tokens)


Figure 6: Scaling law predictions (left, fitted on integer type) vs empirical values (right, floating-
point type). Precision of weights, activations, attention fixed to Ptrain . Predictions closely match the
empirical trend, but are shifted up by a small amount since floating-point is a more expressive type
and will incur lower loss at the same precision. (Right) When N is held fixed, compute-optimal pre-
cision increases approximately logarithmically with data. Markers correspond to predicted compute-
optimal precision for Llama-3 (8b, 70b, 405b), denoted by (circle, triangle, star) at each IsoFLOP
(lines), illustrating how compute-optimal precision increases in data when model size is held fixed.


 4.3.2                          C OMPUTE -O PTIMAL P RETRAINING P RECISION IS IN G ENERAL I NDEPENDENT OF
                                C OMPUTE
Jointly minimizing L(N, D, P ) with C ∝ N DP . This is the setting of pretraining without con-
straints on N, D, P except for a fixed compute budget. Solving this joint minimization problem
gives an implicit equation for P ∗ (C). Denoting u(P ) = [1 − e−P/γ̄ ]−3α , we find (see Appendix E)
that this equation takes the form
                                   3α       3α+1
                                       u(P ) 3α e−P/γ̄ = P −1 u(P )                              (7)
                                    γ̄
which reveals that in general the optimal pretraining precision is independent of compute budget.
This suggests that compute-optimal precision should be held fixed to P ∗ while N, D are scaled
according to Equation 6. We find this P ∗ to be around 7-8 bits when fitting our scaling law on
runs with quantization done to integer type. This has two consequences: first, this means the de-
facto practice of training models in 16-bit may be suboptimal. Second, the race to low-precision
training may have to stop before going below 4-bits, since this would force model sizes to become
disproportionately (more than 4x) larger to maintain loss scaling (see Figure 3, left).
We test our predictions in Figure 6 at a larger scale. We train compute-matched models at various
parameter count and precision ranging from FP4 to FP32 and 220M to 1.6B parameters. We train in
floating-point type since that is standard in pretraining (Groeneveld et al., 2024; Deitke et al., 2024),
though our scaling laws are fitted on integer type. We plot our predicted trend in Figure 6 (left)
and the empirical values in the middle. We find that scaling fits on integer type are a strong fit until
4-bit precision, at which points the difference between the two types becomes more apparent. The
matching of qualitative trends throughout, with the optimum being close to the predicted optimum
of P ∗ near 7-8 bits suggests that similar scaling laws may exist across types. We initiate a similar
analysis for floating-point type in Appendix ??.

 4.3.3                          B UT C OMPUTE -O PTIMAL P RETRAINING P RECISION C AN I NCREASE IN C OMPUTE IF
                                M ODEL S IZE N IS C ONSTRAINED
Minimizing L(D, P ) with N fixed, subject to C ∝ N DP . A common use case in practice
is to train a suite of models of various sizes on similar data. The Llama-3 and Gemma-2 series
(Dubey et al., 2024; Team et al., 2024) are examples. In this setting, N is fixed in advance and
only D, P are jointly optimized. Surprisingly, our scaling laws predict that models of differing sizes
should not necessarily be trained in the same precision, and that compute-optimal precision scales
as P ∗ (C) ∝ log C. Since N is held constant and we show in Appendix E that log C ≈ log D in
proportion, we can write P ∗ (C) ∝ log(D/N ). The intuition for this is that, for a fixed N , precision
acts as a new lever to bring highly overtrained models closer to pretraining optimality3 by reducing
D/Neff .
   3
     An important subtlety here is that since models are overtrained for inference, we want to keep the cost of a
forward pass—which is proportional to N P —fixed, not just N . While N P is the same for both a model of N0


                                                                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               PTQ(Neff, D, Ptrain, Ppost)
                             MSE: 5.06e-02, R 2: 0.9041                                                         8
                                                                                                                               Empirical PTQ                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Predicted PTQ


                                                                        Ppost, post-training precision (bits)


                                                                                                                                                                   Ppost, post-training precision (bits)
                100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.2
                                                                                                                7                                                                                          7
            10 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                6                                                                                          6
Predicted PTQ

            10 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
            10 3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PTQ
                                                                                                                5                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6
            10 4
                                                                                                                4                                                                                          4                                        0.4
            10 5
            10 6                                                                                                3                                                                                          3                                        0.2
            10 7
                      10 6   10 5   10 4     10 3   10 2   10 1   100                                           23   4    5    6    7    8    9   10     11   12                                           2   4       6       8      10       12
                                           Actual PTQ                                                                    Pw, training precision (bits)                                                         Pw, training precision (bits)

Figure 7: Combined plots for predicting degradation. (Left) demonstrates the quality of our fit on
all our runs, including all combinations of pre and post-training precisions. (Center, right) illustrate
visually that our unified degradation form can predict degradation when training and serving in any
precision. Plots (center, right) vary Pw only, but fits in (left) include runs where Pa , Pkv are also
jointly varied.



                 Finding 3. When N, D, P are optimized jointly, compute-optimal pretraining precision is
                 independent of compute. 16-bit has many unnecessary bits, and 4-bit requires increasing
                 the model size disproportionately to maintain loss scaling. Our fits imply that 7-8 bits are
                 compute-optimal. In contrast, when N is fixed in advance, such as when training a model
                 family on similar data, P ∗ (C) ∝ log C. This suggests that for models that will be signifi-
                 cantly overtrained, higher precision during training may be compute-optimal.



5                 A U NIFIED S CALING L AW FOR P RECISION

In this section, we combine the two scaling laws presented into a unified functional form that predicts
both training/post-training effects, including interactions between the two. We now treat δPTQ as
a function δPTQ (N, D, Ptrain , Ppost ) rather than just δPTQ (N, D, Ppost ) as we did earlier in Section
3. We find two competing effects at play when predicting δPTQ , but overall, models trained in
lower precision are more robust to post-train quantization in the sense of incurring lower
degradation.
Two competing effects at play during post-train quantization. Intuitively, training any of
Pw , Pa , Pkv in low precision forces the model to learn weights that are robust to “quantization noise,”
so they degrade less under PTQ. However, the reduced N 7→ Neff implies that models trained in low
precision will degrade more because δPTQ increases with N −γN as we found in Section 3. We call
this second effect the “overtraining” effect. In practice, the first “robustification” effect wins out, so
that models trained in lower precision overall degrade less when post-train quantized. We confirm
using Neff rather than N to predict degradation given various training precisions leads to a substan-
tially stronger fit in Figure 21(top left, top center), to verify the competing overtraining effect.
Modifying δPTQ to account for training precision. We assume training precision is strictly greater
than inference precision, and define degradation as identically zero if they are equal. We begin by
studying how degradation scales with just weight-precision during training, Pw .
Consider Figure 7(center). We fix (N, D) and each cell of the heatmap represents the empirical
degradation δPTQ (Pw , Ppost ). We observe that degradation very quickly increases to its exponentially
large value from Section 3 if there is any gap between training and inference-time precision. This


parameters in 16-bit and one with 2N0 parameters in 8-bit, the latter has higher Neff with our γ̄, so will reach a
lower pretraining loss on the same data with the same training/inference costs.


                                                                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


motivates modifying our initial functional form fitted in Section 3 to
                                                            γD
                                            −Ppost /γpost  D
            δPTQ (N, D, Pw , Ppost ) = CT e                  γN     [1 − e−Cw (Pw −Ppost ) ]                              (8)
                                                           Neff     |           {z            }
                                                          | {z }       Robustification effect
                                                            Overtraining effect

where Cw is the only new fitted value. Then, we can extend this to include the precision effects of
activations/attention in the natural way:

                                                                     D γD
                                                                                   Y
       δPTQ (N, D, Pw , Pa , Pkv , Ppost ) = CT e−Ppost /γpost         γN                    [1 − e−Cx (Px −Ppost ) ]     (9)
                                                                     Neff
                                                                                x∈{w,a,kv}

We measure the fit to the data of such a functional form in Figure 7, and find a strong fit with
R2 = 0.90 on over 1000 data points (each of 465 pretraining runs post-train quantized to multiple
precisions).
An interpretable, unified functional form. Now we simplify and interpret the resulting functional
form. Consider training with only weights in low precision and take Cw = 1 for illustrative purposes
so we can simplify Equation 9. Denote σtr2 := e−Pw /γw as “training noise” reflecting the decrease in
effective parameter count due to training weights in lower precision. Then, Equation 9 simplifies to
                                                                             γD
                                                        2            2       D
                   δPTQ (N, D, Ptrain , Ppost ) = CT (σPTQ − σtr ) ·           γN                (10)
                                                     |       {z       }      Neff
                                                    Robustification effect |  {z  }
                                                                                  Overtraining effect

which we note is the intuitive modification one might make to the form of the initial post-training
quantization degradation we fitted in Section 3, in Finding 3.1, with a small competing effects factor
from Neff pushing in the opposite direction. It cleanly reflects the intuition that models are robustified
to PTQ noise to the extent they were trained with similar noise.

    Finding 4 (Unified Scaling Laws). Modeling low-precision effects during pretraining as
    independent and multiplicative noise that accumulates, and including post-training quan-
    tization degradation, the predicted loss for a language model with N parameters, trained
    on D tokens, with training precision Pw , Pa , Pkv to end-time weight-precision Ppost , can be
    predicted as
                                                          −α
                      L(N, D, Pw , Pa , Pkv , Ppost ) = ANeff + BD−β + E + δPTQ                                    (11)
    where δPTQ (N, D, Pw , Pa , Pkv , Ppost ) is in general as in Equation 9 and Neff (N, Pw , Pa , Pkv )
    as in Finding 4.2.


6    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
We find that the common inference-time technique of post-train quantization can incur large degra-
dation at very high data budgets, demonstrating a striking example of how more pretraining com-
pute does not always imply stronger models at inference-time. Seeking better data scaling, we study
quantization-aware and low precision training. We find that parameters and bit precision are well
modeled as interchangeably controlling an “effective parameter count” of the model allows us to
predict finite-precision loss effects accurately during both training and inference.
There are limitations to our analysis. First, we use a fixed architecture throughout to examine the
effects of precision, parameters, and tokens in a controlled manner. In contrast, low precision train-
ing often involves architectural tweaks (Ma et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024) that can close much of the
gap from a vanilla full precision model. Second, while compute costs do scale linearly with preci-
sion, the gains from halving precision are usually less than 2x due to systems overhead. Third, we
only consider loss scaling without downstream model evaluations. We emphasize that the trends we
find aim to be suggestive rather than prescriptive, and hope future work can more comprehensively
examine these effects at larger model scale. In all, we find that the effects of precision on loss are
predictable and consistent, with important and surprising implications.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   E THICS S TATEMENT
We study the efficient training of language models, and as such do not see any new ethical concerns
arising as a result of our work.

8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Tanishq Kumar thanks Tim Dettmers, Chris De Sa, Neil Band and Luke Bailey for helpful comments
and discussion, as well as Ludwig Schmidt for spotting an early typo. Blake Bordelon is supported
by a Google PhD Fellowship. Cengiz Pehlevan is supported by NSF grant DMS-2134157, NSF
CAREER Award IIS-2239780, and a Sloan Research Fellowship. This work has been made possible
in part by a gift from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Foundation to establish the Kempner Institute
for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence. Aditi Raghunathan acknowledges support from
AI2050 program by Schmidt Sciences (Grant G2264481), Google Research Scholar, Apple, NSF,
Cisco.
We gratefully acknowledge the support of NIH under No. U54EB020405 (Mobilize), NSF un-
der Nos. CCF2247015 (Hardware-Aware), CCF1763315 (Beyond Sparsity), CCF1563078 (Vol-
ume to Velocity), and 1937301 (RTML); US DEVCOM ARL under Nos. W911NF-23-2-
0184 (Long-context) and W911NF-21-2-0251 (Interactive Human-AI Teaming); ONR under Nos.
N000142312633 (Deep Signal Processing); Stanford HAI under No. 247183; NXP, Xilinx, LETI-
CEA, Intel, IBM, Microsoft, NEC, Toshiba, TSMC, ARM, Hitachi, BASF, Accenture, Ericsson,
Qualcomm, Analog Devices, Google Cloud, Salesforce, Total, the HAI-GCP Cloud Credits for Re-
search program, the Stanford Data Science Initiative (SDSI). Benjamin F. Spector is supported by
a Hertz Fellowship. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views, policies, or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of NIH, ONR,
or the U.S. Government.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adsera, Matthew S Brennan, Guy Bresler, and Dheeraj Nagaraj. The
  staircase property: How hierarchical structure can guide deep learning. Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, 34:26989–27002, 2021.
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
  necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
  networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4782–4887. PMLR, 2022.
Hamdy Abdelkhalik, Yehia Arafa, Nandakishore Santhi, and Abdel-Hameed A Badawy. Demysti-
  fying the nvidia ampere architecture through microbenchmarking and instruction-level analysis.
  In 2022 IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2022.
Armen Aghajanyan, Lili Yu, Alexis Conneau, Wei-Ning Hsu, Karen Hambardzumyan, Susan
  Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Omer Levy, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Scaling laws for gen-
  erative mixed-modal language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  265–279. PMLR, 2023.
Arash Ahmadian, Saurabh Dash, Hongyu Chen, Bharat Venkitesh, Zhen Stephen Gou, Phil Blun-
  som, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Intriguing properties of quantization at scale. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:34278–34294, 2023.
Ibrahim M Alabdulmohsin, Behnam Neyshabur, and Xiaohua Zhai. Revisiting neural scaling laws
   in language and vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22300–22312,
   2022.
Alon Albalak, Yanai Elazar, Sang Michael Xie, Shayne Longpre, Nathan Lambert, Xinyi Wang,
  Niklas Muennighoff, Bairu Hou, Liangming Pan, Haewon Jeong, et al. A survey on data selection
  for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16827, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Loubna Ben Allal, Raymond Li, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Christopher Akiki, Carlos Munoz
  Ferrandis, Niklas Muennighoff, Mayank Mishra, Alex Gu, Manan Dey, et al. Santacoder: don’t
  reach for the stars! arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03988, 2023.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.3, knowledge capacity
  scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05405, 2024.

Alexander Atanasov, Blake Bordelon, Sabarish Sainathan, and Cengiz Pehlevan. The on-
  set of variance-limited behavior for networks in the lazy and rich regimes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.12147, 2022.

Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining neural
  scaling laws. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(27):e2311878121, 2024.

Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.

Boaz Barak, Benjamin Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, Eran Malach, and Cyril Zhang. Hid-
  den progress in deep learning: Sgd learns parities near the computational limit. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21750–21764, 2022.

André Bauer, Simon Trapp, Michael Stenger, Robert Leppich, Samuel Kounev, Mark Leznik, Kyle
  Chard, and Ian Foster. Comprehensive exploration of synthetic data generation: A survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2401.02524, 2024.

Tamay Besiroglu, Ege Erdil, Matthew Barnett, and Josh You. Chinchilla scaling: A replication
  attempt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10102, 2024.

Blake Bordelon, Lorenzo Noci, Mufan Bill Li, Boris Hanin, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Depthwise
  hyperparameter transfer in residual networks: Dynamics and scaling limit. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.16620, 2023.

Blake Bordelon, Alexander Atanasov, and Cengiz Pehlevan. A dynamical model of neural scaling
  laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01092, 2024.

Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.

Jerry Chee, Yaohui Cai, Volodymyr Kuleshov, and Christopher M De Sa. Quip: 2-bit quantization
   of large language models with guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   36, 2024.

Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gor-
 don, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for
 contrastive language-image learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2818–2829, 2023.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):
  1–113, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Arthur Mensch, Michela Paganini, Jordan Hoff-
  mann, Bogdan Damoc, Blake Hechtman, Trevor Cai, Sebastian Borgeaud, et al. Unified scaling
  laws for routed language models. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4057–
  4086. PMLR, 2022.
Jeremy Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on
   neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2021.
Matthieu Courbariaux, Yoshua Bengio, and Jean-Pierre David. Training deep neural networks with
 low precision multiplications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7024, 2014.
Matt Deitke, Christopher Clark, Sangho Lee, Rohun Tripathi, Yue Yang, Jae Sung Park, Moham-
 madreza Salehi, Niklas Muennighoff, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini, et al. Molmo and pixmo: Open
 weights and open data for state-of-the-art multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.17146,
 2024.
Tim Dettmers and Luke Zettlemoyer. The case for 4-bit precision: k-bit inference scaling laws. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7750–7774. PMLR, 2023.
Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Sam Shleifer, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 8-bit optimizers via block-wise
  quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02861, 2021.
Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Gpt3. int8 (): 8-bit matrix
  multiplication for transformers at scale. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  30318–30332, 2022.
Tim Dettmers, Ruslan Svirschevski, Vage Egiazarian, Denis Kuznedelev, Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashk-
  boos, Alexander Borzunov, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. Spqr: A sparse-quantized repre-
  sentation for near-lossless llm weight compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03078, 2023.
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized llms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jesse Dodge, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasović, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groeneveld,
  Margaret Mitchell, and Matt Gardner. Documenting large webtext corpora: A case study on the
  colossal clean crawled corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08758, 2021.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Lijie Fan, Kaifeng Chen, Dilip Krishnan, Dina Katabi, Phillip Isola, and Yonglong Tian. Scaling
  laws of synthetic images for model training... for now. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7382–7392, 2024.
Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. Gptq: Accurate post-training
  quantization for generative pre-trained transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.17323, 2022.
Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Georgios Smyrnis, Vaishaal Shankar, Suchin Gururangan, Mitchell Worts-
  man, Rulin Shao, Jean Mercat, Alex Fang, Jeffrey Li, Sedrick Keh, et al. Language models scale
  reliably with over-training and on downstream tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08540, 2024.
Justin Gilmer, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ankush Garg, Sneha Kudugunta, Behnam Neyshabur, David Car-
  doze, George Dahl, Zachary Nado, and Orhan Firat. A loss curvature perspective on training
  instability in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04369, 2021.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Pete Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Ananya Harsh Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, et al. Olmo: Accelerating the
  science of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00838, 2024.
Alexander Hägele, Elie Bakouch, Atli Kosson, Loubna Ben Allal, Leandro Von Werra, and Martin
  Jaggi. Scaling laws and compute-optimal training beyond fixed training durations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.18392, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Wei Huang, Yangdong Liu, Haotong Qin, Ying Li, Shiming Zhang, Xianglong Liu, Michele Magno,
 and Xiaojuan Qi. Billm: Pushing the limit of post-training quantization for llms. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2402.04291, 2024.
Berivan Isik, Natalia Ponomareva, Hussein Hazimeh, Dimitris Paparas, Sergei Vassilvitskii, and
  Sanmi Koyejo. Scaling laws for downstream task performance of large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.04177, 2024.
Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard,
  Hartwig Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and training of neural networks for
  efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2704–2713, 2018.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Jakub Krajewski, Jan Ludziejewski, Kamil Adamczewski, Maciej Pióro, Michał Krutul, Szymon
  Antoniak, Kamil Ciebiera, Krystian Król, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź, Piotr Sankowski, et al. Scaling
  laws for fine-grained mixture of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07871, 2024.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. Bloom: A 176b-
  parameter open-access multilingual language model. 2023.
Jeffrey Li, Alex Fang, Georgios Smyrnis, Maor Ivgi, Matt Jordan, Samir Gadre, Hritik Bansal, Etash
   Guha, Sedrick Keh, Kushal Arora, et al. Datacomp-lm: In search of the next generation of training
   sets for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11794, 2024.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023.
Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Xingyu Dang, and Song Han. Awq: Activation-
   aware weight quantization for llm compression and acceleration. arxiv. MLSys 2024, 2023.
Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Wei-Ming Chen, Wei-Chen Wang, Guangxuan
   Xiao, Xingyu Dang, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. Awq: Activation-aware weight quantization for
   on-device llm compression and acceleration. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 6:
   87–100, 2024a.
Licong Lin, Jingfeng Wu, Sham M Kakade, Peter L Bartlett, and Jason D Lee. Scaling laws in linear
  regression: Compute, parameters, and data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08466, 2024b.
Qian Liu, Xiaosen Zheng, Niklas Muennighoff, Guangtao Zeng, Longxu Dou, Tianyu Pang, Jing
  Jiang, and Min Lin. Regmix: Data mixture as regression for language model pre-training. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.01492, 2024.
Zechun Liu, Barlas Oguz, Changsheng Zhao, Ernie Chang, Pierre Stock, Yashar Mehdad, Yangyang
  Shi, Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, and Vikas Chandra. Llm-qat: Data-free quantization aware
  training for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17888, 2023.
Anton Lozhkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Federico Cassano, Joel Lamy-Poirier, Nouamane
  Tazi, Ao Tang, Dmytro Pykhtar, Jiawei Liu, Yuxiang Wei, et al. Starcoder 2 and the stack v2: The
  next generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19173, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Risto Luukkonen, Ville Komulainen, Jouni Luoma, Anni Eskelinen, Jenna Kanerva, Hanna-Mari
  Kupari, Filip Ginter, Veronika Laippala, Niklas Muennighoff, Aleksandra Piktus, et al. Fingpt:
  Large generative models for a small language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05640, 2023.
Shuming Ma, Hongyu Wang, Lingxiao Ma, Lei Wang, Wenhui Wang, Shaohan Huang, Li Dong,
  Ruiping Wang, Jilong Xue, and Furu Wei. The era of 1-bit llms: All large language models are in
  1.58 bits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17764, 2024.
Paulius Micikevicius, Sharan Narang, Jonah Alben, Gregory Diamos, Erich Elsen, David Garcia,
  Boris Ginsburg, Michael Houston, Oleksii Kuchaiev, Ganesh Venkatesh, et al. Mixed precision
  training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.03740, 2017.
Paulius Micikevicius, Dusan Stosic, Neil Burgess, Marius Cornea, Pradeep Dubey, Richard Grisen-
  thwaite, Sangwon Ha, Alexander Heinecke, Patrick Judd, John Kamalu, et al. Fp8 formats for
  deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05433, 2022.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le
  Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, et al. Crosslingual gen-
  eralization through multitask finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01786, 2022.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Nouamane Tazi, Aleksandra
  Piktus, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin A Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language
  models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Niklas Muennighoff, Luca Soldaini, Dirk Groeneveld, Kyle Lo, Jacob Morrison, Sewon Min, Wei-
  jia Shi, Pete Walsh, Oyvind Tafjord, Nathan Lambert, et al. Olmoe: Open mixture-of-experts
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02060, 2024b.
Quynh Nguyen, Marco Mondelli, and Guido F Montufar. Tight bounds on the smallest eigenvalue
  of the neural tangent kernel for deep relu networks. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8119–8129. PMLR, 2021.
Bo Peng, Daniel Goldstein, Quentin Anthony, Alon Albalak, Eric Alcaide, Stella Biderman, Eugene
  Cheah, Teddy Ferdinan, Haowen Hou, Przemysław Kazienko, et al. Eagle and finch: Rwkv with
  matrix-valued states and dynamic recurrence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05892, 2024.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Yangjun Ruan, Chris J Maddison, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Observational scaling laws and the
  predictability of language model performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10938, 2024.
Nikhil Sardana and Jonathan Frankle. Beyond chinchilla-optimal: Accounting for inference in
  language model scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00448, 2023.
Teven Le Scao, Thomas Wang, Daniel Hesslow, Lucile Saulnier, Stas Bekman, M Saiful Bari, Stella
  Biderman, Hady Elsahar, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, et al. What language model to train
  if you have one million gpu hours? arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15424, 2022.
Noam Shazeer. Glu variants improve transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202, 2020.
Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Binhang Yuan, Zhuohan Li, Max Ryabinin, Beidi Chen, Percy Liang,
  Christopher Ré, Ion Stoica, and Ce Zhang. Flexgen: High-throughput generative inference of
  large language models with a single gpu. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  31094–31116. PMLR, 2023.
Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan
 Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model par-
 allelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053, 2019.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.

Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur,
  Ben Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, et al. Dolma: An open corpus of
  three trillion tokens for language model pretraining research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00159,
  2024.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.

Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: enhanced transformer with
   rotary position embedding. corr abs/2104.09864 (2021). arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09864, 2021.

Xiao Sun, Naigang Wang, Chia-Yu Chen, Jiamin Ni, Ankur Agrawal, Xiaodong Cui, Swagath
  Venkataramani, Kaoutar El Maghraoui, Vijayalakshmi Viji Srinivasan, and Kailash Gopalakrish-
  nan. Ultra-low precision 4-bit training of deep neural networks. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:1796–1807, 2020.

Chaofan Tao, Qian Liu, Longxu Dou, Niklas Muennighoff, Zhongwei Wan, Ping Luo, Min Lin, and
  Ngai Wong. Scaling laws with vocabulary: Larger models deserve larger vocabularies. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.13623, 2024.

Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Hyung Won Chung, William Fedus, Jinfeng Rao, Sharan
  Narang, Vinh Q Tran, Dani Yogatama, and Donald Metzler. Scaling laws vs model architectures:
  How does inductive bias influence scaling? arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10551, 2022a.

Yi Tay, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Vinh Q Tran, David R So, Siamak Shakeri, Xavier Garcia,
  Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Jinfeng Rao, Aakanksha Chowdhery, et al. Transcending scaling laws
  with 0.1% extra compute. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11399, 2022b.

Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.

Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhu-
  patiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al. Gemma
  2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118, 2024.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.

Ahmet Üstün, Viraat Aryabumi, Zheng-Xin Yong, Wei-Yin Ko, Daniel D’souza, Gbemileke
  Onilude, Neel Bhandari, Shivalika Singh, Hui-Lee Ooi, Amr Kayid, et al. Aya model: An in-
  struction finetuned open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07827,
  2024.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.(nips), 2017. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1706.03762, 10:S0140525X16001837, 2017.

Hongyu Wang, Shuming Ma, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Huaijie Wang, Lingxiao Ma, Fan Yang,
  Ruiping Wang, Yi Wu, and Furu Wei. Bitnet: Scaling 1-bit transformers for large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11453, 2023.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Mitchell Wortsman, Tim Dettmers, Luke Zettlemoyer, Ari Morcos, Ali Farhadi, and Ludwig
 Schmidt. Stable and low-precision training for large-scale vision-language models. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:10271–10298, 2023a.
Mitchell Wortsman, Peter J Liu, Lechao Xiao, Katie Everett, Alex Alemi, Ben Adlam, John D Co-
 Reyes, Izzeddin Gur, Abhishek Kumar, Roman Novak, et al. Small-scale proxies for large-scale
 transformer training instabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14322, 2023b.
Hao Wu, Patrick Judd, Xiaojie Zhang, Mikhail Isaev, and Paulius Micikevicius. Integer quan-
  tization for deep learning inference: Principles and empirical evaluation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.09602, 2020.
Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickael Seznec, Hao Wu, Julien Demouth, and Song Han. Smoothquant:
  Accurate and efficient post-training quantization for large language models. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 38087–38099. PMLR, 2023.
Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ry-
  der, Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural
  networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03466, 2022.
Zitong Yang, Neil Band, Shuangping Li, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Synthetic
  continued pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07431, 2024.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Rui-Jie Zhu, Yu Zhang, Ethan Sifferman, Tyler Sheaves, Yiqiao Wang, Dustin Richmond, Peng
  Zhou, and Jason K Eshraghian. Scalable matmul-free language modeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.02528, 2024.
Xunyu Zhu, Jian Li, Yong Liu, Can Ma, and Weiping Wang. A survey on model compression for
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07633, 2023.


                                               17
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Weights                                               KV Cache                                               Activations
             4.27
                                                                    4.40                                                   4.23
             4.26
                                                                    4.35                                                   4.22
             4.25
Final Loss


                                                       Final Loss


                                                                                                              Final Loss
             4.24                                                                                                          4.21
                                                                    4.30
             4.23                                                                                                          4.20

             4.22                                                   4.25                                                   4.19

             4.21                                                                                                          4.18
                    4   5          6           7   8                       4   5          6           7   8                       4   5          6           7   8
                            Precision (bits)                                       Precision (bits)                                       Precision (bits)

  Figure 8: L(Pw ), L(Pa ), L(Pkv ) for ablated hyperparameters, N = 30M, D = 1.5B. We can see the
  trends persist, where the first few bits reduce final val loss significantly, with diminishing/saturating
  returns quickly setting in at higher precision. We do not fit constants on these ablated runs.


  A             H YPERPARAMETER D ETAILS AND A BLATIONS

  We launch over 20 runs for each (N, D) combination to study scaling in precision, trained and
  validated on the common crawl split of the Dolma dataset (Soldaini et al., 2024). We use a standard
  causal Transformer++ implementation: SwiGLU activations (Shazeer, 2020), RoPE embeddings
  (Su et al., 2021), RMSLayerNorm, Adam β values of (0.9, 0.95). We adopt a cosine learning rate
  schedule with 10% warmup period and peak learning rate of 6e-4 for the smallest model and learning
  rates scaled with width and depth according to depth-µP for the larger models (Yang et al., 2022;
  Bordelon et al., 2023). We use a sequence length of 1024 and batch size of 256 throughout, with
  Adam ϵ 1e-15, following (Wortsman et al., 2023b). We use weight decay of 0.1, as (Ahmadian
  et al., 2023) find some results in the quantization literature may be artifacts of insufficient weight
  decay. We follow (Ma et al., 2024) in including a LayerNorm before projections because they find it
  is important for low precision training to be stable. These are the hyperparameters and settings used
  for the main scaling law experiments.
  To check robustness, we then ablate these hyperparameter choices, with results in Figure 8. In our
  ablation we use a sequence length of 512 with batch size 128, weight decay of 1e-3, Adam ϵ of
  1e-10, a peak learning rate of 1e-4 and a warmup period of duration 3%. We train models with these
  alternative hyperparameters at various weight, activation, and KV cache precisions. We train and val
  on C4 (Raffel et al., 2020; Dodge et al., 2021) instead. Though these ablations are at rather smaller
  scale due to compute constraints, the loss curves follow the same trends – rapid decrease in final
  loss with an initial increase in precision from 4 bits, then diminishing returns as we approach higher
  precision – as in the main text, suggesting the trends are robust to hyperparameter choices.


  B             A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

  Efficient training and inference Low precision has been key to improving the efficiency of train-
  ing and using LLMs (Micikevicius et al., 2017; Shoeybi et al., 2019; Wortsman et al., 2023a; Zhu
  et al., 2023). Prior works generally study either precision during training (Courbariaux et al., 2014;
  Dettmers et al., 2024; 2021; Sun et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023) or the effects of changing the pre-
  cision after training (post-training quantization) (Frantar et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024a; Dettmers
  et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2023; Sheng et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2023). In this work we study both,
  the precision during training and after, and unify them from a scaling perspective. Other important
  works include recent popular work on quantization-aware-training (Ma et al., 2024) where weights
  are quantized to extreme precisions (ternary) on the forward pass during training. This work is con-
  sistent with ours in that they can quantize weights so aggressively because weights are less sensitive
  than activations or KV cache. Further, while we use a fixed architecture throughout to maintain
  a controlled comparison across precision, they use a nonstandard architecture, learning rate, and
  weight decay schedule specifically to make training with ternary weights stable.


                                                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Large language models and scaling By scaling up the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) a variety of large language models have been proposed (Brown et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021;
Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Dubey et al., 2024; Le Scao et al., 2023; Muennighoff et al., 2022; 2024b;
Groeneveld et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022; Allal et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023;
Lozhkov et al., 2024; Luukkonen et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Team et al.,
2023; Üstün et al., 2024; Deitke et al., 2024). To improve our understanding of these models,
various works have investigated their scaling properties (Ruan et al., 2024; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2024;
Hägele et al., 2024). Many aspects are relevant to scaling including the architecture (Tay et al.,
2022a; Krajewski et al., 2024; Tao et al., 2024; Clark et al., 2022; Tay et al., 2022b; Scao et al.,
2022; Peng et al., 2024), the modalities considered (Aghajanyan et al., 2023; Alabdulmohsin et al.,
2022; Cherti et al., 2023), the performance metrics (Wei et al., 2022; Srivastava et al., 2022; Isik
et al., 2024), the data composition (Li et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Albalak et al., 2024) and data
repetitions (Muennighoff et al., 2024a). Our work analyzes one such aspect, which is key to better
scaling: the numeric precision during and after training.


C    A LTERNATIVE F UNCTIONAL F ORMS

There are several plausible functional forms to try a priori. The key junctions are whether a form
is 1) additive or multiplicative and 2) interacts with parameters/data or is independent, 3) a power
law or exponential. We try a variety of combinations of these three and find the formulation in the
main text one of the best fits, notably with the fewest fitted parameters. We emphasize that several
fitted forms are likely to be reasonable fits to the data, and an important desiderata for choosing a
functional fit is interpretability. Several scaling law papers find multiple fits plausible in terms of
predictive power (Muennighoff et al., 2024a; Kaplan et al., 2020), and ultimately make a decision
based on interpretability.
We make these fit choices on sweeps of the form L(N, D, PW ) and discuss alternatives to the de-
composition/factorization to account for activations and KV cache in Appendix Section M, which
assumes an effective parameter count formulation. In this section, a power law refers to a term of the
form Cw · P −αw where Cw , αw are fitted. In general, we find modeling precision effects with power
law fits on their own causes the fitted constants A, B to blow up, whereas this does not happen with
exponential fits, suggesting the power law does not change sharply enough to match the change in
loss induced by precision. We note that while fitting parameters using a double notion of effective
parameters and effective data leads to a slightly better fit, it requires more fitted parameters so we
stick with the Neff formulation for simplicity and interpretability. When choosing between fits we
validate on held-out data and the R2 values below reflect the fit on the held out data. This is in
contrast to our plots in the main text, where we have chosen a functional form and we fit and plot on
the same data, as is standard in scaling laws (Muennighoff et al., 2024a).

                  Functional Form               Val R2    Number of Fitted Parameters
                         Neff                    0.82                  3
           Additive/independent power law        0.71                  2
                         Deff                    0.74                  3
                 Neff and Deff (tied)            0.79                  3
               Neff and Deff (not tied)          0.84                  4
           Multiplicative power law, N, P        0.75                  2

       Table 1: Comparison of Functional Forms with R2 ,and Number of Fitted Parameters



D    Q UANTIZATION I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND T YPES

Two canonical types for neural network quantization are floating-point (FP) and integer (INT) quan-
tization. Despite their differences in representation, we hypothesize the scaling behavior between
floating-point and integer quantization can be described by similar functional forms, where 1(b)
provides preliminary evidence for this.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.1    I NTEGER Q UANTIZATION AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In integer quantization, continuous values are mapped to discrete integer values. Typically, this is
done by scaling the original values according to a fixed scale factor. Mathematically, for a real
number x, the quantized integer value xint is computed as:
                                                    jxm
                                             xint =
                                                     s
where s is the scaling factor, and ⌊·⌉ denotes rounding to the nearest integer specified by the number
of bits. The value can then be dequantized back to an approximate real value by multiplying by s:
                                            xdequant = s · xint
This process introduces quantization error, defined as the difference between the original value x and
the dequantized value xdequant . The goal of quantization is to minimize this error while still reducing
the precision. One can think of this as rounding to the nearest point on a uniform lattice. More
complicated quantization schemes involve selecting the lattice points in a data or model-dependent
manner. Integer quantization, as implemented, uses a fixed-point scaling based on the maximum
absolute value of the tensor, and then scales the values within the range [Qn , Qp ], where Qn =
−2(b−1) and Qp = 2(b−1) − 1, with b being the number of bits.
Integer quantization first rescales the inputs into the range specified by the number of bits by
                                                    Qp
                                             s=
                                                  max(|x|)
for tensor-based scaling, or
                                                   Qp
                                        s=
                                             max(|x|, dim = k)
for channel-based scaling. After scaling, the result is rounded to the nearest integer and then clamped
to the range [Qn , Qp ]. After matrix multiplication, the result is rescaled back into the original range.
We quantize only the forward pass in this work, to ensure fair comparison between quantization-
aware-training (weights only) and low-precision training (weights, activations, KV cache). This is
because the backward pass is not usually quantized during quantization-aware-training (Ma et al.,
2024), so comparing sensitivities of weights (forward only) to activations/KV cache (forward and
backward) would not be a principled comparison. In production pretraining in low precision, the
matrix multiplications on the backward pass are also quantized, leading to further compute savings.
We leave a detailed analysis of how our observations change when accounting for the backward pass
to future work. We use integer quantization throughout to fit our scaling laws for simplicity.

D.2    F LOATING -P OINT Q UANTIZATION

Floating-point quantization is slightly more sophisticated, aiming to make a non-uniform lattice
roughly matching the distribution of the weights, which are assumed to be Gaussian. A floating-
point number is in general represented as:
                                         xfp = (−1)s · m · 2e
where s is the sign bit, m is the mantissa, and e is the exponent. In floating-point quantization, both
the mantissa and exponent are quantized to reduce the bit width. For exponent-mantissa allocations
of bits and details of exponent bias, we follow the guidelines from (Micikevicius et al., 2022) and
quantize weights per channel and activations per-tensor.
Making a full scaling law for floating-point quantization is more involved than our integer treatment,
because the effects of scaling mantissa vs exponent bits are not the same. In contrast, in integer
quantization, each additional bit simply causes us to round into a finer-grained lattice after rescaling,
thereby reducing quantization error by a predictable amount. In floating-point quantization, altering
the exponent affects the dynamic range, while altering the mantissa changes the precision within that
range. This flexibility at once makes floating-point quantization more suitable for model training,
but harder to analyze. We leave a commensurately detailed analysis of mantissa vs exponent – and
more generally floating point – scaling to future work.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3     H ARDWARE D ETAILS

Weight-only quantization can accelerate inference because software can be written to accommodate
moving data between GPU parts (HBM-SRAM) in smaller units (types), so that a given bandwidth
can move more data per second. This reduces memory (IO) bottlenecks that often dominate during
inference, even with high-batch workloads. However, we emphasize that the type and therefore
speed at which the GPU can do matrix multiplications in natively is determined by the hardware
provider, so that even when Pw = Pa = Pqkv (including queries), compute savings are only achieved
when these correspond with both a bit-width and type that the GPU supports. We aim to study
scaling in a fairly hardware-agnostic manner so that our work may be useful in the future, and
make no claims about hardware details or optimality. We train all our models with fake (simulated)
quantization on NVidia H100 GPUs to remain hardware agnostic, not taking advantage of any true
low-precision computation. The only assumption is that when hardware does implement support for
integer quantization, it is done in a way that involves some combination of rescaling and rounding,
as is standard at the time of writing (Dettmers & Zettlemoyer, 2023; Dettmers et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2020; Jacob et al., 2018).

E     D ERIVATIONS
E.1     C RITICAL DATASET S IZE FOR PTQ

We seek a Dcrit that satisfies ∂L(D
                                 ∂D
                                   crit )
                                          = ∂δPTQ∂D
                                                  (Dcrit )
                                                           . Taking both derivatives for the functional forms
presented in the main text and equating their opposing effects, we get the equation

                                −β−1                               γD −1
                              BDcrit = γD CT N −γN e−Ppost /γpost Dcrit                                 (12)

which implies

                                                                          γ 1+β
                                                 βBN γN ePpost /γpost

                                                                           D
                                   Dcrit =                                                              (13)
                                                    γD C T
is the predicted point after which pretraining on more data can increase loss of a model that is post-
train quantized. Note that this quantity explodes in P , so that a truly unreasonable amount of data
is required for longer pretraining to be harmful at commonly used precisions (eg. 8-bit). However,
we find that on overtrained models D/N ≫ 103 , these overtraining-degradation effects become
nontrivial around 5-bits, and dominant below that.

E.2     C OMPUTE - OPTIMALITY CALCULATIONS

We set a constraint C ∝ N DP throughout. Working up to proportionality is essentially rescaling
the compute constraint, so it doesn’t affect the scaling trends we identify, which is our focus.

E.2.1    F IXED P RECISION C OMPUTE O PTIMAL S CALING
Under fixed precision, the loss takes the form
                                       L = u(P )AN −α + BD−β                                            (14)
where u(P ) = [1 − e−P/γ ]−3α is a fixed constant. The compute optimal scaling when minimizing
the loss over N, D gives
                                   L = u(P )AN −α + BC −β N β P β                                       (15)
by replacing D = NCP . Optimizing over N , we see that this is equivalent to the original chinchilla
optimization problem but with A → Au(P ) and B → BP β . Performing this optimization, we find
                                  1                                             1
                                                                            − α+β
           ∗            u(P )Aα α+β α+β   β
                                                   ∗              u(P )Aα              α
         N (P, C) =                   C        , D (P, C) =                         C α+β      (16)
                         BP β β                                    BP β β


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We can relate the above expressions to the original Chinchilla-optimal N, D at full precision
NCh (C), DCh (C).
     N ∗ (P, C) h                3α
                             i− α+β      β      D∗ (P, C) h                3α
                                                                        i α+β    β
                ∝ 1 − e−P/γ̄        P − α+β and           ∝ 1 − e−P/γ̄        P α+β      (17)
      NCh (C)                                    DCh (C)

E.2.2   F IXED MODEL SIZE N
Now, we investigate the case where model size N is fixed but precision and data are jointly optimized
at fixed compute C = N DP . This optimization problem takes the form
                                    L = u(P )AN −α + BD−β                                       (18)
Under fixed compute, we have D = NCP so replacing the second term, we have
                                 L = u(P )AN −α + BC −β N β P β                                 (19)
where N is a constant. We therefore have a single variable P to minimize the above formula over
                             ∂L
                                  = u′ (P )AN −α + BC −β N β β P β−1 = 0                        (20)
                             ∂P
First, we note that u′ (P ) has the following form
                                                     1 −P/γ    3α            3α+1
             u′ (P ) = −3α[1 − e−P/γ ]−3α−1 ×          e    = − e−P/γ × u(P ) 3α                (21)
                                                     γ          γ
We thus desire a solution to the implicit equation
                        3α −P/γ        3α+1
                           e    × u(P ) 3α AN −α = BC −β N β β P β−1                            (22)
                         γ
We now aim to find an approximate asymptotic relationship between P and C as C → ∞. Taking
a logarithm of both sides, we find (neglecting additive constants that are independent of C, P )
                                                          1
                           −(3α + 1) ln(1 − e−P/γ ) −       P ≈ −β ln C                         (23)
                                                          γ
The correct dominant balance at large C is to take P ⋆ ∼ βγ ln C, as can be verified numerically.
With the constraint that C = N P D we have that D⋆ ≈ N βγCln C .

E.2.3   M INIMIZATION OVER N , D, P WITH F IXED C OMPUTE
Recall our three-way loss function is given as below. We separate Neff into terms involving (N, P )
explicitly here as it makes the math easier to follow.


                 L(N, D, P ) = AN −α u(P ) + BD−β , u(P ) = [1 − e−P/γ ]−3α                     (24)
Under the constraint C ∝ N DP , we can replace D in terms of C, N, P giving the loss expression
                  L = AN −α u(P ) + BN β P β C −β                                              (25)
                  ∂L
                       = −αAN −α−1 u(P ) + βBN β−1 P β C −β = 0                                (26)
                  ∂N
                  ∂L                        3α+1
                       = −3α/γAN −α u(P ) 3α e−P/γ + βBN β P β−1 C −β = 0                      (27)
                  ∂P
Multiplying the first equation by N and dividing the second equation by it reveals that the optimal
P satisfies a compute-independent implicit equation
                                   3         1
                                      u(P ) 3α e−P/γ̄ = P −1 u(P )                              (28)
                                   γ̄
This exercise reveals that the compute optimal strategy when allowed to jointly optimize N, D, P
is to choose a fixed precision that satisfies the above equation and then to scale up N, D with the
prescription in Appendix I.1.1.


                                                 22
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        P* vs C = 2NP                                                D* vs C = 2NP                                                      N* vs C = 2NP
                                                                                       1018
                            11                                                                                                                            1013

Post-Train Precision (P*)


                                                                                                                                  Model Parameters (N*)
                                                                                       1017
                            10


                                                                    Data Tokens (D*)
                                                                                                                                                          1012
                                                                                       1016
                             9                                                                                                                            1011                                      Llama3-8b
                                                                                       1015
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama3-70b
                             8                                                                                                                                                                      Llama3-405b
                                                                                       1014                                                               1010

                             7
                                                                                       1013                                                               109
                             6
                                                                                       1012
                                 1010   1011   1012   1013   1014                             1010   1011   1012    1013   1014                                  1010   1011   1012   1013   1014
                                  Inference FLOPs, C = 2NP                                     Inference FLOPs, C = 2NP                                           Inference FLOPs, C = 2NP

      Figure 9: Numerically minimizing a model of inference-time costs with respect to N, D, P after
      accounting for post-train-quantization degradation and its relation to overtraining.


       E.3                       I NFERENCE - TIME C OST M ODEL

      For many, inference is the primary cost of training and serving models. Here, we present a prelimi-
      nary analysis of an inference-time cost model. The key tension is that inference cost scales as N P ,
      so that inference costs at a fixed pretraining loss can be reduce by either reducing model size (and
      overtraining more) or quantizing post-training
      We will assume here that P = Ppost refers to the precision weights will be quantized to. In practice,
      inference costs may depend on the precision of the KV cache and activations to some extent as well,
      but we assume this for tractability of the following mathematical model, and to get a sense of how
      overtraining and post-train quantization concerns play out at inference-time. We can phrase this
      minimization problem in the following way.

                                                                                                                              DγD −P/γ
                                        min L(N, D, P ) = AN −α + BD−β + CT                                                        e   subject to C = N P                                                (29)
                                        N,D,P                                                                                 N γN
      The system of first-order conditions that results from this constrained optimization problem is
      not in general tractable analytically, so we solve the above constrained optimization problem for
      P ∗ (C), N ∗ (C), D∗ (C) numerically via a simple grid search. We find that N ∗ , D∗ grow as a power
      law in C while P ∗ ∝ log C. The clumping in points is an artifact of the numerics of the grid search;
      the fitted lines represent the loglinear (left) and loglog (middle, right) trends overall.
      It might be surprising that D∗ is not taken to infinity since it does not appear in the cost function.
      The reason for this is because if it was, post-train degradation (the third term) would become large.
      It might also be surprising that D∗ changes with compute at all. The reason for this is because, once
      again, of the third term: as we allow more inference-time compute we use more N , and at a larger
      N we can now tolerate a larger data budget for a given post-train quantization degradation, so being
      compute-optimal means taking advantage of this and training that larger parameter count on more
      data.
      The intuition for why P ∗ ∼ log C might be as follows. Consider a situation in which P ∗ is in-
      dependent of compute: the third term will come to be a bottleneck in loss as compute gets larger
      because N, D are both being scaled as power laws in compute, and eventually the effect of e−P/γ
      will become non-negligible in comparison to the first two terms in the loss function. To continue
      decreasing loss at this point, we must make this term smaller at a rate commensurate with the other
      terms, which go as a power law in compute. Since precision is inside the exponential, this can be
      done by taking P ∼ log C. An important thing to note is that since we are ignoring pretraining costs
      here, the absolute values of predicted D∗ are much larger than would be realistically possible in any
      reasonably training regime, where pretraining costs do matter, even if less than inference costs. But
      the empirical trends in N ∗ , P ∗ showcase how overtraining with post-train quantization in mind can
      outperform vanilla overtraining without accounting for its effects on post-train quantization.


                                                                                                                   23
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    N = 30M                N = 60M                    N = 110M     N = 220M
                              4.4                                                                         INT3
      Val Loss (Post-Quant)
                              4.2                                                                         INT4
                                                                                                          INT5
                              4.0                                                                         INT6
                              3.8                                                                         No PTQ
                              3.6
                              3.4
Degradation, PTQ


                         10 1

                         10 2

                         10 3
                                    100        1000              100           10            100     10
                                                              Token/Parameter Ratio
                                              Figure 10: Replicating Section 3 results with AWQ.

                                    N = 30M                N = 60M                    N = 110M     N = 220M
                                                                                                          INT3
                              5.5
      Val Loss (Post-Quant)


                                                                                                          INT4
                              5.0                                                                         INT5
                                                                                                          INT6
                              4.5                                                                         No PTQ
                              4.0
                              3.5


                              100
Degradation, PTQ


                         10 2


                                    100        1000              100           10            100     10
                                                              Token/Parameter Ratio
                                              Figure 11: Replicating Section 3 results with RTN.


    F                         R EPLICATING PTQ S CALING WITH OTHER Q UANTIZATION M ETHODS
    Here we replicate the finding that post-train degradation due to post-train quantization increases
    with token/parameter ratio as DγD /N γN . We fit the same functional form as in the main text, but
    get slightly different values of fitted constants, as expect. We replicate on AWQ (Lin et al., 2023)
    and round-to-nearest quantization. The former is a modern and sophisticated technique, and the
    latter a simple and naı̈ve approach to quantization. The fact they, as well as GPTQ in the main text,
    share the same failure modes suggests that poor post-training quantization data scaling should be
    the default expectation for any newly proposed PTQ technique.

    G                          PTQ: L EARNING R ATE S CHEDULE A BLATION
    Here, we ablate our learning rate and schedule to use warmup with linear decay, as opposed to a
    cosine schedule, to check it is not an artifact of our choice of learning rate schedule. We do so


                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               N = 30M
                                                 4.4


                         Val Loss (Post-Quant)
                                                                                       INT6
                                                 4.2                                   INT5
                                                                                       INT4
                                                                                       INT3
                                                 4.0                                   No PTQ

                                                 3.8
                                                                100
                                                         Token/Parameter Ratio
                                                  Figure 12: Linear LR Schedule Ablation


on our 30M model due to compute constraints, finding the degradation with token/parameter ratio
persists, as expected.


H    W HY DO LANGUAGE MODELS GET MORE SENSITIVE WITH
     OVERTRAINING ?

This section is speculative.
Sharpness. A canonical line of work in optimization demonstrates that model sharpness increases
during learning until it hovers at a maximal value (the “edge of stability”) (Cohen et al., 2021;
Gilmer et al., 2021), so that movement along the top Hessian eigenvector degrades loss by more
throughout training. Though sharpness is formally a worst-case sensitivity, we conjecture similar
results hold for average case, such as loss degradation induced by isotropic noise. It may be possible
that sharpness during language model pretraining does not reach its maximal value for a long time,
which is why sensitivity to noise monotonically seems to increase as D/N → ∞ on realistic data
budgets. Closely related is the largest eigenvalue of the neural tangent kernel (NTK) which captures
the magnitude of the variance of the predictor under parameter noise. This quantity is known to
empirically increase during training in a variety of settings, and is closely related to generalization
guarantees (Nguyen et al., 2021; Atanasov et al., 2022).
Hierarchical learning strategies become more sensitive throughout training. Our expectation
that overtrained language models may degrade more when quantized at inference-time is motivated
in part by the following results. The hierarchical nature of learning is by now well understood in
some toy settings: in (Abbe et al., 2021), it is shown that “staircase” polynomials of increasing de-
gree are learned faster than high-degree monomials since neural networks combine existing features
to learn new ones. In (Abbe et al., 2022) this result was strengthened to show that such hierarchical
structure is both necessary and sufficient to learn sparse functions with SGD in two layer neural net-
works. In this setting, damage to features encoding lower-order polynomials affects all higher-order
ones, so that such networks are increasingly sensitive to fixed feature noise throughout learning.
Another result of a similar flavor is that of (Barak et al., 2022), who explicitly require high-precision
gradients for sparse parity to be learned, since sparse parity is learned by the amplification of a
small initial signal. If language models learn hierarchically, it is possible that the features that are
learned late into overtraining as D/N → ∞ are reliant on base features, so that noise harms the
base features and therefore significantly damages higher-order features.


I   G RANULARITY A BLATIONS

Here, we ablate our choice of quantization granularity (per-tensor vs per-channel) compared to the
main text, where we do weights per-channel and activations per-tensor. Per-tensor quantization
involves keeping one scalar to rescale all values in a tensor into the quantization codebook range,
and per-channel means keeping a scalar per channel dimension; therefore, the latter is strictly more
expressive and thus incurs lower quantization loss, than the former, at the cost of slightly more
memory usage. Here, we ask: is the increased sensitivity of activations a result of them being
inherently more sensitive, or due to the per-tensor design choice.


                                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Varying Quantization Granularity
                                                                            Weights (per tensor)
              5.00                                                          Weights (per channel)
                                                                            Activations (per tensor)
              4.75                                                          Activations (per channel)

              4.50
       Loss

              4.25
              4.00
              3.75
                        4         6             8             10   12
                                      Precision (bits)
Figure 13: Quantization granularity ablation: all combination of (training weight precision, training
activation precision) × (per-tensor, per-channel). Dashed lines are per-channel and solid are per-
tensor.



These results show that activations are generally more sensitive than weights, since their loss penalty
at lower precision goes up faster even when granularity is kept fixed across the two. In fact, quan-
tizing activations per-channel is almost as hard as quantizing weights per-tensor. This is consistent
with a broad line of work in quantization finding that activations comprise the central difficulty in
quantization (Dettmers & Zettlemoyer, 2023; Ma et al., 2024).


J   M AIN F IGURE D ETAILS

The model on the left is N = 30M parameters, chosen because we could train it to the highest
token/parameter ratio given our compute budget. On the right we train a suite of models with N P
                                              6
kept constants on 16B tokens (so that C = 16    N DP is matched throughout under our cost model).
We plot val loss on Dolma, as throughout the main text, and use floating-point (rather than integer)
to make the pretraining claims as realistic as possible.


K    N UMERICAL F ITS

Following (Muennighoff et al., 2024a), we tie α = β so they do not become very different, though
this is not required. Distinct α, β only add expressivity to the model and we have verified the plots
look similar without tying. We also only use the full scaling law when specified in the text, since
the law is developed piecewise through the text. For instance, Figures 3 and 4 solely fit Chinchilla
with a substitution N 7→ Neff (Pw ) because at that point Pa , Pkv have not been introduced. Figures
5, 6, and 7 use our full scaling law, for instance to make predictions. We emphasize our numerical
constants are unlikely to be useful because as (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Sardana & Frankle, 2023)
show, fitted constant depend heavily on the architecture and dataset used, which differs from setup
to setup. Rather, the trends we identify are the key findings. With that said, our fitted constants are
as follows.
Note that we include biases in our exponent fits, for instance when modelling Neff as a saturating
exponential, we find that the different parts of a model cause numerical instability at different values
of low precisions, so even if they are the same functional form, they may be translated (left/right
shifted versions) of eah other. For instance a fit of the form ex/γx in the main text is really computed
with offset ex/γx +n , but including biases everywhere clutters notation and obscures mathematical
insight.


                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   Constant               Value
                                                                      A                  4.299e3
                                                                      α                  0.4965
                                                                      B                  1.806e4
                                                                      E                  2.7648
                                                                     γw                  2.6745
                                                                     nw                  0.3037
                                                                      γi                 2.2102
                                                                      ni                 1.4072
                                                                     γkv                 0.9578
                                                                     nkv                 2.4185
                                                                     CT                  0.0598
                                                                     γD                  0.5068
                                                                     γN                  0.3439
                                                                      γ                  0.5907
                                                                      b                  1.1277

                                                     Table 2: Fitted constants and their values

                    220M params, 3.3B tokens                            220M params, 3.3B tokens                        220M params, 3.3B tokens
                               Weights                                     Activations                                   KV Cache
       3.58
                                                             6.0
                                                                                                              3.8
       3.56
                                                             5.5
                                                                                                              3.7
       3.54
                                                             5.0
Loss


       3.52                                                                                                   3.6
                                                             4.5
       3.50
                                                             4.0                                              3.5
       3.48
                                                             3.5                                              3.4
                4        6             8        10      12          4        6             8        10   12         4        6             8        10   12
                    110M params, 26.2B tokens                           110M params, 26.2B tokens                       110M params, 26.2B tokens
                                                                                                              4.4
       3.55                                                  6.0
                                                                                                              4.2
                                                             5.5
       3.50
                                                                                                              4.0
                                                             5.0
Loss


       3.45
                                                                                                              3.8
                                                             4.5

       3.40                                                                                                   3.6
                                                             4.0

       3.35                                                  3.5                                              3.4

                4        6             8        10      12          4        6             8        10   12         4        6             8        10   12
                             Precision (bits)                                    Precision (bits)                                Precision (bits)

                          Figure 14: Sweeping L(P ) for the three model parts at various N, D.


 L            A RE W EIGHTS , ACTIVATIONS , AND KV C ACHE E QUALLY S ENSITIVE ?
We find that training runs with Pa ≤ 3 or Pkv ≤ 3 are not numerically stable, and often diverge,
while Pw = 3 is still well behaved. In particular, we find activations are more sensitive, though this
could be because we quantize activations per-tensor and weights-per channel, rather than activations
being inherently more sensitive. Consequently, we do not fit or validate on runs with activations or
attention bits equal to 3. We leave a more detailed analysis of fine-grained sensitivity across layers
and types of parameters to future work. The Figure below illustrates the empirical sensitivity by
plotting L(P ) for the three quantities for various runs (N, D).


                                                                                  27
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Weights                                      Activations                              KV Cache
               0.9

               0.8
f(P) = Neff(P)/N

               0.7

               0.6

               0.5

               0.4
                       4         6         8        10     12        4      6          8         10      12   4      6          8         10        12
                           Pw (training precision, bits)                 Pa (training precision, bits)            Pkv (training precision, bits)

   Figure 15: Plotting what Neff looks like empirically. Each black point is a pretraining run, mathe-
   matical details of what is plotted here in Appendix E. Blue lines are parametric fits of a saturating
   exponential.


    M                E MPIRICAL NEFF
   Consider a model trained with some arbitrary (N, D, Pw ). Assuming a Chinchilla function form
   with N 7→ Neff (Pw ), we can write the difference between its loss and the loss of a full precision
   model as
                                                                −α
                           L(N, D, Pw ) − L(N, D, ∞) = A[Neff      − N −α ]

   as the terms involving B, D, E cancel. Note that Neff (Pw = ∞) = N by construction. In practice,
   we use a BF16 model as the “infinite-precision” model, finding no real difference if we use an FP32
   model or even a functional fit estimating Pw → ∞ based on our integer quantization loss results.
   Our goal is to plot what f (P ) looks like where Neff = N · f (P ). Therefore, we can rearrange the
   above equation as follows

                                                                                                                           −1/α
                                          Neff   1                  L(N, D, Pw ) − L(N, D, Pw = ∞)
                                f (P ) :=      =                                                   + N −α                                          (30)
                                          N      N                                 A

   Then plotting this quantity using our fitted numerical values (See Appendix K) gives us the empirical
   tradeoff between precision and parameters. We can see that the tradeoff is quickly saturating in P to
   a value near 1. While the functional form is the same for the three model parts, the fitted constants
   are different. For instance, runs with Pa ≤ 3 or Pkv ≤ 3 often diverged, and this was not the case
   with weight precision. Further, we can see that the KV cache is not sensitive to quantization at
   higher bit value, but very quickly becomes sensitive around 4-5 bit precision.
   Then as far as the joint functional form for Neff (Pw , Pa , Pkv ) is concerned, we acknowledge that
   alternative factorizations that do not decompose the model into weights, activations, and KV cache,
   may have an equally good fit. For instance, decomposing the weights term into a product of layer-
   wise effects has a reasonable fit though introduces more parameters, and a more coarse-grained
   version may not decompose the model into parts at all, but only consider tied precisions. We choose
   this factorized form because QAT considers weights only, and activations and attentions are the two
   other things that must then be kept in low precision to see compute gains. Since practitioners often
   care about KV cache on its own, we chose to decompose “activations and attention” as “activations
   and KV cache.” We emphasize that our main point is not that this factorization is objectively correct,
   but in observing that such a factorization that assumes approximate independence is possible in the
   first place.

    N                F LOATING -P OINT E XPERIMENTS
   The key difference between floating point and integer type is that the former allocates some bits
   to the exponent representation and some to the mantissa, and these bits play different roles, unlike
   in integer type where every bit plays the same role in making the quantization lattice uniformly
   more fine-grained. We hypothesize that if exponent and mantissa bits are scaled jointly (ie. increase


                                                                                  28
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Predicted vs Actual
                     MSE: 0.0027, R²: 0.9678                                N=220M, D=13.1B                                      N=30M, D=6.7B
            4.6
                                                                  3.40
            4.4                                                   3.38                                               4.05
            4.2                                                   3.36
                                                                  3.34                                               4.00
Predicted


            4.0


                                                           Loss


                                                                                                              Loss
            3.8                                                   3.32
                                                                  3.30                                               3.95
            3.6
                                                                  3.28
            3.4                                                                                                      3.90
                                                                  3.26
            3.2                                                   3.24
               3.2   3.4   3.6   3.8    4.0    4.2   4.4                 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                 Actual                                    Weight bits (Pw, floating-point)                   Weight bits (Pw, floating-point)

  Figure 16: Fitting an effective parameter form to floating-point precision for weight training. (Left)
  involves checking quality of fit on 140 training runs in floating point precision for weights during
  training.

                                        Loss vs Exponent/Mantissa Weight Bits
                                              3.9

                                              3.8                                                                           MxE3
                                       Loss


                                                                                                                            M3Ex
                                              3.7

                                                     0            2          4          6           8
                                                                  Pw (exponent/mantissa)
  Figure 17: Exponent-mantissa bit allocation sweep. We can see the two types of bits have different
  scaling behavior, but both fit the saturating form where the first few bits reduce loss a lot, with
  diminishing returns after that.


  together as total bit count does), the overall trend will still be predictable with a functional form like
  ours. To test this, we fit a parametric form like Equation 3 with the constants A, B, E, α = β listed
  in the table. The overall fit results in values of γw = 2.8111 and an exponent bias of b = 0.1240,
  showing the functional form is still a good fit to the data, even for floating point, under reasonably
  standard bit allocation schemes between mantissa and exponent. On the middle and right, we fit
  the same parametric form for particular values of (N, D) and visualize the quality of the resulting
  predictions.
  We use bit allocations of E2M0, E3M0, E4M1, E3M2, E4M2, E5M2, and E5M6 for 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
  12 bits, respectively, with one sign bit throughout. Since exponent and mantissa bits play in general
  different roles (ie. the effect of a bit on loss and dynamics depends a lot on whether it comes from
  the mantissa or exponent in floating point), we expect our functional form does well here because
  mantissa and exponent allocations both increase jointly as precision rises, so overall the trends are
  predictable in a similar way. We check directly the role of the two by sweeping ExM3 and E3Mx
  directly, confirming this intuition. This suggests one route for making fine-grained fits for general
  arbitrary ExMy combinations is to decompose the effects of mantissa and weights, for instance a
  form like Neff (Pw, m , Pw, e , N ). Since this is not needed for standard bit allocation choices as we can
  see in Figure 16, we do not delve into this complexity.

  O               A DDITIONAL P LOTS


                                                                                     29
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           5.00
           4.75
           4.50
                      Training-time Effects, Ptrain                    Post-Training Effects, Ppost
Val Loss


           4.25
           4.00
           3.75
           3.50
                  0   2     4        6        8     10   12        0   2     4        6        8     10   12
                                Tokens (billions)                                Tokens (billions)
  Figure 18: Illustration of what finite-precision effects during training and inference look like on
  learning curves.


                                                              30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Empirical Inference-time Degradation                                                                                        Predicted Inference-time Degradation
                            8                      N=30M, D=1.6B                                                                                        8                      N=30M, D=1.6B
                                                                                              1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Predicted Inference-time Degradation
                            7                                                                                                                           7
Pinf, post-train quantization


                                                                                                                            Pinf, post-train quantization
                                                                                              0.8


                                                                                               Inference-time Degradation
                            6                                                                                                                           6                                                                 0.8
                                                                                              0.6
                            5                                                                                                                           5                                                                 0.6

                                                                                              0.4
                            4                                                                                                                           4                                                                 0.4


                            3                                                                 0.2                                                       3                                                                 0.2

                            2                                                                                                                           2
                                3   4      5      6      7      8      9       10   11   12                                                                 3   4      5      6      7      8      9       10   11   12
                                               Pw, training precision (bits)                                                                                               Pw, training precision (bits)
                                        Empirical Inference-time Degradation                                                                                        Predicted Inference-time Degradation
                            8                      N=60M, D=6.6B                                                                                        8                      N=60M, D=6.6B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Predicted Inference-time Degradation
                            7                                                                 2.0                                                       7                                                                 1.4
Pinf, post-train quantization


                                                                                                                            Pinf, post-train quantization
                                                                                               Inference-time Degradation

                            6                                                                                                                           6                                                                 1.2
                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                            5                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                              1.0
                            4                                                                                                                           4                                                                 0.6

                                                                                              0.5                                                                                                                         0.4
                            3                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2

                            2                                                                                                                           2
                                3   4      5      6      7      8      9       10   11   12                                                                 3   4      5      6      7      8      9       10   11   12
                                               Pw, training precision (bits)                                                                                               Pw, training precision (bits)
                                        Empirical Inference-time Degradation                                                                                        Predicted Inference-time Degradation
                            8                     N=110M, D=6.6B                                                                                        8                     N=110M, D=6.6B
                                                                                              1.4                                                                                                                         1.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Predicted Inference-time Degradation
                            7                                                                                                                           7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.2
Pinf, post-train quantization


                                                                                                                            Pinf, post-train quantization


                                                                                              1.2
                                                                                               Inference-time Degradation


                            6                                                                 1.0                                                       6                                                                 1.0

                            5                                                                 0.8                                                       5                                                                 0.8

                                                                                              0.6                                                                                                                         0.6
                            4                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                              0.4                                                                                                                         0.4
                            3                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                              0.2                                                                                                                         0.2

                            2                                                                                                                           2
                                3   4      5      6      7      8      9       10   11   12                                                                 3   4      5      6      7      8      9       10   11   12
                                               Pw, training precision (bits)                                                                                               Pw, training precision (bits)
                                        Empirical Inference-time Degradation                                                                                        Predicted Inference-time Degradation
                            8                     N=220M, D=6.6B                                                                                        8                     N=220M, D=6.6B
                                                                                              1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Predicted Inference-time Degradation


                            7                                                                 1.0                                                       7
Pinf, post-train quantization


                                                                                                                            Pinf, post-train quantization


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                               Inference-time Degradation


                            6                                                                 0.8                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                            5                                                                 0.6                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6

                            4                                                                 0.4                                                       4                                                                 0.4

                            3                                                                 0.2                                                       3                                                                 0.2

                            2                                                                                                                           2
                                3   4      5      6      7      8      9       10   11   12                                                                 3   4      5      6      7      8      9       10   11   12
                                               Pw, training precision (bits)                                                                                               Pw, training precision (bits)

                                                               Figure 19: Predicted vs actual δPTQ for several N, D.


                                                                                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                       Pi Sweep                                                                                                                                Pkv Sweep
                                                                                                                MSE: 0.0055, R²: 0.9410                                                                                                                  MSE: 0.0003, R²: 0.9965
                                                   5.0

                                                   4.5
                                       Predicted


                                                   4.0

                                                   3.5

                                                   3.0
                                                                                    3.2                     3.4        3.6       3.8                        4.0       4.2      4.4             4.6 3.2                                                  3.4            3.6              3.8        4.0            4.2
                                                                                                                                   Actual                                                                                                                                      Actual

Figure 20: Marginal sweeps for precision of activations and KV cache, along with predictions from
an Neff functional form analogous to Equation 3 fitted from scratch.


                                             Without Neff                                                                                                                            With Neff
                                      MSE: 9.24e-02, R 2: 0.8249                                                                                                             MSE: 5.06e-02, R 2: 0.9041                                                                                                  LPTQ vs Training Precision
                 100                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                 10 1                                                                                                                                  10 1
                 10 2                                                                                                                                  10 2
Predicted LPTQ


                                                                                                                                      Predicted LPTQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10 1
                 10 3                                                                                                                                  10 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LPTQ


                 10 4                                                                                                                                  10 4                                                                                                                         10 2
                 10 5                                                                                                                                  10 5
                 10 6                                                                                                                                  10 6                                                                                                                         10 3
                 10 7                                                                                                                                  10 7
                        10 6   10 5     10 4        10 3                                             10 2       10 1     100                                  10 6    10 5     10 4        10 3                                            10 2       10 1      100                            4              6          8         10   12
                                                   Actual LPTQ                                                                                                                        Actual LPTQ                                                                                                             Training Precision


                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                               Empirical LPTQ                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Predicted LPTQ
                                                     Ppost, post-training precision (bits)


                                                                                                                                                                                           Ppost, post-training precision (bits)


                                                                                             7                                                                                                                                     7

                                                                                             6                                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                             5                                                                                                                                     5

                                                                                             4                                                                                                                                     4

                                                                                             3                                                                                                                                     3

                                                                                             2                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                 3          4      5      6       7                     8         9    10     11      12                                               3          4     5       6        7          8      9   10        11       12
                                                                                                                       Pw, training precision (bits)                                                                                                         Pw, training precision (bits)


Figure 21: Combined plots for predicting degradation. (a) and (b) illustrate different fitting ap-
proaches to model degradation, demonstrating a stronger fit when N 7→ Neff is used. (c), (d) (e)
illustrate our unified degradation form can predict degradation when training and serving in any
precision. Plots (c-e) made for varied Pw , but fits in (a) and (b) include runs where Pa , Pkv are also
jointly varied.


                                                                                                                                                                                      32
