Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  C HRO K NOWLEDGE : U NVEILING C HRONOLOGICAL
K NOWLEDGE OF L ANGUAGE M ODELS IN M ULTIPLE
D OMAINS
 Yein Park1 , Chanwoong Yoon1 , Jungwoo Park1,3 ,
 Donghyeon Lee1,3 , Minbyul Jeong2∗ , Jaewoo Kang1,3∗
 Korea University1 Upstage AI2 AIGEN Sciences3
 {522yein, cwyoon99, jungwoo-park, dong9733, kangj}@korea.ac.kr



                                               A BSTRACT

          Large language models (LLMs) have brought significant changes to many aspects
          of our lives. However, assessing and ensuring their chronological knowledge
          remains challenging. Existing approaches fall short in addressing the temporal
          adaptability of knowledge, often relying on a fixed time-point view. To overcome
          this, we introduce C HRO K NOW B ENCH, a benchmark dataset designed to eval-
          uate chronologically accumulated knowledge across three key aspects: multiple
          domains, time dependency, temporal state. Our benchmark distinguishes between
          knowledge that evolves (e.g., personal history, scientific discoveries, amended
          laws) and knowledge that remain constant (e.g., mathematical truths, commonsense
          facts). Building on this benchmark, we present C HRO K NOWLEDGE (Chrono-
          logical Categorization of Knowledge), a novel sampling-based framework for
          evaluating LLMs’ non-parametric chronological knowledge. Our evaluation led to
          the following observations: (1) The ability of eliciting temporal knowledge varies
          depending on the data format that model was trained on. (2) LLMs partially recall
          knowledge or show a cut-off at temporal boundaries rather than recalling all aspects
          of knowledge correctly. Thus, we apply our C HRO K NOW P ROMPT, an in-depth
          prompting to elicit chronological knowledge by traversing step-by-step through
          the surrounding time spans. We observe that it successfully recalls objects across
          both open-source and proprietary LLMs, demonstrating versatility, though it faces
          challenges with dynamic datasets and unstructured formats.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Do large language models (LLMs) possess the ability to understand and track the history of knowledge
as time progresses? In other words, can these models, which represent the cutting edge of modern
artificial intelligence, reason appropriately about questions that involve evolving facts? Although
some details remain controversial, knowledge—like science—is built upon accumulation (Zeigler,
2012; Picho et al., 2016). From raw data to information and to knowledge, every bit is cumulative
which contributes to progress across all domains. This accumulation forms the foundation for higher-
level reasoning, which is akin to wisdom in navigating the complexities of our world (Rowley, 2007).
Given that LLMs are trained on vast and diverse corpora and are now integral to numerous applications
in our daily lives, they must remain accurate and up-to-date to ensure reliability. Early versions of
ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), for instance, sometimes produced inaccurate or absurd responses like the
infamous example of “The happening of King Sejong (1397-1450) throwing MacBook (2016-)”2 .
These errors still give us a lesson that we need more precise model recalling knowledge correctly.
When we examine the issue closely, it’s not just a matter of hallucination but also about whether
the alignment of knowledge, particularly regarding dates, is accurate. Ensuring that LLMs maintain
current and contextually relevant knowledge over time is crucial and researchers have explored
    ∗
      Corresponding authors
    1
      Our datasets and code are publicly available at https://github.com/dmis-lab/ChroKnowledge
    2
      https://english.hani.co.kr/arti/english edition/e international/1095956


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Time-variant                        Temporal state
                                      Dynamic                    Prime minister          president of                Chairperson
                                                                    of Poland               the …                                         S, R, 𝑂1 , 𝑡1                  Generation
                                      S: Donald Tusk
                                                                                                                                         …                               (Quadraplets)
        General
                                      R: position held                                                                                       S, R, 𝑂𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖
                                                                      2010                     2014                      2019
                                                                                                                                          Q, 𝑂1 , 𝑡1                     Multi-choice QA
                      Temporal
                      affect-able
                                      Static
                                      S: Stephan Breyer
                                      R: position held
                                                             Associate Justice
                                                                   of …           =
                                                                                       Associate Justice
                                                                                             of …           =     Associate Justice
                                                                                                                        of …
                                                                                                                                         …
                                                                                                                                            Q, 𝑂𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖                   True / False
    BIO       Legal
                                                                      2010                     2014                      2019



                      General                                                          Biomedical                                                            Legal
          Dynamic                       Static                               Dynamic                        Static                         Dynamic                            Static


                              Known                                 Known                                                                                          Known
  Known                                                                                            Known
                                                                                                                                   Known

 2010                 2023   2010                         2023     2020                 2024       2020                  2024     2010                   2023     2010                   2023

                                         CommonSense Mathematics                                                                                             Generation (Quadraplets)
  Time-Invariant                                                                  S, R, 𝑂1
                                                                                     …
                                                                                                      Invariant    S: Leaf Node
                                                                                                                   R: Rely on
                                                                                                                                  Root Node, …               Multi-choice QA
                                                                                                                                                             True / False


Figure 1: The overview of ChroKnowBench. We gather knowledge with time stamps and separate
them in three key aspects: (1) multiple domains: general, biomedical, legal, commonsense, and
mathematics; (2) time dependency: as time goes by, changeable knowledge or not; (3) temporal state:
dynamic (has evolved over period) and static (no change occurred during period). Here, trends of
Correct (§2.1) for each years represented by line plots show difference among domains and temporal
states. And each highlighted portions are chronologically Known following §6.1.
various ways to investigate and verify the knowledge within these models (Zhang et al., 2024b).
Pioneering works investigate whether language model has an ability of knowledge base or not in
diverse domains (Petroni et al., 2019; Sung et al., 2021). Many subsequent studies analyze how
LLMs define knowledge (Dai et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2024); exploit how LLMs represent their
knowledge (Geva et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024) with temporal context (Kasai et al., 2023; Fatemi
et al., 2024); edit the misleading aspects of knowledge (Manakul et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024c).
Here, we raise a question: “Do these methods sufficiently address the temporal adaptability of
knowledge?”. Current temporal-related approaches for evaluating and updating LLMs often focus on
single time stamps, struggling to address the adaptable characteristics of knowledge over time (Jang
et al., 2022a; Ge et al., 2024), which are especially important in specialized domains such as scientific
discoveries and amended laws. This limitation can lead to outdated or incomplete information, under-
mining the models’ effectiveness and safety. Addressing these challenges requires a comprehensive
approach—temporal evolution, a core component of the knowledge accumulation.
Thus, we introduce C HRO K NOW B ENCH, a benchmark dataset designed to evaluate chronolog-
ically accumulated knowledge across three dimensions: time dependency (time variant and time
invariant), multiple domains (general, biomedical etc.), and temporal state (dynamic and static).
C HRO K NOW B ENCH differentiates between knowledge that is subject to evolution (e.g., transfer
situation of a soccer player, scientific discoveries, and amended legal regulations)—focusing on
transformations in object-specific attributes such as roles or affiliations while keeping the subject and
relation fixed—and knowledge that remains invariant (e.g., mathematical truths and commonsense
facts). This object-level focus allows for precise and interpretable assessments of temporal knowledge
dynamics by isolating changes in object-specific attributes. We then classify domains based on
whether they are influenced by the flow of time, considering the domain specificity. Finally, we set
the time frame to categorize the knowledge as either changeable or steady (Section 3).
Building on this benchmark, we also present C HRO K NOWLEDGE (Chronological Categorization
of Knowledge), a novel framework for assessing and enhancing the non-parametric chronological
knowledge of LLMs. So, we start from analyzing how current open-source and proprietary LLMs
work. As we expected, the time invariant knowledge shows steady in all time frame. However, for
time variant dataset, the domain-specific characteristics significantly influence the representation of
temporal knowledge from LLMs. More stable domains exhibit consistent performance, while more
variable domains show more fluctuations. These observations highlight that we need a comprehensive
approach to enhance representing temporal knowledge from LLMs (Section 5).
To this end, our C HRO K NOW P ROMPT approach utilizes an in-depth chronological prompting strategy
that traverses knowledge across adjacent time spans, effectively addressing issues of partial recall and


                                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 1: Knowledge categorization with a temporal component. We classify responses into Correct,
Partial Correct, and Incorrect to specify eliciting predictions in diverse way by comparing them with
the answer set A. We use a temperature set T ∈ 0, 0.7 to capture variations in prediction, where T
includes both greedy decoding and temperature sampling. We set n as 5, meaning that we evaluate
using five distinct combinations of few-shot exemplars to ensure the robust assessment.

    Category          Definition                                                  Description
                                                                                  All objects generated with greedy decoding are entirely
    Correct           {oˆi | M (Di , s, r, t) = oˆi ; M, τ = 0}ni=1 ⊆ A
                                                                                  included within the answer set.
                       S                                        n                 At least one generated object from greedy decoding or
    Partial Correct          {oˆi | M (Di , s, r, t) = oˆi ; M, τ }i=1 ∩ A ̸= ∅
                      τ ∈T
                                                                                  temperature sampling is in the answer set.
                       S                                        n                 None of the generated objects, either from greedy decoding
    Incorrect                {oˆi | M (Di , s, r, t) = oˆi ; M, τ }i=1 ∩ A = ∅
                      τ ∈T
                                                                                  or temperature sampling, are included in the answer set.


temporal boundaries (Section 6). In knowledge recall, our evaluation reveals improvements in the
biomedical domain (11.5%) and the general domain (2.8%), shifting knowledge category from Partial
Known to Known for unchanged objects. Our non-parametric approach allows for direct updates to
both proprietary and open-source LLMs without extensive retraining, highlighting practicality and
broad applicability (Section 7). Our work emphasizes the importance of temporal context in eliciting
LLMs knowledge while identifying challenges with dynamic datasets and unstructured, context-rich
formats like in the legal domain. A comprehensive analysis advocates for integrating parametric
techniques to complement prompting and achieve more robust temporal knowledge handling.

2       P RELIMINARIES
2.1       K NOWLEDGE C ATEGORIZATION WITH A T EMPORAL C OMPONENT
To distinguish and evaluate the knowledge levels of language models, we utilize the Sampling-based
Knowledge Categorization (SliCK) framework (Gekhman et al., 2024). This approach starts by
sampling the model M ’s answers to questions using various few-shot exemplar sets D. The sampling
is conducted under two temperature conditions: τ = 0 and τ > 0. Then, it categorizes the degree
to which the model knows each piece of knowledge into four levels: HighlyKnown, MaybeKnown,
WeaklyKnown, and Unknown.
Based on Gekhman et al. (2024), we make the following modifications as follows: (1) We append a
temporal component t to the conventional {subject (s), relation (r), object (o)} triplet structure,
allowing us to evaluate the model’s knowledge across different time stamps; (2) We merge the two
categories (MaybeKnown and WeaklyKnown) that represent recallable knowledge states3 into a single
category (Partial Correct); (3) By using time attribute, we also renamed the HighlyKnown and
Unknown to the Correct and Incorrect, respectively. Our detailed definitions and descriptions are
provided in Table 1. Although this setting allows us to categorize the model’s sampled responses
more precisely regarding time attribute, it only captures the model’s knowledge at specific time points
t, limiting our ability to observe changes over time. We address this limitation in Section 6.

2.2       E LICITING K NOWLEDGE USING DIVERSE T EMPLATES
Since models prefer different formats when eliciting their knowledge, it is important to use varied
approaches to accurately assess their understanding (Zhou et al., 2024). While we initially evaluate the
model’s knowledge using a standard triplet format, relying on a single template may not sufficiently
capture the full extent of the model’s knowledge. Thus, following Hendrycks et al. (2021); Huang
et al. (2024), we also employ a well-known format, multiple-choice question answering (MCQA)
with 4 options, and True/False to elicit the model’s knowledge more effectively. As a result, we
propose three templates for measuring how much knowledge the model holds: triplets (hereafter
referred to as Generation), MCQA, and TF. Each template is designed with appropriate few-shot
exemplars and corresponding matching rules. For example, in Generation, due to the complexity
of evaluating responses, we apply fuzzy matching techniques to compare the generated responses
against predefined labels. See Appendix A.2 for further details of few-shot exemplars, fuzzy matching
rules, and examples of three templates.
    3
      We refer a recallable knowledge as the presence of at least one answer in the answer set, generated using
either the greedy decoding or the temperature sampling method.


                                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 2: Statistics of our benchmark dataset. We categorize whether knowledge changes over time
(Time Variant) or remains constant (Time Invariant). Among five domains, we set the temporal state
with dynamic (knowledge that changes within the time frame we have set) and static (knowledge that
do not change within the time frame we have set). The number in parentheses represents the average
change in objects per element within a dynamic dataset. See details in Appendix A.3.1.

    Time                Domain         # of                                   Temporal         # of
                                                 Structured   Format                                    Source
    Dependency       (Time Frame)    Relations                                  State        Examples
                        general                                              dynamic (2.6)    8,330
                                        8            ✓        (s, r, o, t)                              Wikidata
                     (2010 - 2023)                                               static       8,302
                      biomedical                                             dynamic (2.3)    7,345
    Time Variant                        14           ✓        (s, r, o, t)                              UMLS
                     (2020 - 2024)                                               static       7,345
                         legal           *                                   dynamic (1.1)    3,142
                                        6            ✗           QA                                      CFR
                     (2010 - 2023)                                               static       3,142
                     commonsense        8            ✓         (s, r, o)       invariant      24,788     CSKG
    Time Invariant
                        math            12           ✓         (s, r, o)       invariant       2,585    Math-KG



3      C HRO K NOW B ENCH : C ONSTRUCTING A B ENCHMARK DATASET

In this section, we enumerate the details of constructing C HRO K NOW B ENCH, a chronologically
accumulated knowledge benchmark dataset. The C HRO K NOW B ENCH dataset encompasses three key
aspects: time dependency (time variant and invariant), multiple domains (general, biomedical, legal,
commonsense, and math), and temporal state (dynamic and static). We first categorize knowledge
into two groups: knowledge that remains unchanged over time (time invariant) and knowledge that
changes over time (time variant). Additionally, we classify domains based on whether they are
influenced by the flow of time, considering the specificity of each domain. Finally, we categorize
knowledge as either changeable (dynamic) or steady (static) within the time frame we have set.

3.1     TASK DEFINITION
Our primary focus is a time variant knowledge across three domains (general, biomedical, and legal)
with comparisons to time invariant knowledge across two domains (commonsense and mathematics).
What knowledge would be the difference between time variant and invariant? The time variant
knowledge has a specific object changing across a stream of time. For example, “Cristiano Ronaldo
(s) was a member of sports team of (r) Manchester United F.C. (o1 ) in 2009 (t1 ) and Real Madrid
CF (ok ) in 2018 (tk )”. Particularly, we adopts an object-level focus, emphasizing changes in object
attributes such as roles or affiliations. This approach ensures scalability by simplifying temporal
dynamics, precision by capturing nuanced updates, and flexibility by supporting fine-grained real-
world transformations without rigid relational constraints. Likewise, we identify subject and object
alias for each relation, then gather yearly changed objects. After accumulating object lists {o1 , o2 , . . . ,
om }, we de-duplicate and fill out the missing data in specific years based on available data; objects
between Manchester United F.C. (o1 ) in 2009 (t1 ) and Real Madrid CF (ok ) in 2018 (tk ), missing
objects between 2010 (t2 ) to 2017 (tk−1 ) filled with existing object of 2009 (t1 ). The statistic of
C HRO K NOW B ENCH dataset is in Table 2, and detail of object-level focus is in Appendix A.3.2.

3.2     DATASET G ENERATION

To construct dataset, we select annual knowledge sources for each domain, possible to be aligned with
each elements even though the corpus does not specifically mention about time stamp. For sources
with structured triplets, we identify temporal affect-able relations that typically change over time,
such as “position held”. As time variant knowledge refers to the knowledge that has the potential to
change over time, we divide it into two temporal states for more fine grained results: (1) dynamic,
where the knowledge has evolved over the period. (2) static, where no change occurred during the
period, though it has potential to be changed. Following the methodology outlined in Section 3.1, we
track changes in objects to build the dynamic dataset, employing normalization and de-duplication
for verification. Each object is checked with strict exact string match, then add into objects pool.
Simultaneously, we identified unchanged objects over the same time frame to construct the static
dataset. At the end, all data elements consist with an associated object pool {o1 , o2 , . . . , om } over
time frames {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm }.

                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (A) Model-wise                                         (B) Template-wise


                                                        (C) Object Change


Figure 2: Performance analysis of general domain. (A) Heatmap in Generation template. For both
dynamic and static datasets, a common trend across models is that performance is stronger in the
intermediate years but decline recent years, reflecting the data-cutoff point. Dynamic knowledge
shows more variation compared to static. Full results of total time frame is in Figure 10. (B) Template-
wise performance for selected years. As time goes by, performance in generation goes low, on the
other hand, MCQA and TF appeal to be rising. (C) Distribution of object changes in dynamic dataset.

3.3   T IME VARIANT & I NVARIANT K NOWLEDGE
We sourced time variant knowledge from the general, biomedical, and legal domains. In general
domain, we utilize Wikidata (Vrandečić & Krötzsch, 2014) dump to track object changes among
the time frame using suggested time quantifiers. Collecting similar amounts of dynamic and static
instances across eight relations, the result is formatted as {s, r, o, t} quadruplet for each object and
accompanied time stamp. For biomedical domain, we parse Unified Medical Language System
(UMLS) (Bodenreider, 2004) metathesaurus data, where suggest yearly updated research in the
domain, following previous work of BIOLAMA (Sung et al., 2021). Due to the slow pace of change
in biomedical research, object pools in this domain shows slight expansions or contractions over time
frame. In the legal domain, we employ the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) (U.S. Government)
to track regulatory changes, as they suggest collection and accumulation of change in regulations
at the end of year. Starting from pre-processing unstructured xml data, we adopt a QA-like format
with placeholder for object, tracked among time frame which ends to dynamic or static whether it
change or not. Time invariant knowledge, which remains constant regardless of temporal context,
is drawn from common-sense and mathematical domains. We process the CSKG (Ilievski et al.,
2021) dataset of commonsense knowledge, and Math-KG (Wang, 2022) for covering areas like data
structures and pure mathematics. Further details are provided in Appendix A.3, especially the sources
and the mechanism of object-level focus. Especially, compared to TKGs (Zhang et al., 2024a), which
focus on temporal snapshots, our C HRO K NOW B ENCH emphasizes the detailed temporal evolution of
individual knowledge elements, offering better adaptability for gradual changes; see Appendix A.3.3.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We enumerate the nine open-source and two proprietary LLMs: Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct and Llama-
3.1-8B-Instruct (Meta, 2024), Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), Llama-2-7b-chat-hf (Touvron
et al., 2023b), Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 (Jiang et al., 2023), Phi-3.5-mini-instruct (Abdin et al., 2024),
SOLAR-10.7B-Instruct-v1.0 (Kim et al., 2023), gemma-2-9b-it (Team et al., 2024b), gemma-7b-
it (Team et al., 2024a) for major open-source models, and GPT-4o mini (OpenAI, 2024a), Gemini-
1.5-flash (DeepMind, 2024) for proprietary models. Each model utilizes either an instruction-tuned
or chat version to enhance instruction following during sampling. We focus on anlayzing trends in
the chronological knowledge captured by those models, differ in corpus coverage. Details of our
inference setups are in Appendix A.4.

                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (A) Model-wise                                       (B) Template-wise


                                                      (C) Object Change


Figure 3: Performance analysis of biomedical domain. The format of figure is same as Figure 2.
(A) Compared to the general domain, both dynamic and static datasets show lower variability,
reflecting a domain-specific tendency toward consistency in knowledge changes. Both of them shows
performance decrease between 2022 and 2023, aligning with the cutoff pattern noted in the general
domain. (B) As time goes by, performance in generation declines, but MCQA and TF continue to
perform well.

5     C HRO K NOWLEDGE : C HRONOLOGICAL C ATEGORIZATION OF K NOWLEDGE
In this section, we introduce C HRO K NOWLEDGE (Chronological Categorization of Knowledge), a
sampling-based framework designed to evaluate LLMs’ non-parametric chronological knowledge.
Our methodology assesses the temporal capabilities of LLMs using two distinct templates, detailed
in Section 2.2, and explores how current LLMs encapsulate temporal information.

5.1   R ESULTS OF R EPRESENTING K NOWLEDGE FROM L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
For testing model’s knowledge within the categorization, we sample five times for each knowledge
to elicit it as possible in dynamic and static dataset. We present our findings across three different
aspects: temporal-wise, template-wise, and domain-wise results. In Figure 2, 3 and 4, we depict the
results for all time variant domains; general, biomedical and legal domains in main section. Time
invariant datasets are presented in Appendix A.5, Figure 9.
Temporal-wise Results. Comparing the upper and lower panels of (A) in Figure 2, 3 and 4 provides
the tendency of temporal-wise results based on the generation results. A common trend across
models is a decline in performance on recent knowledge, reflecting the pretraining corpus cutoff dates.
Particularly in dynamic datasets, models demonstrate strong performance on earlier knowledge but
experience a steeper decline in later periods, particularly in both general and biomedical domains. In
contrast, static datasets show less fluctuation, with more stable yet weaker performance, highlighting
limited temporal sensitivity due to reliance on a single timestamp. These results emphasize the need
for frequent model updates, especially for dynamic knowledge, to ensure temporal relevance.
Template-wise Results. (B) of Figure 2, 3 and 4 provide the average scores of template-wise results,
for more template specificity checking in three templates: generation, MCQA, and TF. Generation
templates reveal a greater decline in recent knowledge, as models rely on internal information without
predefined answers. In contrast, MCQA and TF templates help models select correct answers from
structured options and predefined formats, mitigating some gaps in recent knowledge. This trend
is more evident in the biomedical domain with MCQA templates and the legal domain with TF,
revealing how domain-specific knowledge is more effectively elicited through specific formats. Also,
dynamic dataset in the general domain is more sensitive to temporal shifts than static, highlighting
the importance of task-specific templates in eliciting and improving temporal robustness.

                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (A) Model-wise                                        (B) Template-wise


                                                       (C) Object Change


Figure 4: Performance analysis of legal domain. The format of figure is same as Figure 2. (A)
Among time variant domains, legal domain shows the most stable results of static, while the gap
between dynamic and static datasets is the largest among domains. (B) When it comes to each
template, generation shows the lowest performance, while TF settings perform extraordinarily well
in answering correctly. (C) In the legal domain, the distribution shows the lowest number of object
changes over time, supporting the conclusion of the stable results in the heatmap.

Domain-wise Results. Comparing the Figure 2, 3 and 4 provide the tendency of domain-wise
results, demonstrating distinct domain-specific characteristics of temporal knowledge change. In
general domain, the models show a decline in recent knowledge, with a more unstable distribution
of scores, which stems from domain’s nature; changes in relations ‘position held’ or ‘member of
sports team’ are more sensitive to temporal cues, leading to higher variability. Here, MCQA setting
offers some resilience as it mitigates the knowledge decline observed in generation templates across
dynamic and static datasets over different years. Every domain shows similar distribution of object
changes with benchmark statistics, comparing (C) in each figure with Figure 8. This indicates that
the models perform robustly as intended by the benchmark, without bias toward specific low changed
objects. We provide more details for legal domain and time-invariant knowledge in Appendix A.5.
Overall, domain-specific characteristics significantly influence LLMs’ temporal knowledge repre-
sentation. More stable domains like biomedical and legal exhibit consistent performance with time
invariant knowledge, while general domain shows more inconsistency. These insights underscore the
need for tailored strategies to enhance LLMs’ temporal knowledge capabilities.
6     C HRO K NOW P ROMPT: C HRONOLOGICAL K NOWLEDGE P ROMPTING
6.1   C HRONOLOGICAL C ATEGORIZATION
In previous section, we demonstrate whether open-source and proprietary models possess specific
knowledge at various time stamps. However, this does not sufficiently assess the models’ understand-
ing of knowledge within a chronological progression. As Zhao et al. (2024) suggest, knowledge
influenced heavily by temporal factors as general domain can still vary in more stable situation like
static dataset. To address this, we first reclassify the models’ responses using a refined categorization
scheme, allowing for a more comprehensive evaluation of temporal knowledge across all years.
Figure 6 illustrates how it works: (1) Known for the precise temporal alignment if the model correctly
identifies all relevant objects for a given knowledge category at each specific year; (2) If model
fails to match the correct objects for every year, we refer it as Unknown for indicating incomplete
or misaligned temporal knowledge; (3) The model accurately responds either just before or after a
specific year but fails for others, signifying outdated information or forgotten legacy knowledge due
to continuous updates (Cut-off); (4) The model correctly identifies some objects for a given year but
not others, reflecting an incomplete understanding of the temporal knowledge (Partial Known).


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



    Partial Known Set                                            Initial Prompt                                    ⏰ChroKnowBench
              Timeline                 Q. In Tn , Nana Akwasi Asare, member of sports team, [Object]                    …
   Tn-3    1. Previous Span            Candidate A. None                                                                S, R, on, Tn
                                                                                                                                       …
   Tn-2     O                                           Step 1: Generate First Candidate
                                  Q. In Tn-1 , Nana Akwasi Asare, member of sports team, [Object]
   Tn-1     O                     A. FC Utrecht
                                  dd

                                  Q. In Tn, Nana Akwasi Asare, member of sports team, [Object]
   Tn           Target X          Candidate A. None → { generate                  }                                                    On

                                                       Step 2: Verify & Refine Candidate
   Tn+1    △                      Q. In Tn-2 , Nana Akwasi Asare, member of sports team, [Object]
                                  A. FC Utrecht
   Tn+2                           dd
                                                                                                                           LLM
                                                                                                                                       Cn
                                  Q. In Tn-1 , Nana Akwasi Asare, member of sports team, [Object]
             2. Next Span         A. FC Utrecht
   Tn+3                           dd

                                  Q. In Tn, Nana Akwasi Asare, member of sports team, [Object]

           Using Correct Answer
                                  Candidate A. C1 → { verify & reﬁne to               }
               for few shot
             LLM Generates                             Step k to n: Iterate Over All Spans
               the Output
                                  …                                                             …→
              Match Answer
             with Benchmark


Figure 5: Overview of ChroKnowPrompt. The algorithm systematically traverses step by step, appending
each span’s correct answer as few shot for each steps. The range of each previous and next span is predefined,
with the order of nearest time stamp from target Tn . The model suggests last candidate answer Cn , verified an d
refined through several steps, which ends to be checked with the object on in original ChroKnowBench.

Our main focus is on the Partial Known cat-
                                                                                                                    Answer in T
egory, where models demonstrate substantial                          Unknown                           O Correct △ Partial Correct X Incorrect
temporal knowledge but fail to answer correctly
for all years, often showing confusion between                         Cut-Off                         Incomplete Temporal Knowledge
correct answers. For example, Nana Akwasi
                                                                                      △         O         X             X              △
Asare (s) was a member of sports team of (r)                           Partial
                                                                       Known
FC Utrecht (on ) in 2011 (tn ), but the model in-                                     O         O         O             X              △
correctly identifies the team as FC Groningen,
                                                                       Known          Target of “ChroKnowPrompt”
despite answering correctly with FC Utrecht
for 2010 (tn−1 ) and in 2012 (tn+1 ). At this
                                                                       Timeline       Tn-3     Tn-2      Tn-1           Tn             Tn+1
point, we hypothesize that when the model gets
one time stamp wrong, a more explicit focus                         Figure 6: Chronological categorization based on each
on the temporal aspects surrounding that time                       answer with its time stamp. If the model answer cor-
span could help it generate more accurate an-                       rectly for all, it is re-categorized as Known. The target
swers. This is the core idea behind C HRO -                         of ChroKnowPrompt is Partial Known, which con-
K NOW P ROMPT.                                                      fuses its knowledge among the whole time stamps.


6.2       M ETHOD

We introduce a chronological prompting technique for non-parametric method to elicit chronological
knowledge, aimed at bridging knowledge gaps by utilizing multiple temporal snapshots. This method
enhances the model’s reasoning by systematically integrating knowledge from different time stamps,
enabling in-depth traverse. Our method is inspired by non-parametric editing techniques, such
as Zhong et al. (2023) and Zheng et al. (2023), described in detail in Appendix A.1.
Figure 5 illustrates an example of the chronological prompting process. From a target year tn , the
algorithm systematically traverses the preceding years (tn−1 , tn−2 , . . .) in the ‘Previous Span’ and the
subsequent years (tn+1 , tn+2 , . . .) in the ‘Next Span’. For each traversed year, the most representative
object ôk is selected from the Correct (represented by circle) and Partial Correct (represented by
triangle) categories in Table 1 using majority voting.
Starting with the initial prompt containing the target time tn , subject sn , and relation rn , the nearest
year in the previous span is appended above the initial prompt with the selected object, forming the
first step. The model then generates a candidate answer C1 for tn using this augmented prompt.
Next, our C HRO K NOW P ROMPT iteratively adds prompts from progressively earlier years, refining


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                    General Domain                                               Biomedical Domain                                               Legal Domain
     gpt-4o-mini         -7.0                                   +7.0                 -21.9                                  +21.9                      -1.9                 +1.9
                                    -4.7                          +4.7            -27.3                                     +27.3                   -14.1                                       +14.1
gemini-1.5-flash    -5.9                                 +5.9                                 -15.0                        +15.0                     -1.0                   +1.0
                                     -4.5                    +4.5                            -15.6                         +15.6         -14.1                                   +14.1
      Phi3.5_Mini    -1.8                                 +1.8                       -16.7                                +16.7                           -0.3              +0.3
                                   -2.5                       +2.5               -20.1                                   +20.1                 -4.5                             +4.5
    Llama3.1_70B    -1.7                                       +1.7                      -11.2                              +11.2                     -1.0                   +1.0
                                   -2.0                            +2.0                  -8.5                             +8.5                            -4.5                                   +4.5
     Llama3.1_8B    -2.8                                    +2.8                       -7.8                             +7.8
                                  -1.7                         +1.7                -7.9                                +7.9                 -1.3                               +1.3
     Gemma2_9B           -3.0                              +3.0                         -5.6                          +5.6                                  -0.6            +0.6
                                    -2.3                       +2.3                 -8.5                              +8.5                                -2.6                                 +2.6
       Mistral7B      -1.4                                +1.4                        -3.8                           +3.8                                 -0.6              +0.6
                                   -1.6                        +1.6                -5.6                             +5.6                         -7.0                              +7.0
      Llama3_8B            -2.3                             +2.3                      -5.5                            +5.5                                -0.3              +0.3
                                     -1.7                       +1.7              -3.8                              +3.8                         -0.6                              +0.6
      Gemma_7B             -0.8                            +0.8                    -5.7                           +5.7
                                     -1.4                     +1.4              -5.2                             +5.2
    SOLAR_10.7B     -0.7                                 +0.7                        -3.8                            +3.8
                                  -0.8                        +0.8               -4.4                              +4.4                            -1.3                              +1.3
      Llama2_7B       -4.9                                +4.9                     -23.2                                  +23.2
                                    -5.0                       +5.0            -25.6                                    +25.6               -12.8                                   +12.8

                    40               20         0        20        40            80     60       40    20    0    20   40   60      80    80       60      40      20   0      20         40     60     80
                                          Performance (%)                                             Performance (%)                                       Performance (%)
                                         Dynamic Known Before             Dynamic Partial Before              Static Known Before         Static Partial Before
                                         Dynamic Known After              Dynamic Partial After               Static Known After          Static Partial After
Figure 7: Results of ChroKnowPrompt across multiple domains with unchanged objects. For each
domain, the left space represents the percentage of Partial Known, and the right represents the
percentage of Known. Each model includes results for both dynamic (yellow-blue bar) and static
(red-green) datasets, with arrows indicating the actual increase. As shown in plots, the most effective
results are observed in the biomedical domain, where the unchangeable characteristic is stronger than
the general domain. While the static dataset of the legal domain shows improvement, many models
struggle with unstructured format, resulting in the lowest performance among the dynamic dataset.

the candidate answer by verifying its consistency across contexts (from C1 to C2 ). This backward
traversal continues until a predefined span range is reached. Once the previous span is completed,
our algorithm performs forward traversal by appending objects from subsequent years below the
target year, further generating and verifying candidate answers. If there are no previous or next years
available, the process proceeds on only one side.
Upon completing all traversals, the final candidate answer Cn is compared against the benchmark
object for tn . If the candidate answer aligns correctly with the object for tn , appropriately reflecting
the temporal contexts, the knowledge categorization for tn is updated to Chrono-Correct, which is
equivalent to Correct for chronological assessments. In Appendix A.7, we provide the detailed steps.

7      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS & A NALYSIS
7.1      R ESULTS OF C HRO K NOW P ROMPT
Details of task configuration is in Appendix A.8. Figure 7 presents the effect of chronological prompt-
ing on unchanged objects across different models. Results show the rise of percentage in Known
category with decreasing Partial Known, indicating the increase by Chrono-correct. Significant
improvements are observed in the biomedical domain (average increase of 11.5%), while general and
legal domains show smaller gains (2.8% and 3.1%, respectively). Both proprietary models (GPT4o-
mini, Gemini-1.5-flash) and the massive open-source model (Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct) perform well,
while smaller open-source models like Llama-2-7B-chat-hf also show notable improvements despite
being outdated. This indicates that chronological prompting effectively enhances knowledge recall
without requiring external retrieval systems. But in the legal domain, models struggle to recall
knowledge due to the complexity of unstructured, context-rich data, especially for dynamic dataset.

7.2      A NALYSIS
Results in changed objects Table 5 compares results for changed and unchanged objects in dynamic
datasets across domains. As shown in Section 7.1, ChroKnowPrompt effectively aids models in
recalling unchanged objects in both dynamic and static datasets. However, its performance on changed
objects in dynamic datasets remains limited, achieving only 10–30% performance of unchanged
object cases (an average of 0.4 in general domains). This highlights, despite the helpfulness and
applicability of ChroKnowPrompt in addressing the chronological gaps of knowledge, recalling all
historical changes of objects using prompting alone remains an exceptionally challenging problem,
particularly in complex contexts such as the legal domain. These findings emphasize the need for
further research into effective parametric editing techniques to assist temporal knowledge handling.

                                                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Effects of chronological span To elucidate the mechanisms of chronological prompting, we
analyze the impact of incorporating the next span in chronological contexts. As shown in Table 6, the
total span (both previous and next) yields higher scores than using only the previous span with the
degree of improvement varying by domain. In the biomedical domain, the total span nearly doubles
the score of the previous span alone (12.0 vs. 6.7), while the general domain shows a modest increase
(2.8 vs. 1.8). Model-specific temporal sensitivity also varies: Llama-2-7b-chat-hf effectively utilizes
next spans, whereas Gemini-1.5-flash and SOLAR-10.7B-Instruct-v1.0 benefit more from previous
spans. These suggest that differences in temporal context utilization and the coverage of pretraining
corpus may influence models’ sensitivity and knowledge recall across time frames.

Effects of chat prompting Additionally, we analyze various chat models (before instruction-
tuning), including Llama-2-7b-chat-hf, as chronological prompting may enhance both current and
legacy models by leveraging temporal context. We evaluate three open-source chat models: mpt-7b-
chat (Research, 2023), Pythia-Chat-Base-7B (Biderman et al., 2023), and nemotron-3-8b-chat-4k-sft-
hf (Zhang et al., 2023a). As shown in Table 6 and 7, ChroKnowPrompt is not particularly effective
for chat models. Only mpt-7b-chat achieves a comparable peformance to Llama-2-7b-chat-hf (an
average increase of 11.4), while Pythia-Chat-Base-7B shows almost no improvement.

8   R ELATED WORK
Since the emergence of LMs, deriving knowledge from language model is extensively studied, such
as probing tasks (Hewitt & Manning, 2019), LAMA (Petroni et al., 2019) and BioLAMA (Sung et al.,
2021). Then, many subsequent studies follows to exploit, (1) how LLMs define knowledge (Yu et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2023b; Gottesman & Geva, 2024), (2) how these models represent it (Chen et al.,
2024a;b; Wang et al., 2024d), and (3) how manipulate misleading part (Wang et al., 2023; Gutiérrez
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024a). Based on them, recent investigations of knowledge highlight the
dynamic nature of evolving facts and suggests that contradictions within the training data may lead to
knowledge conflicts (Marjanović et al., 2024; Chang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Xu et al., 2024;
Jin et al., 2024). And knowledge overshadowing (Zhang et al., 2024c) reveals phenomena where
certain conditions overshadow other facts, leading to misleading information (i.e., hallucinations).
In other view point, exploring temporal knowledge starts from using Wikidata, a static format
of knowledge in triplet: subject, relation, and object, originated from extracting literature-based
knowledge (Hahn-Powell et al., 2017). Following pioneers like TimeQA (Chen et al., 2021) and
TemporalWiki (Jang et al., 2022a), many works dealing with temporal and continuous knowledge
flow (Zhang & Choi, 2021; Dhingra et al., 2022; Jang et al., 2022b; Liska et al., 2022; Nylund et al.,
2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Khodja et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024d) consist in line of it. Building upon
their achievement, CarpeDiem (Kim et al., 2024) emerges to simply identify whether knowledge is
outdated or not, and DyKnow (Mousavi et al., 2024) maps various models’ knowledge distribution.
Also, (Zhao et al., 2024) makes dramatic work: align model into one fixed age. Though those
impressive works, we try to broad the coverage of temporal knowledge. We utilize various templates
to elicit the knowledge of LLMs, broaden the coverage of time stamps, and differentiate domains that
should change based on a temporal perspective with those that should remain constant.

9   C ONCLUSION , L IMITATION , AND F UTURE W ORK

Overall, our work highlights the critical role of temporal context in knowledge evaluation and
introduces a framework for improving the temporal capabilities of future language models. We present
C HRO K NOW B ENCH, a benchmark for assessing temporal knowledge across diverse domains, and
our C HRO K NOWLEDGE framework, which evaluates LLMs’ chronological knowledge through three
types of templates. Our findings indicate that while models often recall facts with time stamps, they
struggle with capturing full temporal boundaries, with reliance on rigid formats like MCQA and TF.
By using C HRO K NOW P ROMPT, we improve knowledge recall by reducing ambiguous Partial Known
and increasing Known, particularly in biomedical domains with strong performance on unchanged
objects in both proprietary and open-source models. However, challenges persist in dynamic datasets
and in unstructured, context-rich formats, which amplify the difficulty of capturing temporal evolution
solely with prompting. Future work will focus on the need for parametric techniques to complement
prompting, enabling better alignment with changing objects and complex temporal dependencies to
enhance LLMs’ temporal accuracy across various domains.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Research Foundation of Korea [NRF-
2023R1A2C3004176, RS-2023-00262002], the Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea
[HR20C002103], and the ICT Creative Consilience program through the Institute of Information &
Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the MSIT [IITP-2025-
2020-0-01819].

R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany
 Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. Phi-3 technical report:
 A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219, 2024.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Olivier Bodenreider. The unified medical language system (umls): integrating biomedical terminology.
  Nucleic acids research, 2004.
Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang, and
  Minjoon Seo. How do large language models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2406.11813, 2024.
Jianhao Chen, Haoyuan Ouyang, Junyang Ren, Wentao Ding, Wei Hu, and Yuzhong Qu. Timeline-
   based sentence decomposition with in context learning for temporal fact extraction. In Lun-Wei
   Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
   Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Bangkok, Thailand, August
   2024a. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Wenhu Chen, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. A dataset for answering time-sensitive questions.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.06314, 2021.
Yuheng Chen, Pengfei Cao, Yubo Chen, Yining Wang, Shengping Liu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao.
  Cracking factual knowledge: A comprehensive analysis of degenerate knowledge neurons in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13731, 2024b.
Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons
  in pretrained transformers. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022,
  2022.
Google DeepMind. Gemini flash: Lightweight models, two variants, both optimized for speed and
  efficiency. 2024.
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized LLMs. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OUIFPHEgJU.
Bhuwan Dhingra, Jeremy R Cole, Julian Martin Eisenschlos, Dan Gillick, Jacob Eisenstein, and
  William Cohen. Time-aware language models as temporal knowledge bases. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 10, 2022.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Bahare Fatemi, Mehran Kazemi, Anton Tsitsulin, Karishma Malkan, Jinyeong Yim, John Palowitch,
  Sungyong Seo, Jonathan Halcrow, and Bryan Perozzi. Test of time: A benchmark for evaluating
  llms on temporal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09170, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiou Ge, Ali Mousavi, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, Kun Qian, Benjamin Han, Mostafa Arefiyan,
  and Yunyao Li. Time sensitive knowledge editing through efficient finetuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.04496, 2024.
Zorik Gekhman, Gal Yona, Roee Aharoni, Matan Eyal, Amir Feder, Roi Reichart, and Jonathan
  Herzig. Does fine-tuning llms on new knowledge encourage hallucinations? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.05904, 2024.
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
 EMNLP, 2023.
Gaurav Rohit Ghosal, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Aditi Raghunathan. Understanding finetuning for
  factual knowledge extraction. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian
 Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st
  International Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research.
  PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024.
Daniela Gottesman and Mor Geva. Estimating knowledge in large language models without generating
  a single token. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12673, 2024.
Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Yu Gu, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Yu Su. Hipporag: Neurobio-
  logically inspired long-term memory for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14831,
  2024.
Gus Hahn-Powell, Marco A Valenzuela-Escárcega, and Mihai Surdeanu. Swanson linking revisited:
 Accelerating literature-based discovery across domains using a conceptual influence graph. In
  Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations, 2017.
Tom Hartvigsen, Swami Sankaranarayanan, Hamid Palangi, Yoon Kim, and Marzyeh Ghassemi.
  Aging with grace: Lifelong model editing with discrete key-value adaptors. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  d7KBjmI3GmQ.
John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. A structural probe for finding syntax in word representations.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
  2019.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Xiusheng Huang, Jiaxiang Liu, Yequan Wang, and Kang Liu. Reasons and solutions for the decline
  in model performance after editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.23843, 2024.
Filip Ilievski, Pedro Szekely, and Bin Zhang. Cskg: The commonsense knowledge graph. In The
  Semantic Web: 18th International Conference, ESWC 2021, Virtual Event, June 6–10, 2021,
  Proceedings 18. Springer, 2021.
Joel Jang, Seonghyeon Ye, Changho Lee, Sohee Yang, Joongbo Shin, Janghoon Han, Gyeonghun
  Kim, and Minjoon Seo. Temporalwiki: A lifelong benchmark for training and evaluating ever-
  evolving language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, 2022a.
Joel Jang, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Joongbo Shin, Janghoon Han, Gyeonghun Kim, Jungkyu
  Choi, and Minjoon Seo. Towards continual knowledge learning of language models. In 10th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022. International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022b.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Zhuoran Jin, Pengfei Cao, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, Xiaojian Jiang, Jiexin Xu, Li Qiuxia, and Jun
  Zhao. Tug-of-war between knowledge: Exploring and resolving knowledge conflicts in retrieval-
  augmented language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on
  Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), 2024.
Jaehun Jung, Jinhong Jung, and U Kang. T-gap: Learning to walk across time for temporal knowledge
  graph completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.10595, 2020.
Jungo Kasai, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Yoichi Takahashi, Ronan Le Bras, Akari Asai, Xinyan Velocity Yu,
  Dragomir Radev, Noah A Smith, Yejin Choi, and Kentaro Inui. Realtime qa: what’s the answer
  right now? In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023.
Hichem Ammar Khodja, Frédéric Bechet, Quentin Brabant, Alexis Nasr, and Gwénolé Lecorvé.
  Wikifactdiff: A large, realistic, and temporally adaptable dataset for atomic factual knowledge
  update in causal language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on
  Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), 2024.
Dahyun Kim, Chanjun Park, Sanghoon Kim, Wonsung Lee, Wonho Song, Yunsu Kim, Hyeonwoo
  Kim, Yungi Kim, Hyeonju Lee, Jihoo Kim, et al. Solar 10.7 b: Scaling large language models with
  simple yet effective depth up-scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15166, 2023.
Yujin Kim, Jaehong Yoon, Seonghyeon Ye, Sangmin Bae, Namgyu Ho, Sung Ju Hwang, and Se-
  Young Yun. Carpe diem: On the evaluation of world knowledge in lifelong language models.
  In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems
 Principles, pp. 611–626, 2023.
Zixuan Li, Xiaolong Jin, Wei Li, Saiping Guan, Jiafeng Guo, Huawei Shen, Yuanzhuo Wang, and
  Xueqi Cheng. Temporal knowledge graph reasoning based on evolutional representation learning.
  In Proceedings of the 44th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in
  information retrieval, pp. 408–417, 2021.
Adam Liska, Tomas Kocisky, Elena Gribovskaya, Tayfun Terzi, Eren Sezener, Devang Agrawal,
  D’Autume Cyprien De Masson, Tim Scholtes, Manzil Zaheer, Susannah Young, et al. Streamingqa:
 A benchmark for adaptation to new knowledge over time in question answering models. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022.
Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box hallucina-
  tion detection for generative large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 9004–9017, 2023.
Sara Vera Marjanović, Haeun Yu, Pepa Atanasova, Maria Maistro, Christina Lioma, and Isabelle
  Augenstein. From internal conflict to contextual adaptation of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.17023, 2024.
Nick Mecklenburg, Yiyou Lin, Xiaoxiao Li, Daniel Holstein, Leonardo Nunes, Sara Malvar, Bruno
  Silva, Ranveer Chandra, Vijay Aski, Pavan Kumar Reddy Yannam, et al. Injecting new knowledge
  into large language models via supervised fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00213, 2024.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 2022.
Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex J Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-editing
  memory in a transformer. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Meta. Introducing llama 3.1: Our most capable models to date. 2024.
Abhika Mishra, Akari Asai, Vidhisha Balachandran, Yizhong Wang, Graham Neubig, Yulia Tsvetkov,
  and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained hallucination detection and editing for language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06855, 2024.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Fast
  model editing at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=0DcZxeWfOPt.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. Memory-
  based model editing at scale. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari,
  Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022b.
Seyed Mahed Mousavi, Simone Alghisi, and Giuseppe Riccardi. Is your llm outdated? benchmarking
  llms & alignment algorithms for time-sensitive knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08700,
  2024.
Kai Nylund, Suchin Gururangan, and Noah A Smith. Time is encoded in the weights of finetuned
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13401, 2023.
Yasumasa Onoe, Michael Zhang, Shankar Padmanabhan, Greg Durrett, and Eunsol Choi. Can lms
  learn new entities from descriptions? challenges in propagating injected knowledge. In Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), 2023.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4o mini, advancing cost-efficient intelligence. 2024a.
OpenAI. Openai o1 system card. 2024b.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
  Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
  on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
Katherine Picho, Lauren A Maggio, and Anthony R Artino. Science: the slow march of accumulating
  evidence. Perspectives on medical education, 2016.
Mosaic AI Research. Introducing mpt-7b: A new standard for open-source, commercially usable
 llms. 2023.
Jennifer Rowley. The wisdom hierarchy: representations of the dikw hierarchy. Journal of information
  science, 2007.
Mujeen Sung, Jinhyuk Lee, S Yi Sean, Minji Jeon, Sungdong Kim, and Jaewoo Kang. Can language
 models be biomedical knowledge bases? In 2021 Conference on EMNLP 2021. Association for
 Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2021.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu
  Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable
  multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak,
  Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et al. Gemma: Open models
  based on gemini research and technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295, 2024a.
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya
  Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al.
  Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118,
  2024b.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
U.S. Government. Electronic code of federal regulations. URL https://www.ecfr.gov/.
Denny Vrandečić and Markus Krötzsch. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communica-
  tions of the ACM, 2014.
Jianing Wang. Math-kg: Construction and applications of mathematical knowledge graph. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2205.03772, 2022.
Mengru Wang, Yunzhi Yao, Ziwen Xu, Shuofei Qiao, Shumin Deng, Peng Wang, Xiang Chen,
 Jia-Chen Gu, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, et al. Knowledge mechanisms in large language models: A
 survey and perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15017, 2024a.
Peng Wang, Zexi Li, Ningyu Zhang, Ziwen Xu, Yunzhi Yao, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang,
  and Huajun Chen. Wise: Rethinking the knowledge memory for lifelong model editing of large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14768, 2024b.
Peng Wang, Ningyu Zhang, Bozhong Tian, Zekun Xi, Yunzhi Yao, Ziwen Xu, Mengru Wang,
  Shengyu Mao, Xiaohan Wang, Siyuan Cheng, Kangwei Liu, Yuansheng Ni, Guozhou Zheng, and
  Huajun Chen. EasyEdit: An easy-to-use knowledge editing framework for large language models.
  In Yixin Cao, Yang Feng, and Deyi Xiong (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), Bangkok,
  Thailand, August 2024c. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xiaohan Wang, Shengyu Mao, Ningyu Zhang, Shumin Deng, Yunzhi Yao, Yue Shen, Lei Liang,
  Jinjie Gu, and Huajun Chen. Editing conceptual knowledge for large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.06259, 2024d.
Yike Wang, Shangbin Feng, Heng Wang, Weijia Shi, Vidhisha Balachandran, Tianxing He, and
  Yulia Tsvetkov. Resolving knowledge conflicts in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.00935, 2023.
Kevin Wu, Eric Wu, and James Zou. How faithful are rag models? quantifying the tug-of-war
  between rag and llms’ internal prior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10198, 2024a.
Xiaobao Wu, Liangming Pan, William Yang Wang, and Anh Tuan Luu. Updating language models
  with unstructured facts: Towards practical knowledge editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18909,
  2024b.
Rongwu Xu, Zehan Qi, Cunxiang Wang, Hongru Wang, Yue Zhang, and Wei Xu. Knowledge
  conflicts for llms: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08319, 2024.
Lang Yu, Qin Chen, Jie Zhou, and Liang He. Melo: Enhancing model editing with neuron-indexed
  dynamic lora. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
Qinan Yu, Jack Merullo, and Ellie Pavlick. Characterizing mechanisms for factual recall in language
  models. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.
David Zeigler. Evolution and the cumulative nature of science. Evolution: Education and Outreach,
  2012.
Jinchuan Zhang, Bei Hui, Chong Mu, Ming Sun, and Ling Tian. Historically relevant event structuring
   for temporal knowledge graph reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10621, 2024a.
Michael Zhang and Eunsol Choi. Situatedqa: Incorporating extra-linguistic contexts into qa. In
 Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
 7371–7387, 2021.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ningyu Zhang, Yunzhi Yao, Bozhong Tian, Peng Wang, Shumin Deng, Mengru Wang, Zekun Xi,
  Shengyu Mao, Jintian Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, et al. A comprehensive study of knowledge editing
  for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01286, 2024b.
Vivienne Zhang, Shashank Verma, Neal Vaidya, Abhishek Sawarkar, and Amanda Saunders. Nvidia
  ai foundation models: Build custom enterprise chatbots and co-pilots with production-ready llms.
  2023a.
Yuji Zhang, Sha Li, Jiateng Liu, Pengfei Yu, Yi R Fung, Jing Li, Manling Li, and Heng Ji. Knowledge
  overshadowing causes amalgamated hallucination in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.08039, 2024c.
Zhihan Zhang, Yixin Cao, Chenchen Ye, Yunshan Ma, Lizi Liao, and Tat-Seng Chua. Analyzing
  temporal complex events with large language models? a benchmark towards temporal, long context
  understanding. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the
  62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024d. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zihan Zhang, Meng Fang, Ling Chen, Mohammad-Reza Namazi-Rad, and Jun Wang. How do large
  language models capture the ever-changing world knowledge? a review of recent advances. In
  Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on EMNLP, pp. 8289–8311, 2023b.
Bowen Zhao, Zander Brumbaugh, Yizhong Wang, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Noah Smith. Set the
  clock: Temporal alignment of pretrained language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
  Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024,
  Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ce Zheng, Lei Li, Qingxiu Dong, Yuxuan Fan, Zhiyong Wu, Jingjing Xu, and Baobao Chang. Can
  we edit factual knowledge by in-context learning? In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  EMNLP, 2023.
Danna Zheng, Mirella Lapata, and Jeff Z Pan. Large language models as reliable knowledge bases?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13578, 2024.
Zexuan Zhong, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Manning, Christopher Potts, and Danqi Chen. MQuAKE:
  Assessing knowledge editing in language models via multi-hop questions. In Houda Bouamor,
  Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics.
Yuxuan Zhou, Xien Liu, Chen Ning, and Ji Wu. Multifaceteval: Multifaceted evaluation to probe
  llms in mastering medical knowledge. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-24. International Joint Conferences on Artificial
  Intelligence Organization, 2024. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2024/737. URL https://doi.org/10.
  24963/ijcai.2024/737.
Xinyu Zhu, Cheng Yang, Bei Chen, Siheng Li, Jian-Guang Lou, and Yujiu Yang. Question answering
  as programming for solving time-sensitive questions. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     S UPPLEMENTARY S TUDIES IN K NOWLEDGE E DITING

A.1.1    PARAMETRIC K NOWLEDGE U PDATE
Considering update of LLMs are in two types, parametric and non-parametric (Wang et al., 2024c), a
classical way of parametric update is using fine-tuning (Ghosal et al., 2024; Mecklenburg et al., 2024;
Ge et al., 2024). While the method extends to LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), QLoRA (Dettmers et al., 2023),
and Melo (Yu et al., 2024), as well as continual learning approaches such as GRACE (Hartvigsen
et al., 2024) and WISE (Wang et al., 2024b), the parameter accessibility of open-source LLMs like


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the Llama series (Touvron et al., 2023a) enables techniques such as MEND (Mitchell et al., 2022a),
ROME (Meng et al., 2022), and MEMIT (Meng et al., 2023) to emerge. Those local editable methods
are effective, and still try to improve specificity and generalizability.


A.1.2    N ON - PARAMETRIC K NOWLEDGE U PDATE

In contrast, for black-box LLMs, updates rely on non-parametric knowledge methods (Onoe et al.,
2023), such as SERAC (Mitchell et al., 2022b), MeLLo (Zhong et al., 2023), and IKE (Zheng et al.,
2023). They align with two key trends: (1) Mitigating catastrophic forgetting, where the model
loses previous knowledge, by not directly updating parameters. (2) Exploiting abilities of prominent
black-box LLMs like GPT-o1 (OpenAI, 2024b) and Gemini (Team et al., 2023), as we cannot access
to parameters. Another concern in knowledge update is they often focus only structured format,
pointed out that current methods struggle to update unstrctured data effectively (Wu et al., 2024b).
In this paper, we focus on non-parametric knowledge updates accomodating a broad range of input
formats (structured and unstructured) to represent knowledge across diverse domains, depending on
the use of various white-box and black-box LLMs.


A.2     D ETAILS OF E LICITING K NOWLEDGE : F EW- SHOT E XEMPLARS , F UZZY M ATCHING
        RULES , AND E XAMPLES OF T HREE T EMPLATES

A.2.1    F EW- SHOT E XEMPLARS

To obtain the few-shot exemplar pool D, we leverage additional data collected using the same process
as in C HRO K NOW B ENCH. Specifically, for each individual relation type, We gather four exemplars
for the general domain, and eight for the biomedical and legal domains. We then generate the few-shot
exemplar set Di by sampling four exemplars from D, which serves as actual demonstrations within a
prompt. This process is repeated for every timestamp to ensure comprehensive temporal coverage.


A.2.2    F UZZY M ATCHING

We utilize the rapidfuzz library to compare the model’s responses with the predefined labels. As
the model’s answer may a little bit different with complicated objects in specialized domains, such as
the difference in order of words or upper and lower cases, using fuzzy match enables more rapid but
still reliable quality without facilitating external NLI mechanisms.
Specifically, we employ a token set ratio metric with a threshold value set to 70 to determine a
match. token set ratio is a metric used for comparing the similarity of two strings in a flexible
manner, extending the functionality of the token sort ratio. In the preprocessing stage, the
strings undergo tokenization, removal of punctuation, and conversion to lowercase. The tokens are
then sorted in alphanumeric order before the similarity ratio is computed. This makes it useful for
comparing strings where the word order may differ but the content is similar.
The key distinction of token set ratio lies in its incorporation of set operations, where du-
plicate words are removed. After eliminating repeated tokens, the same preprocessing steps as
in token sort ratio are applied. When performing the comparison, the method checks if all
tokens from the shorter string are contained within the longer string, making the approach particularly
suited for cases where one string is a subset of the other. This flexible matching often results in
higher accuracy for comparing strings with similar content but different structures, as illustrated by
the example where a score of 100 is achieved when all tokens from the second string are present in
the first.


A.2.3    E XAMPLES OF T HREE T EMPLATES

We provide three templates of Generation, MCQA, and TF in the end of the Appendix for the better
readability. For example, in Table 8 and Table 9, our target year is 2020 (t) to generate answer
candidate of position held (r) by Donald Tusk (s).


                                                 17
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     A.2.4                                        I TERATIVE D ISTRACTOR G ENERATION
    For the Commonsense dataset, the objects corresponding to a given subject and relation are often
    ambiguous. When constructing compelling distractors, there is a higher likelihood (about 20%) of
    creating options that are actually correct answers rather than intended incorrect ones, compared to
    other datasets. Therefore, we include an additional verification process after generating the distractors,
    as outlined in Algorithm 1. Specifically, we formulate multiple-choice questions using the problem
    and the generated distractors, then use GPT-4o to select all correct answers. If it identifies more than
    one correct answer, we refine the distractors based on a prompt to recreate incorrect options.

                                    Algorithm 1: Iterative Distractor Generation Algorithm
                                       Data: Subject s, Relation r, Set of correct objects Ocorrect
                                       Result: Refined multiple-choice question q
                                     1 Initialize conversation history H ← ∅
                                     2 Initialize number of selected options n ← 1
                                     3 while n > 0 do
                                     4      D ← LLMResponse(s, r, H) // Generate three incorrect options
                                     5      q ← ComposeQuestion(s, r, D) // Compose question using the generated distractors
                                     6      Append q to H
                                     7      ⊣ ← LLMResponse(q) // LLM generates a response by solving the question
                                     8      S ← LLMResponse(⊣) // Extract selected options using LLM
                                     9      n ← |S| // Number of options selected by LLM
                                    10      if n > 0 then
                                    11          p ← CreatePrompt(s, r) // Create another prompt for regenerating distractors
                                    12          Append p to H // Add regeneration prompt to the conversation history
                                    13          Dnew ← LLMResponse(s, r, H) // Generate new set of distractors
                                    14          D[S] ← Dnew [1 : n] // Replace selected options
                                    15        return q


     A.3                                  D ETAILS OF BENCHMARK DATASET

     A.3.1                                        S TATISTICS OF O BJECT C HANGES IN DYNAMIC DATASET
   The statistics of object changes among dynamic dataset in three time variant domains are in Figure 8.
   The figure shows how many objects have been changed among the time frame of each elements,
   and its distribution is proposed with the percentage of that elements across total number of dataset.
   The average number of object changes is 2.6 and 2.3 for general and biomedical dynamic dataset,
   while most of the element in legal domain has only one object changes among time frame. The
   biomedical domain shows the least skewness with a balanced cumulative distribution of changes,
   unlike the general domain, which is moderately skewed with broader change frequencies. The legal
   domain is highly skewed, with most changes concentrated in a single occurrence, lacking cumulative
   progression.
                                                          General Domain                                                                               Biomedical Domain                                                               Legal Domain
                                                    ( =2.58, =1.72, skew=1.87)                                                                     ( =2.34, =0.98, skew=0.18)                                                   ( =1.09, =0.45, skew=9.47)
                             100%                                                                                                100%                                                                           100%   93.73
                                                                                                  Cumulative %                                Cumulative %                                                                                                          Cumulative %
                                                                                                  Percentage of Elements                      Percentage of Elements                                                                                                Percentage of Elements
                             80%                                                                                                 80%                                                                            80%
Percentage of Elements (%)


                             60%                                                                                                 60%                                                                            60%


                             40%                    35.65                                                                        40%                             34.85                                          40%
                                                27.54                                                                                                                               28.52
                                                                                                                                               22.72
                             20%                            13.85
                                                                                                                                 20%                                                              13.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                20%
                                                                 11.67
                                                                         5.28                                                                                                                                                  4.74
                                                                                2.51 1.26 0.89 0.53                                                                                                                                   1.08 0.19 0.06 0.03 0.10 0.03
                                         0.01                                                         0.37 0.24 0.18 0.01                                                                                                                                                          0.03
                              0%                                                                                                  0%                                                                             0%
                                          0             2         4              6         8          10        12          14          0.5    1.0      1.5      2.0       2.5      3.0     3.5   4.0     4.5                   2           4         6         8            10
                                                                  Number of Changes                                                                            Number of Changes                                                           Number of Changes
                                                                            n = 8330                                                                                     n = 7345                                                                 n = 3142



                               Figure 8: Statistics of object changes among dynamic dataset in three time variant domains.


                                                                                                                                                                   18
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 A.3.2    O BJECT-L EVEL F OCUS IN BENCHMARK GENERATION
 Our C HRO K NOW B ENCH emphasizes object-level changes as the core metric for assessing temporal
 knowledge dynamics. This approach reflects a deliberate balance between scalability, precision, and
 interpretability, aligning with the methodological goals of the benchmark.

 Design and Scope The benchmark evaluates how well models can align and reason about temporal
 knowledge by focusing on object-level transformations at specific time points. For instance: Query 1:
”In 2001, Zidane was a player at Real Madrid.” and Query 2: ”In 2010, Zidane was a coach.” By
 treating these as distinct evaluations, C HRO K NOW B ENCH isolates object-level transitions—such as
 roles or affiliations—while keeping the subject and relation fixed. This design ensures a structured and
 scalable evaluation process that captures significant, interpretable changes in temporal knowledge.

 Reason of focusing on Object-Level Changes

         • Scalability: The object-level focus simplifies the complexity of tracking temporal dynamics
           in subject-relation-object triples. By avoiding the combinatorial challenges associated with
           relational changes, this approach ensures clear and scalable evaluations.
         • Precision: Object-level changes, such as shifts in roles or affiliations, capture more nuanced
           updates compared to relational changes, which often default to binary states (e.g., “is a
           player” → “is not a player”). This granularity enhances the depth of the evaluation.
         • Flexibility: Unlike traditional Temporal Knowledge Graphs, which may impose rigid
           relational structures, the object-centered approach accommodates fine-grained changes in
           knowledge. This flexibility enables precise and interpretable assessments, particularly for
           dynamic, real-world transformations.

By centering evaluations on object-level changes, C HRO K NOW B ENCH delivers a robust frame-
work for measuring temporal knowledge dynamics, balancing methodological rigor with practical
scalability.

 A.3.3    C OMPARISON WITH T EMPORAL K NOWLEDGE G RAPHS
Temporal Knowledge Graphs (TKGs) are one of the well known approach for addressing temporal
knowledge (Jung et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024a). Our C HRO K NOW B ENCH also aim
to model time-sensitive knowledge, but we adopt different approaches to structuring and interpreting
temporal information. In this section, we compare these two paradigms across several dimensions,
with particular attention to their handling of temporal snapshots, knowledge dynamics, and suitability
for domains such as biomedical data.

Temporal Snapshot vs. Knowledge-Centric Tracking TKGs organize events based on temporal
snapshots, incorporating multiple events occurring within the same timestamp into a single graph
representation. This approach emphasizes the relationships between events at a specific time point,
making it highly suitable for scenarios where the context of concurrent events is critical (e.g.,
(North America, Host a visit, Business Africa, 2010), (Barack Obama, Consult, North America,
2010)) (Zhang et al., 2024a). By connecting these events, TKGs enable reasoning about their
inter-dependencies and broader temporal patterns.
 In contrast, C HRO K NOW B ENCH adopts a knowledge-centric perspective, focusing on the temporal
 evolution of individual knowledge elements (s, r, o) over time. Instead of aggregating multiple events
 into a single snapshot, C HRO K NOW B ENCH tracks changes in object (o) values for each relation (r)
 across a timeline like the example in Section 3.1 This approach highlights the evolution of specific
 knowledge and ensures comprehensive tracking of its temporal progression.

 Handling Specific Domains A key limitation of TKGs lies in their reliance on well-defined
 temporal snapshots. While this approach is effective for aggregating and reasoning about concurrent
 events, it becomes less suitable for domains like biomedical data, where changes often unfold
 gradually over time and are not tied to distinct temporal snapshots. For instance, the development
 of a medical treatment over a decade may involve incremental advancements that cannot be neatly
 encapsulated within discrete, event-based snapshots.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Comparison of TKGs and C HRO K NOW B ENCH based on their temporal modeling approaches.
TKGs focus on temporal snapshots aggregating multiple events, while C HRO K NOW B ENCH empha-
sizes tracking the temporal evolution of individual knowledge elements. This table highlights their
strengths, weaknesses, and domain applicability.
 Aspect                          TKGs                                    C HRO K NOW B ENCH
                                 Temporal snapshots aggregating          Temporal evolution of individual
 Temporal Focus
                                 multiple events                         knowledge elements
                                 Suitable for well-defined,              Applicable not only temporal,
 Domain Applicability            event-rich domains                      but also gradual or implicit changes
                                 (e.g., geopolitical, social networks)   (e.g., biomedical, legal)
 Handling of Gradual Changes     Limited by snapshot granularity         Effective through continuous tracking
                                 May overlook fine-grained               May overlook broader
 Limitations
                                 changes in individual knowledge         event interdependencies


C HRO K NOW B ENCH overcomes this limitation not merely by dividing time into yearly intervals, but
by prioritizing the temporal progression of individual knowledge elements. This distinction lies in its
focus on tracking and organizing the dynamic and static changes of specific objects over time. While
TKGs aggregate multiple concurrent events within a single snapshot, C HRO K NOW B ENCH constructs
yearly object pools that capture the fine-grained evolution of a specific knowledge element across its
temporal trajectory. These object pools allow C HRO K NOW B ENCH to explicitly track updates and fill
gaps in data, ensuring a cohesive and complete representation of knowledge.
Furthermore, C HRO K NOW B ENCH incorporates the concept of dynamic and static datasets, cate-
gorizing knowledge based on its temporal variability. This approach enables detailed modeling
of knowledge that evolves gradually while preserving distinctions from knowledge that remains
unchanged over time. By avoiding the rigid aggregation of unrelated events and instead focusing on
the chronological development of individual elements, C HRO K NOW B ENCH provides a more precise
framework for fine-grained analysis in those specialized domains.

Comparative Summary TKGs excel at modeling inter-event relationships within temporal snap-
shots, making them effective for domains where concurrent event dependencies are critical, such as
geopolitical analysis. However, they struggle with gradual changes and unstructured data, limiting
their applicability in multiple domains. In contrast, C HRO K NOW B ENCH focuses on the detailed
temporal evolution of individual knowledge units, leveraging object pools to capture gradual changes
effectively, particularly in specialized domains like biomedical, and legal regulations.
Table 3 provides a comparative overview of the two paradigms.

A.3.4     S OURCE AND A PPROACH OF B IOMEDICAL D OMAIN
In the biomedical domain, we follow previous work of BIOLAMA (Sung et al., 2021) framework to
parse Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) yearly metathesaurus data. In the range of 2020 to
2024, we gather instances in 14 relations, resulting 7k for each dynamic and static dataset. Here, by
considering domain specificity that the slow pace of change typical of long-term research, the object
pool is slightly expanded or narrowed in that period; Autonomic nerve structure, with the relation
has indirect procedure site, has a slightly broader scope in 2024, including additional objects like
Neurolytic autonomic nerve block alongside previous objects such as Intravenous regional autonomic
block. The format is same with general domain, {s, r, o, t} quadruplet.

A.3.5     S OURCE AND A PPROACH OF L EGAL D OMAIN
In the legal domain, we create a benchmark dataset based on the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
from 2010 to 2023. We first extract paragraph-level data from regulatory documents for each year
and employ Python’s difflib library to detect changes between paragraphs across adjacent years (e.g.,
2011 to 2012). Careful filtering is applied to ensure that only paragraphs with minor modifications
(e.g., single-word updates or subtle phrasing changes) are retained.
To further analyze the dataset, we utilize the spaCy en core web lg model to detect named entities
in the paragraphs and assess whether these changes involve modifications to the detected entities.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Despite noise introduced by the NER model, we initially identify around 56K changes for near-year
comparisons. These changes are grouped into sequences of years to track alterations over time, while
filtering out paragraphs that are introduced or removed in intermediate years. Ultimately, we focus on
paragraphs present in all years between 2010 and 2023, resulting in 8,793 paragraphs.
We then apply GPT-4o-mini to assess whether the detected changes are semantically meaningful,
excluding minor corrections like typographical fixes or abbreviations. This results in a refined set of
4,362 meaningful updates. Additionally, we select 4,746 unchanged paragraphs containing entities
detected by the NER model. For each paragraph, we format the changes as fill-in-the-blank tasks,
where the modified part is replaced with a blank, providing a rich resource for studying legal text
evolution over time.

A.3.6    S OURCE AND A PPROACH OF C OMMONSENSE AND MATHEMATICS

In the commonsense domain, we utilized the CSKG dataset presented in the CSKG paper. Unlike the
BIO dataset, the object lists for each triplet in this dataset consist of synonymous terms, allowing
multiple triplets to share the same subject and relation. In such cases, the objects appearing in each
triplet carry distinct meanings. Out of the 6 million triplets, we merged the objects of triplets that
have the same subject and relation into a single set, and then sampled x number of triplets from this
collection.
In the mathematics and data structure/algorithm domain, we utilized the Math-KG dataset introduced
in the Math-KG paper. This dataset, originally in Chinese, stores multiple objects with the same
subject and relation across different triplets. Each object was translated into English using GPT-4,
after which the objects from triplets sharing the same subject and relation were merged to construct a
final dataset consisting of 22k triplets.
For the CommonSense dataset, the answers (objects) corresponding to a given subject and relation
are often ambiguous. Consequently, when constructing compelling distractors, there is a higher
likelihood (about 20%) of creating options that are actually correct answers rather than intended
incorrect ones, compared to other datasets. Therefore, we include an additional verification process
after generating the distractors, as outlined in Algorithm 2. Specifically, we formulate multiple-choice
questions using the problem and the generated distractors, then ask GPT-4o to select all correct
answers. If it identifies more than one correct answer, we refine the distractors based on a prompt to
recreate incorrect options.

A.4     I NFERENCE S ETTING

We evaluates all models using vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) system, supporting features of efficient KV
cache memory management that dramatically decrease inference time. All white box LM inference is
conducted by vLLM with hyper-parameter: BFloat16, fixed seed, two kinds of temperature based on
each sampling setting(greedy decoding with 0.0, and high temperature with 0.7). The precision is
done with eight NVIDIA A100 GPUs(80GB).

A.5     D ETAILS OF C HRO K NOWLEDGE IN L EGAL AND T IME -I NVARIANT D OMAIN

Figure 4 shows the result of legal domain. Among time variant domains, legal domain shows the
most stable results of static, also minimal decline in dynamic dataset. This indicates the domain
specificity, which has less frequent yearly changes (almost cases has one change of object in total
time frame) and change continues across many time stamps. Also, model’s capability for specific
task setting is influential in legal domain like the result of MCQA and TF shows, where gap between
generation and other templates are many times larger than in other domains.
For commonsense and mathematics in Figure 9, arbitrary years based on the biomedical domain
were used, from 2020 to 2024. The left side of result shows the tendency of generation templates,
and the middle side is the tendency of MCQA templates, and the last one for TF templates. Each
results measure the percentage of Correct answer, represented as line plots. Results show minimal
variation, aligning with the stable nature of these knowledge types. This consistency confirms that
time-invariant knowledge is well-preserved across models. For template wise comparison, generation
cases show a way little gap between models, while MCQA tasks show the different between models,


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            Common Sense
            Generation                       Multi-choice QA                       True/False


                                             Mathematics


Figure 9: Performance analysis of common-sense and mathematics domains. Three line plots
represent each template’s results: Generation, MCQA and TF. All model shows clearly the domain
specific characteristics, which is invariant knowledge even it comes with temporal attributes. Overall
results are lower in generation templates, as it is challenging for models to correctly recall exactly
one object in these domains (e.g., ’subject’: ’Parent’, ’relation’: ’Synonym’ has more objects later
than ’Ancestor’)


which is aligned with the findings from other time variant domains: the ability of each model’s
specialized task affects its knowledge recall ability.
About the overall performance quality, the result of time invariant shows lower performance as the
models generate one object per each knowledge, while the time invariant knowledge’s coverage is
wider than other domains. This tendency is alleviated by using MCQA and TF templates, which ends
of the rationale for helpfulness of using multiple templates to check knowledge.

A.6    T OTAL T IME F RAME R ESULT OF C HRO K NOWLEDGE

Figure 10–12 represent the total results with total time frames in general, biomedical and legal
domain, including chat template models like mpt-7B. Figure 13– 17 represents the total results of
template-wise performance in ChroKnowledge. Each domain’s result is separated into two temporal
state: Dynamic and Static. Every spider plots consist with three template: Generation, Multi-choice
QA, and True/False. Each statistics refer the percentage of Correct answer, same as Figure 2.

A.7    A LGORITHM OF C HRO K NOW P ROMPT

The overall scheme of ChroKnowPrompt is down below. As described in Section 6.2, the algorithm
starts from making initial prompt with target time tn , subject sn and relation rn from target triplet.
As the initialized candidate answer is None that model cannot properly answer for that target year,
the algorithm also starts with make a empty list of candidate answer list A. and accumulated prompt
P. Then, the algorithm checks the correct object within each time span P and N . If one of those
span has no correct object, the algorithm passes that side of traversal. It the preparation is all done,
the first step in previous span (if no previous span exists, the nearest next span) begins with selecting
object ô by majority voting. Appending prompts in each step, the model is asked to generate or verify
and refine the answer C of each step, like in Figure 5. After all step is done, the last candidate answer,
which is the most refined result, is being checked with the original target object on coming from
target triplet. If it is matched (we also used fuzzy match in here), the category of Incorrect is updated
to Chrono-correct.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Algorithm 2: Chronological Prompting Algorithm
         Data: Correct set C = {(ti , ci )}, target time t, triplet (s, r, o), Prev span P , Next span N
         Result: List of candidate answers A, Updated Category
       1 Initialize accumulated prompt P ← ∅
       2 Initialize candidate answer a ← ∅
       3 Initialize candidate answer list A ← ∅
       4 Tprev ← time before t in C up to span P        // Find correct object in previous time
       5 Tnext ← time after t in C up to span N      // Find correct object in next time
       6 if Tprev = ∅ then
       7      Skip backward traversal and process next years only
       8 if Tnext = ∅ then
       9      Skip forward traversal and process previous years only
      10 for tp ∈ Tprev do                            // Process previous years first
      11      ô ← MajorityVote(C(tp )) // Get the correct object by majority voting
      12      M ← PromptAugment(tp , t, s, r, P, ô, a, ‘previous’) // Augment prompt by adding above
      13      anew ← LLMResponse(M) // Generate or verify answer based on system prompt
      14      aext ← ExtractAnswer(anew )
      15      if aext ̸= ∅ and aext ̸= a then
      16           a ← aext
      17      Append a to A
      18      Update accumulated prompt P with M
      19 for tn ∈ Tnext do                            // Process next years after previous years
      20      ô ← MajorityVote(C(tp )) // Get the correct object by majority voting
      21      M ← PromptAugment(tn , t, s, r, P, ô, a, ‘next’) // Augment prompt by adding below
      22      anew ← LLMResponse(M) // Generate or verify answer based on system prompt
      23      aext ← ExtractAnswer(anew )
      24      if aext ̸= ∅ and aext ̸= a then
      25           a ← aext
      26      Append a to A
      27      Update accumulated prompt P with M
      28 if ∀ai ∈ A, ai = o then
      29      Update knowledge categorization to Chrono-Correct
      30 return A, Updated Category


A.8     TASK C ONFIGURATIONS OF C HRO K NOW P ROMPT

We apply our method to both Incorrect and Partial Correct categories, as the latter may still lack
definitive answers. The test set consists of 10% of the total dataset from each domain. Evaluation
employs fuzzy matching with a temperature of 0 for strict assessment, classifying an answer as
Chrono-correct only if the last candidate answer matches the object. As described in Section 6.2, the
system prompt for each case (generation or verification & refinement) works as follows Table 4:


  Generation Case

  [System]
  Answer ’Candidate A. [Object]’ based on the timestamp. Output only the answer: ’A. [Object]’.

  Verification & Refinement Case

  [System]
  Answer ’Candidate A. [Object]’ based on the timestamp. If it is correct, repeat the same [Object]. If it is
  wrong, generate a new [Object]. Output only the answer: ’A. [Object]’.


                            Table 4: System prompts for ChroKnowPrompt.


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Result of ChroKnowPrompt for both object changed and unchanged cases. The order of
open-sources LLM is sorted by release date, starting from the latest model to the most outdated model.
The numeric score represents the level of Known increase in chronological categorization, and the
increase is due to the transition of previously confusing Partial correct responses to Chrono-correct.
The parenthesis score is the total percentage in dynamic or static dataset, including both changed and
unchanged cases. Showing almost 10% to 30% performance of object unchanged cases, the results
gives observations that only prompting method has limitations in editing diversely changing temporal
knowledge.

                                         general                                       biomedical                                     legal
      Models
                            dynamic                    static             dynamic                     static             dynamic                   static
      Object          changed   unchanged            unchanged      changed   unchanged             unchanged      changed unchanged             unchanged
 Proprietary Large Language Models
 GPT4o-mini          +0.7 (28.7)     +7.0 (28.7)     +4.7 (33.2)   +1.1 (51.9)     +21.9 (51.9)     +27.8 (51.6)   +0.0 (3.2)     +1.9 (3.2)     +14.1 (51.9)
 Gemini-1.5-flash    +0.6 (15.6)     +5.9 (15.6)     +4.5 (22.1)   +0.8 (49.0)     +15.0 (49.0)     +16.0 (48.8)   +0.0 (1.3)     +1.0 (1.3)     +14.1 (16.3)
 Open-Source Large Language Models
 Phi3.5 Mini         +0.3 (17.3)     +1.8 (17.3)     +2.5 (25.5)   +2.1 (45.4)     +16.7 (45.4)     +20.3 (41.3)   +0.0 (0.6)     +0.3 (0.6)     +4.5 (14.2)
 LLaMA3.1 70B        +0.1 (26.0)     +1.7 (26.0)     +2.1 (33.9)   +1.4 (49.5)     +11.2 (49.5)     +8.7 (46.7)    +0.0 (3.9)     +1.0 (3.9)     +4.5 (56.1)
 LLaMA3.1 8B         +0.2 (20.6)     +2.8 (20.6)     +1.7 (27.1)   +1.4 (36.9)     +7.8 (36.9)      +7.9 (33.6)    +0.0 (0.3)     +0.0 (0.3)     +1.3 (13.8)
 Gemma2              +1.0 (19.6)     +3.0 (19.6)     +2.3 (26.7)   +0.6 (32.5)     +5.6 (32.5)      +9.0 (31.7)    +0.0 (2.9)     +0.6 (2.9)     +2.6 (44.6)
 Mistral v0.3        +0.4 (18.6)     +1.5 (18.6)     +1.6 (26.9)   +0.4 (26.6)     +3.8 (26.6)      +5.6 (24.3)    +0.0 (1.3)     +0.6 (1.3)     +7.0 (21.1)
 LLaMA3              +0.4 (20.9)     +2.3 (20.9)     +1.7 (28.0)   +0.3 (31.4)     +5.5 (31.4)      +3.8 (25.7)    +0.0 (1.0)     +0.3 (1.0)     +0.6 (18.9)
 Gemma               +0.2 (18.9)     +0.8 (18.9)     +1.5 (25.9)   +0.3 (18.3)     +5.7 (18.3)      +5.3 (12.6)    +0.0 (0.3)     +0.0 (0.3)     +0.0 (8.70)
 SOLAR               +0.1 (16.5)     +0.7 (16.5)     +0.9 (24.9)   +0.3 (26.5)     +3.8 (26.5)      +4.5 (20.3)    +0.0 (0.6)     +0.0 (0.6)     +1.3 (26.8)
 LLaMA2              +0.3 (18.1)     +4.9 (18.1)     +5.0 (26.6)   +2.0 (44.3)     +23.2 (44.3)     +26.3 (37.2)   +0.0 (0.3)     +0.0 (0.3)     +12.8 (21.8)
  Object Increase       0.4                        2.8                1.0                       11.6                  0.0                      3.1
 Temporal Increase                 1.7                   2.6                     6.0                   12.3                     0.3                  5.7
  Domain Increase                          2.0                                            8.1                                          2.1


A.9     D ETAILS IN SPAN - WISE RESULTS OF C HRO K NOW P ROMPT

Table 6 and 7 present the evaluation of ChroKnowPrompt in span-wise comparisons. While our
approach demonstrates significant improvements in certain domains, it shows limited or negligible
gains in the legal domain. Overall scores in the dynamic dataset remain modest, with the highest
gain being only 1.9. However, the static dataset yields more impressive results, with the highest
increase exceeding 10% in proprietary models, a level comparable to the biomedical domain’s results.
Another finding is that although the increase in Table 6’s result in general domain is not higher than
the static figures in the legal domain, the variation in figures between models is significantly larger in
the legal domain. As the format of legal dataset is the unstructured format with long context, this
would be one factor of low edit quality.


                                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Result of ChroKnowPrompt in span-wise comparison for general and biomedical domain.
The order of open-sources LLM is sorted by release date, starting from the latest model to the most
outdated model. The numeric score is the level of Known in chronological categorization and the
increase in parentheses is from the ratio of Chrono-correct which was confusing Partial correct
before. Each result presents both in total span and previous span.
                                             general                                                       biomedical                           Model Increase
      Models               total span                 previous span                         total span                 previous span            total    previous
                      dynamic       static         dynamic       static                dynamic        static       dynamic        static        span       span
 Proprietary Large Language Models
 GPT4o-mini          28.7 (+7.7)    33.2 (+4.7)   26.6 (+5.7)       31.7 (+3.3)    51.9 (+23.0)    51.6 (+27.8)   41.8 (+12.8)   36.7 (+13.0)   15.8        8.7
 Gemini-1.5-flash    15.6 (+6.5)    22.1 (+4.5)   15.3 (+6.1)       21.7 (+4.1)    49.0 (+15.8)    48.8 (+16.0)   48.0 (+14.9)   51.7 (+18.8)   10.7       11.0
 Open-Source Large Language Models
 Phi3.5 Mini         17.3 (+2.1)    25.5 (+2.5)   16.5 (+1.2)       24.1 (+1.1)    45.4 (+18.7)    41.3 (+20.3)   36.6 (+10.0)   31.5 (+10.5)   10.9       5.7
 LLaMA3.1 70B        26.0 (+1.8)    33.9 (+2.1)   26.1 (+1.9)       33.5 (+1.6)    49.5 (+12.6)    46.7 (+8.7)    44.9 (+7.9)    41.7 (+3.7)    6.3        3.8
 LLaMA3.1 8B         20.6 (+3.1)    27.1 (+1.7)   19.4 (+1.9)       26.4 (+1.0)    36.9 (+9.2)     33.6 (+7.9)    32.0 (+4.2)    29.1 (+3.4)    5.5        2.6
 Gemma2              19.6 (+4.0)    26.7 (+2.3)   17.8 (+2.2)       24.7 (+0.4)    32.5 (+6.2)     31.7 (+9.0)    27.9 (+1.5)    26.7 (+4.1)    5.4        2.1
 Mistral v0.3        18.6 (+1.8)    26.9 (+1.6)   18.3 (+1.6)       26.8 (+1.5)    26.6 (+4.2)     24.3 (+5.6)    24.6 (+2.2)    21.3 (+2.6)    3.3        2.0
 LLaMA3              20.9 (+2.7)    28.0 (+1.7)   20.8 (+2.5)       27.2 (+0.9)    31.4 (+5.7)     25.7 (+3.8)    28.7 (+3.0)    24.2 (+2.3)    3.5        2.2
 Gemma               18.9 (+1.0)    25.9 (+1.5)   18.8 (+0.8)       25.3 (+0.8)    18.3 (+6.0)     12.6 (+5.3)    16.0 (+3.7)    9.60 (+2.3)    3.5        1.9
 SOLAR               16.5 (+0.8)    24.9 (+0.9)   16.7 (+1.1)       25.1 (+1.1)    26.5 (+4.1)     20.3 (+4.5)    27.7 (+5.3)    19.7 (+3.8)    2.6        2.8
 LLaMA2              18.1 (+5.2)    26.6 (+5.0)   15.9 (+3.0)       23.1 (+1.5)    44.3 (+25.2)    37.2 (+26.3)   32.5 (+13.4)   23.3 (+12.4)   15.4       7.6
 Open-Source Chat Models
 Mpt                 18.3 (+4.8)    25.6 (+4.8)   17.0 (+3.5)       22.8 (+2.1)    43.3 (+22.9)    45.3 (+30.3)   30.8 (+10.4)   26.6 (+11.6)   15.7       6.9
 Pythia              13.8 (+0.0)    20.8 (+0.1)   13.8 (+0.0)       20.7 (+0.0)    13.1 (+0.0)     10.2 (+0.1)    13.1 (+0.0)    10.2 (+0.1)     0.1       0.0
 Nemotron3           11.2 (+1.5)    18.3 (+1.8)   10.1 (+0.5)       16.7 (+0.1)    22.1 (+9.0)     19.4 (+8.3)    17.9 (+4.8)    15.4 (+4.4)    5.2        2.5
 Temporal Increase      3.1            2.5              2.3            1.4               11.6          12.4             6.7          6.6
 Domain Increase               2.8                             1.8                              12.0                          6.7


Table 7: Result of ChroKnowPrompt in span-wise comparison for legal domain. The order
of open-source LLMs follows the same sequence as in Table 6, starting with the latest model
and progressing to the most outdated one. The numeric score represents the level of Known in
chronological categorization, and the increase in parentheses reflects the ratio of Chrono-correct
answers, considering total span in the left side and previous span in the right side.

                                                                        legal                                                    Model Increase
          Models                        total span                                previous span
                                                                                                                         total span        previous span
                                   dynamic       static                       dynamic       static
 Proprietary Large Language Models
 GPT4o-mini                        3.2 (+1.9)      51.9 (+14.1)              2.6 (+1.3)            48.4 (+10.6)               8.0                  6.0
 Gemini-1.5-flash                  1.3 (+1.0)      16.3 (+14.1)              1.6 (+1.3)            18.5 (+16.3)               7.6                  8.8
 Open-Source Large Language Models
 Phi3.5 Mini                       0.6 (+0.3)      14.2 (+4.5)               0.6 (+0.3)            11.9 (+2.3)                2.4                  1.3
 LLaMA3.1 70B                      3.9 (+1.0)      56.1 (+4.5)               3.2 (+0.3)            53.9 (+2.2)                2.8                  1.3
 LLaMA3.1 8B                       0.3 (+0.0)      13.8 (+1.3)               0.3 (+0.0)            12.5 (+0.0)                0.7                  0.0
 Gemma2                            2.9 (+0.6)      44.6 (+2.6)               2.6 (+0.3)            43.9 (+1.9)                1.6                  1.1
 Mistral v0.3                      1.3 (+0.6)      21.1 (+7.0)               1.0 (+0.3)            19.2 (+5.1)                3.8                  2.7
 LLaMA3                            1.0 (+0.3)      18.9 (+0.6)               1.3 (+0.6)            18.9 (+0.6)                0.5                  0.6
 Gemma                             0.3 (+0.0)      8.70 (+0.0)               0.3 (+0.0)            8.70 (+0.0)                0.0                  0.0
 SOLAR                             0.6 (+0.0)      26.8 (+1.3)               0.6 (+0.0)            28.4 (+2.9)                0.7                  1.5
 LLaMA2                            0.3 (+0.0)      21.8 (+12.8)              0.3 (+0.0)            17.3 (+8.3)                6.4                  4.2
 Open-Source Chat Models
 Mpt                               1.0 (+0.6)      8.4 (+5.1)                0.6 (+0.3)            4.5 (+1.3)                 2.9                  0.8
 Pythia                            0.3 (+0.0)      3.2 (+0.0)                0.3 (+0.0)            3.2 (+0.0)                 0.0                  0.0
 Nemotron3                         0.3 (+0.0)      5.1 (+1.0)                0.3 (+0.0)            4.8 (+0.6)                 0.5                  0.3
 Temporal Increase                    0.5                     4.9                  0.3                   3.7
   Domain Increase                                2.7                                           2.0


                                                                                  25
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              43.1   42.6   42.2        43.1           43.7        46.0         49.8           50.1      49.5         48.1     46.3       50.1           47.7   35.6
              39.7   36.8   37.1        35.0           33.7        35.4         35.9           33.9      30.6         29.4     28.9       31.0           30.1   23.6
              30.7   29.7   29.9        29.5           30.4        33.0         34.1           34.4      33.4         30.4     28.6       27.5           24.0   20.4
              40.1   37.2   37.5        37.9           38.2        40.5         42.6           42.5      39.7         36.6     35.3       38.3           34.5   32.3
              50.9   50.4   50.2        50.2           50.0        51.5         55.2           55.7      53.2         53.1     52.1       52.1           50.1   41.0
              40.0   36.7   36.9        37.5           38.1        40.9         43.1           42.9      39.4         39.2     37.4       40.7           37.5   31.7
Dynamic


              38.1   35.5   35.9        36.6           37.5        40.5         44.7           44.8      39.6         36.7     35.5       39.6           36.8   30.1
              31.5   30.1   30.8        31.4           31.8        33.8         36.1           34.9      32.5         30.0     28.6       28.8           25.2   21.0
              30.6   31.5   32.1        28.9           29.4        31.2         32.5           31.3      28.4         25.5     22.8       24.8           22.7   16.0
              37.2   35.7   35.7        33.6           34.1        36.8         41.1           40.8      36.8         39.6     37.8       40.2           36.3   31.5
              37.5   35.0   35.3        35.1           35.6        38.2         40.6           40.3      39.5         37.3     37.1       41.3           37.1   33.1
              32.2   33.6   34.4        34.7           36.0        38.9         42.9           42.7      36.8         37.5     30.7       35.6           28.5   25.5
              30.3   26.4   26.6        28.5           28.6        28.8         31.4           30.1      29.7         28.3     25.1       26.2           21.6   15.4
              26.2   25.9   26.1        25.4           26.3        29.8         31.3           30.0      30.1         28.1     26.3       30.1           25.3   16.4



              33.5   35.5   37.0        38.5           38.6        39.0         39.6           38.8      37.2         36.2     33.4       35.9           33.9   31.4
              30.5   31.6   33.1        32.4           32.2        31.6         31.2           29.6      27.7         24.7     23.9       25.5           24.7   26.1
              25.6   27.2   28.1        29.1           28.7        29.8         29.0           28.6      25.9         24.5     22.5       22.1           18.9   14.7
              31.4   32.3   33.4        34.4           34.3        35.4         33.9           33.5      30.8         28.7     25.9       30.2           27.2   22.9
              38.9   41.0   42.6        43.3           43.7        44.5         44.9           44.1      41.8         40.9     39.5       40.6           39.2   40.0
              30.8   32.2   33.3        34.4           34.4        35.8         34.6           33.7      30.6         28.8     28.2       31.1           28.5   26.1
              29.4   31.6   32.8        33.2           33.3        34.3         34.6           33.7      31.0         29.8     28.4       30.2           29.0   23.7
Static


              25.3   26.9   27.6        29.2           29.0        30.5         28.9           27.5      24.2         23.7     20.8       21.8           18.0   15.1
              23.9   26.6   27.5        26.3           26.4        27.4         25.9           23.7      21.1         18.7     14.9       15.6           12.9   9.4
              29.8   31.9   33.6        32.9           32.8        34.0         34.2           33.2      30.3         30.2     29.5       31.1           25.6   20.4
              29.5   30.7   31.8        32.6           31.6        32.5         31.9           31.3      29.3         28.9     27.3       30.9           28.5   25.7
              26.6   28.6   29.7        31.1           30.6        32.0         31.1           28.0      23.5         22.4     18.3       19.6           18.7   13.5
              24.5   24.5   25.0        26.8           25.9        25.9         24.6           23.9      22.4         19.9     18.4       19.1           17.4   11.4
              22.7   23.6   24.5        25.4           24.9        26.6         24.1           22.2      22.4         20.3     18.0       20.2           19.2   15.1
              2010   2011   2012        2013           2014        2015         2016           2017      2018         2019     2020       2021           2022   2023



          9                             20                                                32                                    44                                    55
                                                                         Percentage of Correct
                            Phi-3.5-mini-instruct             Llama-3-8B-Instruct               mpt-7b-chat                     GPT-4o mini
                            Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct             gemma-7b-it                       Pythia-Chat-Base-7B             Gemini-1.5-Flash
                            gemma-2-9b-it                     SOLAR-10.7B-Instruct-v1.0         nemotron-3-8b-chat-4k-sft-hf    Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
                            Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3          Llama-2-7b-chat-hf



                 Figure 10: Total result of performance heatmap in general domain for all models


                                                                                    26
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   47.4                         47.4                           48.3                              41.7                                 41.7
                   62.3                         63.1                           63.5                              57.7                                 57.7
                   38.4                         39.3                           38.9                              33.1                                 32.9
                   46.8                         46.5                           46.9                              39.6                                 40.7
                   56.7                         57.9                           58.3                              50.5                                 51.2
                   48.5                         49.6                           49.4                              42.5                                 43.4
Dynamic


                   40.8                         41.3                           41.1                              34.7                                 35.7
                   47.2                         47.8                           47.9                              41.3                                 41.7
                   33.2                         34.5                           32.8                              28.2                                 27.7
                   40.8                         43.0                           41.9                              35.3                                 35.3
                   46.4                         47.1                           46.8                              39.1                                 39.5
                   29.5                         29.9                           28.6                              23.2                                 23.6
                   39.7                         41.1                           40.5                              34.1                                 34.3
                   33.2                         33.7                           33.9                              27.8                                 27.4



                   40.5                         39.7                           40.1                              37.3                                 37.0
                   63.0                         62.5                           61.7                              59.2                                 59.9
                   27.2                         27.6                           26.0                              23.9                                 24.1
                   40.7                         40.9                           38.8                              36.8                                 37.1
                   53.1                         53.9                           53.0                              50.5                                 50.9
                   44.9                         44.8                           43.3                              41.0                                 41.7
                   34.4                         35.4                           33.7                              30.2                                 31.6
Static


                   40.7                         41.3                           39.1                              37.0                                 37.2
                   28.9                         29.4                           27.2                              25.7                                 25.7
                   33.3                         33.3                           31.6                              29.0                                 28.9
                   41.1                         40.8                           39.4                              36.3                                 36.2
                   20.1                         20.3                           18.5                              16.8                                 16.9
                   34.5                         35.6                           33.5                              31.1                                 32.4
                   28.3                         28.1                           26.9                              25.0                                 24.2
                   2020                         2021                           2022                              2023                                 2024



          16                             28                                        40                                   51                                   63
                                                                  Percentage of Correct
                          Phi-3.5-mini-instruct        Llama-3-8B-Instruct              mpt-7b-chat                          GPT-4o mini
                          Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct        gemma-7b-it                      Pythia-Chat-Base-7B                  Gemini-1.5-Flash
                          gemma-2-9b-it                SOLAR-10.7B-Instruct-v1.0        nemotron-3-8b-chat-4k-sft-hf         Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
                          Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3     Llama-2-7b-chat-hf



               Figure 11: Total result of performance heatmap in biomedical domain for all models


                                                                              27
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              10.9     11.1   14.2        13.7           15.0        16.4         15.9           16.9      17.2         16.0     16.3       16.9           16.5   16.4
              11.3     10.5   11.8        12.2           12.3        12.2         12.9           14.2      14.2         13.6     13.0       14.0           13.4   13.4
              5.2      5.5    6.4          6.8           7.4          7.7          7.7           8.6        8.5          7.5     7.3         7.3           7.1    7.5
              7.6      7.1    9.4         10.0           11.2        12.1         13.5           14.3      14.4         12.8     12.6       13.3           12.7   12.4
              19.7     19.6   24.0        23.6           24.5        27.5         26.4           27.7      27.7         26.7     28.0       29.0           28.7   27.7
              6.6      6.7    8.0          8.2           9.7         10.1         10.2           10.3      10.5          9.0     9.4         9.6           9.5    9.6
Dynamic


              7.2      7.5    8.4          8.3           9.4         10.1         10.5           10.7      10.6          9.5     9.2         9.8           9.2    9.3
              5.2      5.2    6.3          6.2           6.9          7.0          6.9           8.0        7.5          6.3     5.9         6.4           6.3    6.1
              2.5      2.7    2.4          2.0           2.2          2.1          2.3           2.1        2.3          1.3     1.3         1.4           1.6    1.6
              9.2      9.4    12.2        12.0           13.6        14.5         15.2           15.7      15.6         15.5     15.4       16.0           15.5   14.9
              13.1     13.3   16.5        16.6           18.3        18.6         19.4           20.3      20.9         19.4     19.3       20.4           20.0   20.5
              4.3      4.4    4.3          5.1           4.6          5.0          4.9           5.0        4.9          4.1     4.0         4.1           3.8    4.2
              3.0      3.1    3.0          3.2           3.3          3.3          3.3           3.5        3.6          3.1     3.0         3.2           3.2    3.7
              4.4      4.6    5.2          5.0           6.3          6.0          6.2           6.3        6.5          5.3     5.5         5.8           5.8    5.5



              48.4     48.8   48.4        49.0           49.4        48.7         49.1           49.2      48.7         48.3     48.1       48.6           48.1   48.4
              40.5     38.4   37.3        37.1           36.3        36.8         37.4           36.8      37.2         37.7     37.2       37.3           37.5   37.0
              19.7     19.4   19.7        20.1           19.4        19.3         19.4           19.3      19.8         19.3     18.8       19.4           19.8   19.4
              29.8     30.1   29.0        30.1           30.0        29.7         29.9           29.8      29.0         29.6     28.5       29.4           29.7   28.5
              58.9     58.6   58.6        59.0           59.1        58.8         59.3           58.9      59.3         59.0     58.3       59.3           58.6   58.7
              25.3     25.9   26.0        25.9           25.7        25.8         25.8           26.2      25.7         26.1     25.1       25.5           25.8   26.2
              24.2     23.6   23.5        23.8           24.1        24.5         23.7           24.6      24.1         24.7     23.9       24.4           24.4   23.5
Static


              20.6     20.3   19.9        19.8           20.4        20.0         20.7           20.3      20.2         20.9     21.2       20.4           20.9   20.8
              9.1      9.5    9.6          9.4           9.6         10.1          9.1           9.2        9.8          9.8     9.5         9.5           9.3    9.6
              38.7     37.7   37.8        38.4           38.3        37.7         38.2           38.6      37.8         39.2     38.1       38.4           38.1   38.1
              48.1     48.2   48.0        48.7           48.1        48.2         48.4           48.6      48.3         49.1     48.8       48.8           48.7   48.9
              18.6     19.0   17.8        18.8           18.8        18.6         18.7           18.7      18.0         18.0     18.6       18.1           18.3   18.5
              11.0     11.2   11.4        11.6           11.2        11.1         11.5           11.6      11.2         10.9     10.9       11.0           10.3   11.2
              12.4     12.1   12.5        12.1           12.8        12.3         11.9           12.5      12.3         11.9     12.4       12.2           13.1   12.3
              2010     2011   2012        2013           2014        2015         2016           2017      2018         2019     2020       2021           2022   2023



          1                               15                                                30                                   44                                      59
                                                                            Percentage of Correct
                              Phi-3.5-mini-instruct             Llama-3-8B-Instruct               mpt-7b-chat                     GPT-4o mini
                              Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct             gemma-7b-it                       Pythia-Chat-Base-7B             Gemini-1.5-Flash
                              gemma-2-9b-it                     SOLAR-10.7B-Instruct-v1.0         nemotron-3-8b-chat-4k-sft-hf    Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
                              Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3          Llama-2-7b-chat-hf



                     Figure 12: Total result of performance heatmap in legal domain for all models


                                                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       General - Dynamic


    Figure 13: Total result of template-wise performance in general domain, dynamic dataset



                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       General - Static


      Figure 14: Total result of template-wise performance in general domain, static dataset



                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Biomedical - Dynamic
       Biomedical - Static


Figure 15: Total result of template-wise performance in biomedical domain, dynamic and static
dataset


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Legal - Dynamic


      Figure 16: Total result of template-wise performance in legal domain, dynamic dataset



                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Legal - Static


       Figure 17: Total result of template-wise performance in legal domain, static dataset



                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Template: Generation

  Q. In 2020, Pedro Braillard Poccard, position held, [Object]
  A. member of the Argentine Chamber of Senators

  Q. In 2020, Ana Santos Aramburo, position held, [Object]
  A. Spain National Library general manager

  Q. In 2020, James E. McPherson, position held, [Object]
  A. United States Secretary of the Navy

  Q. In 2020, Jesús Ávila de Grado, position held, [Object]
  A. chief scientific officer

  Q. In 2020, Donald Tusk, position held, [Object]
  : (generate from here ...)
  Template: MCQA

  In 2020, what office does Pedro Braillard Poccard hold?
  (a) member of the Argentine Chamber of Senators, (b) Minister of Foreign Affairs, (c) Governor of
  Corrientes Province, (d) Mayor of Buenos Aires

  (a) member of the Argentine Chamber of Senators

  In 2020, what office does Ana Santos Aramburo hold?
  (a) Minister of Culture and Sports of Spain, (b) Director of the Prado Museum, (c) Spain National Library
  general manager, (d) President of the Spanish Royal Academy

  (c) Spain National Library general manager

  In 2020, what office does James E. McPherson hold?
  (a) United States Secretary of Homeland Security, (b) United States Attorney General, (c) United States
  Secretary of the Navy, (d) United States Secretary of Defense

  (c) United States Secretary of the Navy

  In 2020, what office does Jesús Ávila de Grado hold?
  (a) President of the National Research Council, (b) Minister of Health, (c) Director of the World Health
  Organization, (d) chief scientific officer

  (d) chief scientific officer

  In 2020, what office does Donald Tusk hold?
  (a) President of the European Commission, (b) President of Poland, (c) Chancellor of Germany, (d)
  chairperson

  : (generate from here ...)


Table 8: Example of two templates: Generation and MCQA. Domain: general, Subject: Donald Tusk,
Relation: position held (P39), year to target: 2020.


                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Template: TF

  Q. In 2020, Pedro Braillard Poccard, position held, member of the Argentine Chamber of Senators
  A. true

  Q. In 2020, Ana Santos Aramburo, position held, Director of the Prado Museum
  A. false

  Q. In 2020, James E. McPherson, position held, United States Secretary of Defense
  A. false

  Q. In 2020, Jesús Ávila de Grado, position held, chief scientific officer
  A. true

  Q. In 2020, Donald Tusk, position held, Prime Minister of Poland
  : (generate from here ...)


Table 9: Example of TF templates. Domain: general, Subject: Donald Tusk, Relation: position held
(P39), year to target: 2020.


                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Domain: General

 [System]
 You are an expert in natural language processing and logic puzzles, skilled at generating plausible yet
 misleading distractor options that challenge users to distinguish between correct and incorrect answers.
 Pay special attention to questions that involve negative phrasing, such as those containing “not” or “which
 does not,” to ensure that the distractors do not confuse users into overlooking the negative aspect of the
 question.

 [User]
 The question “What office does ‘Mitt Romney’ hold?” can be answered with ‘United States senator’.
 Create three plausible incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. Governor of Massachusetts
 2. Secretary of State
 3. Speaker of the House

 [User]
 The question “Which sports team is ‘Yann MVila’ a member of?” can be answered with ‘Rubin Kazan’,
 ‘France national association football team’, ‘Sunderland A.F.C.’, ‘France national under-21 association
 football team’, ‘Inter Milan’, ‘Stade Rennais F.C.’. Create three plausible incorrect distractors for this
 question.

 [Assistant]
 1. Paris Saint-Germain F.C.
 2. Olympique Lyonnais
 3. AS Monaco FC

 [User]
 The question “[Q]” can be answered with ‘[O1]’, ‘[O2]’, ... , ‘[On]’. Create three plausible incorrect
 distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 : (generate from here ...)


            Table 10: 2-shot prompt for generating three distractors in general domain.


                                                    36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Domain: Biomedical

 [System]
 You are an expert in natural language processing and logic puzzles, skilled at generating plausible yet
 misleading distractor options that challenge users to distinguish between correct and incorrect answers.
 Pay special attention to questions that involve negative phrasing, such as those containing “not” or “which
 does not,” to ensure that the distractors do not confuse users into overlooking the negative aspect of the
 question.

 [User]
 The question “What is not the primary anatomic site of ‘Rhabdomyosarcoma of the orbit’?” can be
 answered with ‘Bones set’, ‘structure bone’, ‘Bone structure’, ‘os’, ‘Skeletal bone’, ‘Bone structure (body
 structure)’, ‘bones structure’, ‘bone structures’, ‘Ossa’, ‘Set of bone organs’, ‘Bone organ’, ‘Skeleton
 system’, ‘Osseous’, ‘Bone’, ‘NOS’, ‘Bones’, ‘bones structures’, ‘Bone (organ)’, ‘Bone’, ‘skeletal’, ‘Set of
 bones’, ‘Bones’, ‘NOS’. Create three plausible incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. Orbital connective tissue
 2. Extrinsic ocular muscles
 3. Orbital soft tissue

 (two more shots)

 [User]
 The question “What negatively regulates ‘Vitellogenesis’?” can be answered with ‘downregulation of yolk
 production’, ‘downregulation of vitellogenesis’, ‘down regulation of vitellogenesis’, ‘inhibition of yolk
 production’, ‘negative regulation of vitellogenesis’, ‘down regulation of yolk production’, ‘down-regulation
 of yolk production’, ‘inhibition of vitellogenesis’, ‘down-regulation of vitellogenesis’, ‘negative regulation
 of yolk production’. Create three plausible incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. Partial left salpingectomy
 2. Unilateral oophorectomy
 3. Hysterectomy

 [User]
 The question “[Q]” can be answered with ‘[O1]’, ‘[O2]’, ... , ‘[On]’. Create three plausible incorrect
 distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 : (generate from here ...)


          Table 11: 4-shot prompt for generating three distractors in biomedical domain.


                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Domain: Legal

 [System]
 You are a legal expert skilled in crafting challenging fill-in-the-blank questions and generating plausible
 yet misleading distractor options. You will receive a question and answer where part of a legal text has
 been blanked out. For the provided question, create three plausible incorrect distractors that challenge
 users to distinguish between correct and incorrect answers.

 [User]
 The question
 """
 ... (beginning of text omitted)
 Subpart B—Certification of Substantially Equivalent Agencies
 Substantial equivalency certification is granted if the   determines that a state or local agency enforces a
 law that is substantially equivalent to the Fair Housing Act with regard to substantive rights, procedures,
 remedies, and the availability of judicial review. The Department has developed a two-phase process of
 substantial equivalency certification.
 """
 can be answered with ‘Department’. Create three plausible incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. Secretary
 2. Commission
 3. Board

 [User]
 The question
 """
 ... (beginning of text omitted)
 Subpart B—Minimum Standards for Substantial Compliance by States
 Within the period defined in § 383.73(       :
 """
 can be answered with ‘f) of this title, the State shall’, ‘h) of this subchapter, the State must’. Create three
 plausible incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. g) of this chapter, the State will
 2. e) of this section, the State is required to
 3. d) of this part, the State should

 [User]
 The question
 """
 [Q]
 """
 can be answered with ‘[O1]’, ‘[O2]’, ... , ‘[On]’. Create three plausible incorrect distractors for this
 question.

 [Assistant]
 : (generate from here ...)


              Table 12: 2-shot prompt for generating three distractors in legal domain.


                                                      38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Domain: CommonSense

 [System]
 You are an expert in natural language processing and logic puzzles, skilled at generating plausible yet
 misleading distractor options that challenge users to distinguish between correct and incorrect answers.
 Pay special attention to questions that involve negative phrasing, such as those containing “not” or “which
 does not,” to ensure that the distractors do not confuse users into overlooking the negative aspect of the
 question.

 [User]
 The question “What properties does ‘human’ not have?” can be answered with ‘strong enough to lift horse’,
 ‘strong enough to lift truck’, ‘strong enough to lift car’, ‘strong enough to lift cow’, ‘strong enough to lift
 building’. Create three plausible incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. strong enough to lift a motorcycle
 2. strong enough to lift a large suitcase
 3. strong enough to lift a heavy stone

 [User]
 The question “What is synonym for ‘salix tristis’?” can be answered with ‘dwarf gray willow’. Create
 three plausible incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. green weeping willow
 2. dwarf green willow
 3. gray weeping willow

 [User]
 The question “What does ‘kids’ desire?” can be answered with ‘play games’, ‘play’, ‘find crabs in tidal
 pools’, ‘read games magazines’, ‘play with’, ‘play with toys’, ‘learn things’. Create three plausible
 incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. eat vegetables
 2. do homework
 3. fold laundry

 [User]
 The question “What is ‘oil and water’ not capable of?” can be answered with ‘mix’. Create three plausible
 incorrect distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 1. boil
 2. freeze
 3. emulsify

 [User]
 The question “[Q]” can be answered with ‘[O1]’, ‘[O2]’, ... , ‘[On]’. Create three plausible incorrect
 distractors for this question.

 [Assistant]
 : (generate from here ...)


         Table 13: 4-shot prompt for generating three distractors in commonsense domain.


                                                      39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Prompt: Mathematics / Data Structure & Algorithm

  [System]
  You are an expert in mathematics and computer science, skilled at generating plausible yet misleading
  distractor options that challenge users to distinguish between correct and incorrect answers. Pay special
  attention to questions that involve negative phrasing, such as those containing “not” or “which does not,”
  to ensure that the distractors do not confuse users into overlooking the negative aspect of the question.

 [User]
 The question “Which of the following is unrelated to ‘Output’?” can be answered with ‘Left child’, ‘Set’,
 ‘Depth’, ‘Modify’, ‘Post-order traversal’, ‘Dictionary’, ‘Predecessor’, ‘Array’, ‘Delete’, ‘Sparse matrix’,
 ‘Infix expression’, ‘Leaf node’, ‘Shortest path’, ‘Right subtree’, ‘Node’, ‘In-order traversal’, ‘Hashing’,
 ‘Head node’, ‘Pointer’, ‘Level-order traversal’, ‘Keyword’, ‘Pattern string’, ‘Record’, ‘Determinism’,
 ‘Linked list’, ‘Critical Path’, ‘Function name’, ‘Connected component’, ‘Loop statement’, ‘Robustness’,
 ‘Inverted index’, ‘Preorder traversal’, ‘Memory’, ‘Dequeue’, ‘Singly Linked List’, ‘Image’. Create three
 plausible incorrect distractors for this question.

  [Assistant]
  1. Print statement
  2. Display buffer
  3. Output stream

  [User]
  The question “What is synonym for ‘Ancestor’?” can be answered with ‘Parent’. Create three plausible
  incorrect distractors for this question.

  [Assistant]
  1. Descendant
  2. Sibling
  3. Offspring

  [User]
  The question “[Q]” can be answered with ‘[O1]’, ‘[O2]’, ... , ‘[On]’. Create three plausible incorrect
  distractors for this question.

  [Assistant]
  : (generate from here ...)


Table 14: 2-shot prompt for generating three distractors in mathematics, data structure, and algorithm
domain.


                                                     40
