Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING M ULTI -I NDEX M ODELS WITH N EURAL
N ETWORKS VIA M EAN -F IELD L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS
 Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini1,2 , Denny Wu3,4 , Murat A. Erdogdu1,2
 1
   University of Toronto, 2 Vector Insitute, 3 New York University, 4 Flatiron Institute
 {mousavi,erdogdu}@cs.toronto,edu, dennywu@nyu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         We study the problem of learning multi-index models in high-dimensions using a
         two-layer neural network trained with the mean-field Langevin algorithm. Under
         mild distributional assumptions on the data, we characterize the effective dimen-
         sion deff that controls both sample and computational complexity by utilizing
         the adaptivity of neural networks to latent low-dimensional structures. When the
         data exhibit such a structure, deff can be significantly smaller than the ambient
         dimension. We prove that the sample complexity grows almost linearly with deff ,
         bypassing the limitations of the information and generative exponents that appeared
         in recent analyses of gradient-based feature learning. On the other hand, the compu-
         tational complexity may inevitably grow exponentially with deff in the worst-case
         scenario. Motivated by improving computational complexity, we take the first
         steps towards polynomial time convergence of the mean-field Langevin algorithm
         by investigating a setting where the weights are constrained to be on a compact
         manifold with positive Ricci curvature, such as the hypersphere. There, we study
         assumptions under which polynomial time convergence is achievable, whereas
         similar assumptions in the Euclidean setting lead to exponential time complexity.


1    I NTRODUCTION
A key characteristic of neural networks is their adaptability to the underlying statistical model. Several
works have shown that shallow neural networks trained by (variants of) gradient descent can adapt to
inherent structures in the learning problem, and learn functions of low-dimensional projections with
a sample complexity that depends on properties of the nonlinear link function such as the information
exponent (Ben Arous et al., 2021) or generative exponent (Damian et al., 2024) for single-index
models, and the leap complexity (Abbe et al., 2023) for multi-index models. Specifically, prior works
typically established a sample complexity of n ≳ dΘ(s) for gradient-based learning, where s can
be the information/leap exponent (Abbe et al., 2022; Bietti et al., 2022; Damian et al., 2023; Ba
et al., 2023; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023b; Bietti et al., 2023; Dandi et al., 2023) or the generative
exponent (Dandi et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024; Arnaboldi et al., 2024; Joshi et al., 2024), depending on
the implementation of gradient descent. This sample complexity is also predicted by the framework
of statistical query lower bounds (Damian et al., 2022; Abbe et al., 2023; Damian et al., 2024).
On the other hand, neural networks can efficiently approximate arbitrary multi-index models regard-
less of the generative/leap exponent s (Barron, 1993; E et al., 2022); moreover, if the (polynomial)
optimization budget is not taken into consideration, there exist computationally inefficient training
algorithms that can achieve sample complexity independent of s (Bach, 2017; Liu et al., 2024; Damian
et al., 2024). Intuitively speaking, a function depending on k = Od (1) directions of the input data has
kd = O(d) parameters to be estimated, and hence the information theoretically optimal algorithm on
isotropic data only requires n ≍ d samples. However, thus far it has been relatively unclear whether
standard first-order optimization algorithms for neural networks inherit this optimality.
A promising approach to close the sample complexity gap is to consider neural networks in the
mean-field regime (Nitanda & Suzuki, 2017; Chizat & Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Rotskoff &
Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2020), where overparameterization is utilized to lift
the gradient descent dynamics into the space of measures so that global convergence can be established.
While most existing results in this regime focus on optimization instead of generalization/learnability,


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


recent works have shown that under restrictive data and target assumptions (such as XOR), mean-field
neural networks achieve a sample complexity that does not depend on the leap complexity (Wei et al.,
2019; Chizat & Bach, 2020; Telgarsky, 2023; Suzuki et al., 2023b). Among these works, Suzuki
et al. (2023b) proved quantitative convergence guarantees for learning k-parity with n ≍ d samples,
despite the target function having leap index k. Key to this result is the convergence rate analysis of
the mean-field Langevin algorithm (MFLA) (Hu et al., 2019; Nitanda et al., 2022; Chizat, 2022b).
However, existing learnability guarantees in the mean-field regime fall short in the following aspects:
• Learning general multi-index models. Prior works established optimal sample complexity for
  mean-field neural networks under stringent assumptions on the data distribution (isotropic Gaussian,
  hypercube, etc.) as well as on the target function such as single-index models with specific link
  functions (Berthier et al., 2023; Mahankali et al., 2023), or k-sparse parity classification (Wei
  et al., 2019; Telgarsky, 2023; Suzuki et al., 2023b). Hence, the problem of universally learning
  functions of low-dimensional projections with minimal data assumptions using neural networks
  with a standard training procedure remains largely open.
• Polynomial computational complexity. To achieve optimal sample complexity, the computational
  complexity of the training algorithm in Telgarsky (2023); Suzuki et al. (2023b) is exponential in
  the ambient (input) dimension. Although such exponential dependence may be unavoidable in
  the most general setting, sufficient conditions under which the mean-field algorithm can achieve
  statistical efficiency with polynomial compute is relatively under-explored, with the exception of a
  recent work that studied the specific example of k-parity on anisotropic data (Nitanda et al., 2024).

1.1   O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

Motivated by the above discussion, in this work we address two key questions. First, we ask
  Can we train two-layer neural networks using the MFLA to learn arbitrary multi-index models
                 with an (information theoretically) optimal sample complexity?
We answer this in the affirmative by showing that empirical risk minimization on a standard variant
of a two-layer neural network can be achieved by the MFLA. This result handles arbitrary multi-
index models on subGaussian data with general covariance, hence enabling us to obtain a sample
complexity with optimal dimension dependence up to polylogarithmic factors with standard gradient-
based training. However, such a universal guarantee will inevitably suffer from an exponential
computational complexity; thus, the second fundamental question we aim to answer is
   Are there conditions under which the computational complexity of the MFLA can be improved
                  from exponential to (quasi)polynomial dimension dependence?
We provide a positive answer in two problem settings. In the Euclidean setting, we show that the
complexity of MFLA is governed by the effective dimension of the learning problem, instead of its
ambient dimension; this implies an improved efficiency of MFLA when the data is anisotropic. In the
Riemannian setting, we outline concrete conditions on the Ricci curvature of the compact manifold
defining the weight space under which MFLA converges in polynomial time.

1.2   R ELATED W ORKS

Mean-field Langevin dynamics. The training dynamics of neural networks in the mean-field
regime is described by a nonlinear partial differential equation in the space of parameter distributions
(Chizat & Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018). Unlike the neural
tangent kernel (NTK) description (Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat et al., 2019) that freezes the parameters
around random initialization, the mean-field regime allows the parameters to travel and learn useful
features, leading to improved statistical efficiency. While convergence analyses for mean-field neural
networks are typically qualitative, in that they do not specify the speed of convergence or finite-width
discrepancy, the mean-field Langevin algorithm that we study is a noticeable exception, for which the
quantitative convergence rate (Hu et al., 2019; Nitanda et al., 2022; Chizat, 2022b) and uniform-in-
time propagation of chaos (Chen et al., 2022; Suzuki et al., 2022; 2023a; Kook et al., 2024; Nitanda,
2024; Chewi et al., 2024) have been established.
A recent work (Takakura & Suzuki, 2024) considered a two-timescale MFLD where the second
layer is optimized infinitely faster than the first layer, and provided statistical guarantees for learning


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Barron spaces with a bounded activation function. The concurrent work of Wang et al. (2024) studied
this two-timescale approach to MFLD in a more general setting of optimization over signed measures
without considering the estimation aspect and statistical guarantees. Our formulation here bypasses
the need for two-timescale dynamics while learning a similarly large class of target functions.

Learning low-dimensional targets. The benefit of feature learning has also been studied in a
“narrow-width” setting, where parameters of the neural network align with the low-dimensional target
function during gradient-based training. Examples of low-dimensional targets include single-index
models (Ben Arous et al., 2021; Ba et al., 2022; Bietti et al., 2022; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023a;
Damian et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024) and multi-index models (Damian et al., 2022; Abbe et al., 2022;
2023; Dandi et al., 2023; Bietti et al., 2023; Collins-Woodfin et al., 2023; Vural & Erdogdu, 2024).
While the information-theoretic threshold for learning such functions is n ≳ d (for isotropic data)
(Mondelli & Montanari, 2018; Barbier et al., 2019; Damian et al., 2024), the complexity of gradient-
based learning is governed by properties of the link function. For instance, in the single-index setting,
prior works established a sufficient sample size of n ≳ dΘ(s) where s is the information exponent
for one-pass SGD on the squared/correlation loss (Dudeja & Hsu, 2018; Ben Arous et al., 2021;
Bietti et al., 2022; Damian et al., 2023), and the generative exponent (Damian et al., 2024) when the
algorithm can reuse samples or access a different loss (Dandi et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024; Arnaboldi
et al., 2024; Joshi et al., 2024). This presents a gap between the information-theoretically achievable
sample complexity and the performance of neural networks optimized by gradient descent.

Notation. We denote the Euclidean inner product with ⟨·, ·⟩, the Euclidean norm for vectors and
the operator norm for matrices with ∥·∥, and the Frobenius norm with ∥·∥F . Given a topological
space W endowed with an underlying metric and Lebesgue measure, we use P(W), P2 (W), and
P2ac (W) to denote the set of (Borel) probability measures, the set of probability measures with finite
second moment, and the set of absolutely continuous probability measuresRwith finite second moment,
respectively. Finally, we use δw0 to denote the Dirac measure at w0 , i.e. h(w)dδw0 (w) = h(w0 ).

2    P RELIMINARIES : O PTIMIZATION IN M EASURE S PACE
Statistical model. In this paper, we consider the regression setting where the input x ∈ Rd is
generated from some distribution and the response y ∈ R is given by the following multi-index model

                                 y = g ⟨u√1 ,x⟩
                                             k
                                                , . . . , ⟨uk ,x⟩
                                                            √
                                                              k
                                                                    + ξ.                       (2.1)

Here, g : Rk → R is the unknown link function, ξ is a zero-mean ς-subGaussian noise independent
from x; for simplicity, we assume ς 2 ≲ 1. Without loss of generality,
                                                                √          we assume
                                                                                √    that the unknown
directions u1 , . . . , uk are orthonormal, and define U = (u1 / k, . . . , uk / k)⊤ ∈ Rk×d ; thus, we
can use the shorthand notation y = g(U x) + ξ. Throughout the paper, we consider the setting k ≪ d,
and treat k as an absolute constant independent from the ambient input dimension d.
For a student model x → ŷ(x; W ) with W denoting its model parameters, we consider loss functions
of the form ℓ(ŷ, y) = ρ(ŷ − y) where ρ : R → R+ is convex. In the classical regression setting where
we observe n i.i.d. samples {(x(i) , y (i) )}ni=1 from the data distribution, the regularized population
risk and the regularized empirical risk are defined respectively as
                                                             n
                                  λ                       1X                              λ
Jλ (W ) := E[ℓ(ŷ(x; W ), y)] +     R(W ) and Jˆλ (W ) :=       ℓ(ŷ(x(i) ; W ), y (i) ) + R(W ),
                                  2                       n i=1                           2

where R is some regularizer on the model parameters and the expectation is over the joint distribution
of (x, y). In practice, we minimize the empirical risk Jˆλ as the finite sample approximation of the
population risk Jλ , anticipating that both minimizers are close to each other.
We use a two-layer neural network coupled with ℓ2 regularization to learn the statistical model (2.1),
where learning constitutes recovering both unknowns U and g. Denoting the m neurons with a matrix
W := (w1 , . . . , wm )⊤ , the student model and the ℓ2 -regularizer are given as
                              m                                                   m
                           1 X                                      1          1 X
          ŷm (x; W ) :=         Ψ(x; wj )     and       R(W ) :=     ∥W ∥2F =       ∥wj ∥2 ,      (2.2)
                           m j=1                                    m          m j=1


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Ψ : Rd × W → R is the activation function, and wj ∈ W with W denoting a Riemannian
manifold. In this formulation, the second layer weights are all fixed to be +1.
To minimize an objective J denoting either Jλ or Jˆλ , we will consider a discretization of the following
set of SDEs, which essentially define an interacting particle system over m neurons:
             dwtj = −m∇wj J(wt1 , . . . , wtm )dt + 2β −1 dB jt for 1 ≤ j ≤ m,
                                                       p
                                                                                                     (2.3)
where ∇w is the Riemannian gradient and (B jt )mj=1 is a set of independent Brownian motions on W.
We scale the learning rate by m to compensate for the fact that the gradient will be of order m−1 with
respect to each neuron. The case β = ∞ corresponds to the classical gradient flow over J, while the
Brownian noise can help escaping from spurious local minima and saddle points.

Optimization in measure space. Notice that the neural network and the regularizer in (2.2) are both
invariant under permutations of the weights (w1 , . . . , wm ); thus, an equivalent integral representation
of these functions can be written using Dirac measures δwj centered at wj , namely
                                                                                           m
                                                                                        1 X
                 Z                                   Z
    ŷ(x; µW ) := Ψ(x; ·)dµW and R(µW ) := ∥ · ∥2 dµW with µW =                                δw . (2.4)
                                                                                       m j=1 j
Here, µW is the empirical measure supported on m atoms. Indeed, ŷ(x; µW ) = ŷm (x; W ) and
R(µW ) = R(W ), and this formulation allows extension to infinite-width networks by removing the
condition that measures are supported on m atoms, and by expanding the feasible set of measures to
µ ∈ P2 (W). Thus, we rewrite the population and the empirical risks in the space of measures as
                       Jλ (µW ) := Jλ (W ) and Jˆλ (µW ) := Jˆλ (W ),
with domain µ ∈ P2 (W). Let J : P2 (W) → R be the population risk Jλ or the empirical risk Jˆλ .
We can equivalently state the interacting SDE system (2.3) as (see e.g. (Chizat, 2022b, Prop. 2.4))
               dwtj = −∇w J ′ [µW t ](wtj )dt + 2β −1 dB jt for 1 ≤ j ≤ m,
                                                 p
                                                                                                (2.5)
where J ′ [µ] ∈ L2 (W) denotes the first variation of J (µ) defined via
                J [µ](w)d(ν − µ)(w) = limϵ↓0 J ((1−ϵ)µ+ϵν)−J       (µ)
              R ′
                                                            ϵ          , ∀ν ∈ P2 (W),          (2.6)
which is unique up to additive constants when it exists (Santambrogio, 2015, Definition 7.12).
As m → ∞, the empirical measure µW t weakly converges to a deterministic measure µt for all
fixed t, a phenomenon known as the propagation of chaos (Sznitman, 1991). Furthermore, µt can be
characterized as the law of the solution of the following SDE and non-linear Fokker-Planck equation
                                 p
  dwt = −∇w J ′ [µt ](wt )dt + 2β −1 dB t and ∂t µt = ∇ · (µt ∇J ′ [µt ]) + β −1 ∆µt , (2.7)
where ∇· and ∆ are the Riemannian divergence and Laplacian operators, respectively. Due to the
existence of mean-field interactions, (2.7) is known as the mean-field Langevin dynamics (MFLD).
For a pair of probability measures µ ≪ ν both in P(W), we define the relative entropy H(µ | ν) and
the relative Fisher information I(µ | ν) respectively as
                                                                                2
                                     dµ                                      dµ
                              Z                                   Z
                 H(µ | ν) :=      ln     dµ and I(µ | ν) :=             ∇ ln      dµ.             (2.8)
                               W     dν                             W        dν
It is well-known at this point that µt in (2.7) can be interpreted as the Wasserstein gradient flow of
the entropic regularized functional Fβ (µ) := J (µ) + β1 H(µ | τ ), where τ is the uniform measure
on compact W or the Lebesgue measure on a Euclidean space (Jordan et al., 1998; Ambrosio et al.,
2005; Villani, 2009). For this gradient flow to converge exponentially fast towards the minimizer
µ∗β := arg minµ Fβ (µ), we require a gradient domination condition on µ∗β in the space of probability
measures, given as
                                           CLSI
                            H(µ | µ∗β ) ≤        I(µ | µ∗β ), ∀µ ∈ P(W),                          (2.9)
                                             2
                                                                                             ′
which is referred to as the log-Sobolev inequality (LSI). If the measure dνµt ∝ exp(−βJ [µt ])dτ
satisfies LSI with constant CLSI for all t ≥ 0, µt enjoys the following exponential convergence
                                                    −2t
                         Fβ (µt ) − Fβ (µ∗β ) ≤ e βCLSI (Fβ (µ0 ) − Fβ (µ∗β ));                     (2.10)
see e.g. (Chizat, 2022b, Theorem 3.2) and (Nitanda et al., 2022, Theorem 1).


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3    L EARNING M ULTI - INDEX M ODELS IN THE E UCLIDEAN S ETTING
In this section, we consider learning multi-index models in the Euclidean setting. For technical
reasons, we use an approximation of ReLU denoted by z 7→ ϕκ,ι (z) for some κ, ι > 1, which is
given by ϕκ,ι (z) = κ−1 ln(1 + exp(κz)) for z ∈ (−∞, ι/2] and extended on (ι/2, ∞) such that ϕκ,ι
is C 2 smooth, |ϕκ,ι | ≤ ι, ϕ′κ,ι ≤ 1, and ϕ′′κ,ι ≤ κ. Note that ϕκ,ι recovers ReLU as κ, ι → ∞.
Recall that we freeze the second-layer weights at +1. Consequently, non-negative activations can
only learn non-negative functions. To alleviate this, we choose W = R2d+2 , and use the notation
w = (ω ⊤       ⊤ ⊤
         1 , ω 2 ) with ω 1 , ω 2 ∈ R
                                      d+1
                                          to denote the first and the second half of weight coordinates,
and use the activation function
                             Ψ(x; w) := ϕκ,ι (⟨x̃, ω 1 ⟩) − ϕκ,ι (⟨x̃, ω 2 ⟩),                       (3.1)
                    ⊤      d+1
where x̃ := (x, r̃x ) ∈ R     for a constant r̃x corresponding to a bias unit. The above can also be
seen as a 2-layer neural network with activation ϕκ,ι and second-layer weights frozen at ±1.
We use the neural network and the regularizer in (2.2) with weights W := (w1 , . . . , wm ), and
minimize the resulting empirical risk Jˆλ (W ) via the mean-field Langevin algorithm (MFLA), which
is a simple time discretization of (2.3) with the stepsize η and the number of iterations l > 0,
                          = wlj − mη∇wj Jˆλ (W ) + 2ηβ −1 ξ lj , 1 ≤ j ≤ m,
                                                        p
                    wl+1
                      j                                                                          (3.2)
where ξ lj are independent standard Gaussian random vectors. When the stepsize is sufficiently small,
MFLA approximately tracks the system of continuous-time SDEs (2.3) as well as their equivalent
formulation in the measure space (2.5). If, in addition, the network width m is sufficiently large, prop-
agation of chaos will kick in and the dynamics will be an approximation to MFLD (2.7), ultimately
minimizing the corresponding entropic regularized objective Fβ,λ (µ) := Jˆλ (µ) + β1 H(µ | τ ).
We make the following assumption on the input distribution.
Assumption 1. The input x has zero mean and covariance Σ. Further, ∥x∥ and ∥U x∥ are subGaus-
sian with respective norms σn ∥Σ1/2 ∥F and σu ∥Σ1/2 U ⊤ ∥F for some absolute constants σn , σu .

One example for the above assumption is the Gaussian case x ∼ N (0, Σ) where ∥Ax∥ is subGaus-
sian with norm ∥Σ1/2 A∥ for any matrix A. In settings we consider, we can replace the operator norm
with the Frobenius norm to obtain a weaker assumption, since ∥Ax∥ is roughly concentrated near its
mean, scaling with ∥Σ1/2 A⊤ ∥F . Assumption 1 can cover much broader settings than Gaussianity,
e.g. it is satisfied when x = Σ1/2 z and z has mean-zero i.i.d. subGaussian coordinates (Vershynin,
2018, Theorem 6.3.2.). Without loss of generality, we will consider a scaling where ∥Σ∥ ≲ 1.
A key quantity in our analysis is the effective dimension which governs the algorithmic guarantees.
Definition 1 (Effective dimension). Define deff := c2x /rx2 where cx := tr(Σ)1/2 , rx := ∥Σ1/2 U ⊤ ∥F .

The effective dimension deff can be significantly smaller than the ambient dimension d, leading to
particularly favorable results in the following when deff = polylog(d). This concept has numerous
applications from learning theory to statistical estimation; see e.g. Vershynin (2018); Wainwright
(2019); Ghorbani et al. (2020); Ba et al. (2023). In covariance estimation, for example, the effective
dimension is typically defined as tr(Σ)/∥Σ∥ (e.g. (Wainwright, 2019, Example 6.4)), which is
equivalent to deff in Definition 1 provided that U lives in the top eigenspace of Σ. However, in
general, deff might be larger than tr(Σ)/∥Σ∥, which is expected as one can imagine a supervised
learning setup where the variations of x provide very little information about target directions U ,
making estimation more difficult. We make the following assumption on the link function in (2.1).
Assumption 2. The link function is locally Lipschitz:
                                                  p     |g(z 1 ) − g(z 2 )| ≤ L∥z 1 − z 2 ∥ for z 1 , z 2 ∈
  k
R satisfying ∥z 1 ∥  ∨  ∥z 2 ∥ ≤ r̃x := rx (1 + σu 2(q + 1) ln(n)) for some q > 0 and L = O(1/rx ).
We also assume E y 2 ≲ 1.

Note that the above Lipschitz condition is only local, thus allowing polynomially growing link
functions g. We scale the Lipschitz constant with 1/rx to make sure y has a variance of order Θ(1).
Recall from Section 2 that in order to prove convergence of the MFLD (and its time/particle dis-
cretization MFLA), it is sufficient for the Gibbs potential νµW t ∝ exp(−β Jˆλ′ [µW t ]) to satisfy LSI


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


uniformly along its trajectory. Here, it is straightforward to derive the first variation as
                                                       n
                            λ                       1X ′
 Jˆλ′ [µ](w) = Jˆ0′ [µ](w) + ∥w∥ with Jˆ0′ [µ](w) =
                                2
                                                          ρ (ŷ(x(i) ; µ) − y (i) )Ψ(x(i) ; w). (3.3)
                            2                       n i=1

The following assumption introduces the uniform LSI constant for the trajectory of MFLA.
Assumption 3. Let W l = (wl1 , . . . , wlm ) denote the trajectory of MFLA. We assume the measure
νµW l ∝ exp(−β Jˆλ′ [µW l ]) satisfies the LSI (2.9) with constant CLSI for all l ≥ 0, and CLSI ≥ β.

The above condition is stated to simplify the exposition and will be verified in our results by using
the boundedness of ϕκ,ι ; Jˆλ′ [µW l ] can be considered as a bounded perturbation of a strongly convex
potential, thus satisfies LSI by the Holley-Stroock argument (Holley & Stroock, 1986).
Proposition 2. Suppose ρ is Cρ -Lipschitz. Then for any µ ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ), the probability measure
νµ ∝ exp(−β Jˆλ′ [µ]) with Jˆλ′ given by (3.3) satisfies the LSI (2.9) with constant
                                                  1
                                        CLSI ≤      exp(4Cρ ιβ).                                      (3.4)
                                                 βλ

For the squared loss, we can replace Cρ above with Jˆ0 (µW )1/2 . With this, as Jˆ0 (µW ) is uniformly
bounded along the trajectory, convergence of the infinite-width MFLD can be established. However,
for the finite-width MFLA, controlling Jˆ0 (µW ) is challenging as there is non-trivial probability that
neurons incur a large loss, which is why we require Lipschitz ρ. Note that the right hand side of (3.4)
is independent of κ; thus, by letting κ → ∞, the proposition implies the same LSI constant for a
bounded variant of ReLU. However, for MFLA (the time discretization of MFLD), we additionally
require smoothness of the activation.

3.1   S TATISTICAL AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF MFLA

The main result of this section is stated in the following theorem.
Theorem 3. Under Assumptions 1, 2 and 3,  consider MFLA (3.2) with parameters λ = λ̃rx2 ,
β = Θ̃(deff /λ̃), and η ≤ Õ CLSI κ2 r̄41(d+r̄2 /λ) , where r̄x := ∥Σ∥ ∨ r̃x . Suppose λ̃, κ−1 = on (1),
                                          x     x
          r̃ 2
ι = Θ λ̃rx2 , the loss satisfies |ρ′ | ∨ ρ′′ ≲ 1, and the algorithm is initialized with the weights sampled
              x
i.i.d. from some distribution w0j ∼ µ0 with E ∥w0j ∥22 ≲ 1. Then, with the number of samples n, the
number of neurons m, and the number of iterations l that can respectively be bounded by
                                               C r̄4 κ2 d        r̄2               CLSI β
                                                 LSI x
                 n = Õ(deff ), m = Õ                       + x , l = Õ                   ,          (3.5)
                                                   βλ      β      λ                   η
with probability at least 1 − O(n−q ) for some q > 0, the excess risk satisfies
                         EW l Ey,x [ρ(y − ŷm (x; W l ))] − Eξ [ρ(ξ)] ≤ on (1).                       (3.6)

The above theorem demonstrates that (i) the effective dimension of Definition 1 controls the sample
complexity, and (ii) the LSI constant of Assumption 3 controls the computational complexity. To
that end, we can employ the LSI estimate of Proposition 2 to arrive at the following corollary.
Corollary 4. In the setting of Theorem 3, using the LSI estimate of Proposition 2, with the number of
samples, the number of neurons, and the number of iterations, respectively bounded by

                       n = Õ(deff ),   m = Õ(deÕ(deff ) ),   l = Õ(deÕ(deff ) ),                 (3.7)
MFLA can achieve the excess risk bound (3.6) with λ̃−1 , κ = polylog(n).

We observe that the above corollary demonstrates a certain adaptivity to the effective low-dimensional
structure, both in terms of statistical and computational complexity. Remarkably, this property of
MFLA emerges without explicitly encoding any information about the covariance structure in the
algorithm. In contrast, consider “fixed-grid” methods for optimization over the space of measures
P(R2d+2 ) (see Chizat (2022a) and references therein), in which the algorithm fixes the first-layer


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Work             Class of Targets     Sample Complexity                        Input         Covariance   deff -adaptivity
   Telgarsky (2023)           2-parity                        d                       hypercube        isotropic          ✗
  Suzuki et al. (2023b)       k-parity                        d                       hypercube        isotropic          ✗
                                                     Pk
  Nitanda et al. (2024)       k-parity       tr(Σ)    i=1 ∥Σ
                                                                      1/2
                                                                            ui ∥−2   parallelotope     full-rank         ✓
                                                              k+3
      Bach (2017)           multi-index                   d    2                       bounded         general            ✗
      Theorem 3             multi-index        tr(Σ)/∥Σ1/2 U ⊤ ∥2F                   subGaussian       general           ✓

Table 1: Learning guarantees of neural networks with exponential compute (we state the dimension dependence).
Our Theorem 3 improves upon prior bounds, with a potentially significant gap depending on the problem setup.


of a two-layer network’s representation and only trains the second-layer, solving a convex problem
similar to the random features regression (Rahimi & Recht, 2007). However, fixed-grid methods do
not show any type of adaptivity to low-dimensions, and in particular their computational complexity
always scales exponentially with the ambient dimension d, unless information about the covariance
structure is explicitly used when specifying the fixed representation.
                                                                                                     k+3
Table 1 compares recent works in various aspects. Bach (2017) requires d 2 sample complexity for
learning general k-index models, which is worse than the complexity deff of Theorem 3 even in the
worst case deff = d. The improvement in our √ bound is due to a refined control over ∥U x∥; while Bach
(2017) assumes this quantity scales with d, it can be verified that for centered x, its expectation is
independent of d. Further, Bach (2017) does not provide a quantitative analysis of the optimization
complexity, and it is not clear if their algorithm is adaptive to the covariance structure. Nitanda et al.
(2024) studied learning k-sparse parities, a subclass of multi-index models we considered, for which
it is considerably simpler to construct optimal neural networks with bounded activation. While the
effective dimension (and the resulting sample complexity) of Nitanda et al. (2024) is not explicitly
scale-invariant, we derive a scale-invariant translation of their bound in Appendix C, and show that it
is always lower bounded by our effective dimension, especially when Σ is nearly rank-deficient.
Remark. We make the following remarks on the complexity of learning multi-index models.
• Even though the complexity in Corollary 4 scales exponentially with deff , in Section 3.2 we outline
  problem settings where deff = polylog(d), under which it is possible to achieve quasipolynomial
  runtime for the MFLA. That said, the exponential dependence in deff is unavoidable in general
  in LSI-based analysis (Menz & Schlichting, 2014), and is consequently present in the mean-field
  literature (Chizat, 2022b; Suzuki et al., 2023a;b).
• In the isotropic setting Σ = Id , recent works have shown that certain variants of SGD can learn
  single-index polynomials with almost linear sample complexity (Dandi et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024;
  Arnaboldi et al., 2024), which matches our sample complexity without needing exponential compute.
  However, these analyses crucially relied on the polynomial link function, which has generative
  exponent at most 2 (Damian et al., 2024) and is SQ-learnable with n = Õd (d) samples (Mondelli
  & Montanari, 2018; Barbier et al., 2019; Chen & Meka, 2020). In contrast, our assumption on the
  link function allows for arbitrarily large generative exponent, and hence the computational lower
  bound in Damian et al. (2024) implies that achieving learnability in the n ≍ d scaling requires
  exponential compute for statistical query learners.


3.2    U TILIZING THE E FFECTIVE D IMENSION

To better demonstrate the impact of effective dimension deff , we consider two covariance models.

Spiked covariance. We consider the spiked covariance model of Mousavi-Hosseini et al. (2023b).
Namely, given a spike direction θ ∈ Sd−1 , suppose the covariance and the target directions satisfy

  Σ = (1 + α)−1 (Id + αθθ ⊤ ),            α ≍ dγ2 ,           ∥U θ∥ ≍ d−γ1 ,              γ2 ∈ [0, 1],     γ1 ∈ [0, 1/2]. (3.8)
Note that in high-dimensional settings, γ1 = 1/2 corresponds to a regime where θ is sampled
uniformly over Sd−1 , whereas γ1 = 0 corresponds to the case where θ has a strong (perfect)
correlation with U . We only consider γ2 ≤ 1 since γ2 > 1 corresponds to a setting where the input
is effectively one-dimensional. In this setting, effective dimension depends on γ1 and γ2 .


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                      500
                      1.75
                                                                                                                                                                   1.2


                                                                                              n (sample complexity)
                      1.50                                     deff 1

     (target alignment)
                      1.25


                                                                                                                                                                         Test Loss
                      1.00                                                                                            300

                      0.75
                      0.50                                                                                                                                         0.5

                      0.25      deff d
                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                            5               30                50
                          0.0            0.5           1.0        1.5                                                            deff (effective dimension)
                                               (eigenvalue decay)
                                                 (a)                                                                                        (b)

    Figure 1: (a) deff according to Corollary 6. (b) Test loss from MFLA, details in Appendix E.


Corollary 5. Under the spiked covariance model (3.8), we have deff ≍ d1−{(γ2 −2γ1 )∨0} .

To get improvements over the isotropic effective dimension d, either the spike magnitude α or
the spike-target alignment ∥U θ∥ needs to be sufficiently large so that γ2 > 2γ1 . Recall that the
effective dimension in the covariance estimation problem is tr(Σ)/∥Σ∥ ≍ d1−γ2 . Therefore, deff
in Corollary 5 only matches its unsupervised counterpart when γ1 = 0, i.e. θ has a significant
correlation with the target directions U . As γ2 → 1 and γ1 → 0, the effective dimension will be
smaller than polylog(d), leading to a computational complexity that is quasipolynomial in d.

Scaling laws under power-law spectra. Next, we consider a more general power-law decay for
                                            Pd
the eigenspectrum. Specifically, suppose Σ = i=1 λi θ i θ ⊤
                                                          i is the spectral decomposition of Σ, and
                                                                               2
                                                    λi                  ∥U θ i ∥
                                                       ≍ i−α ,                     2 ≍i
                                                                                       −γ
                                                                                          ,            for                      1 ≤ i ≤ d,                                       (3.9)
                                                    λ1                  ∥U θ 1 ∥
                                                      Pd           2    2
for some absolute constants α, γ > 0. Notice that i=1 ∥U θ i ∥ = ∥U ∥F = 1. The following
corollary characterizes deff in terms of the parameters α and γ.
Corollary 6. Under the power-law eigenspectrum for the covariance matrix (3.9), we have
                                       1∧(2−α−γ)
                                      d                 α < 1, γ < 1
                               deff ≍ d1−α               α < 1, γ ≥ 1 ,                 (3.10)
                                       (1−γ)∨0
                                        d                α≥1
where ≍ above hides polylog(d) dependencies.

The scaling of deff (hence the sample complexity) is illustrated in Figure 1a. We remark that
the power-law assumption (3.9) is parallel to the source condition and capacity condition in the
nonparametric regression literature (Cucker & Smale, 2002; Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007), where the
capacity condition measures the decay of feature eigenvalues, and the source condition measures the
alignment between the target and feature eigenvectors.
Also, based on (3.10), the width and number of iterations in Corollary 4 both become quasipolynomial
in d when α, γ ≥ 1. This corresponds to the setting where Σ is approximately low-rank with most
of its eigenspectrum concentrated in the first few principal components, and the corresponding
eigenvectors are aligned with the row space of U .

4    P OLYNOMIAL T IME C ONVERGENCE IN THE R IEMANNIAN S ETTING
The strong statistical learning guarantees in the previous section come at a computational price;
MFLA may need exp(deff ) many iterations and neurons to converge. This complexity arises since
in the worst case, the LSI constant that governs the convergence of MFLD will be exponential
in the inverse temperature parameter β (Menz & Schlichting, 2014). In this section, we provide


                                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


first steps towards achieving polynomial-time complexity for MFLD. In particular, we show that
if we constrain the weight space to be a compact Riemannian manifold with a uniformly lower
bounded Ricci curvature such as the hypersphere Sd−1 , we can establish a uniform LSI constant with
polynomial dimension dependence, while the same set of assumptions in the Euclidean setting results
in exponential dimension dependence. Notice that due to the manifold constraint on the weights, we
no longer require ℓ2 -regularization, and simply consider the objective Fβ (µ) = Jˆ0 (µ)+β −1 H(µ | τ ).
Let (W, g) be a (d − 1)-dimensional compact Riemannian manifold with metric tensor
                                                                                R g. We denote
the Ricci curvature of W with Ricg . We recall the neural network ŷ(x; µ) = Ψ(x; w)dµ(w)
where, in this case, we choose a C 2 -smooth activation Ψ(x; ·) : W → R defined on the manifold.
We consider the following model example to demonstrate our results.
Example 7. W is the hypersphere Sd−1 equipped with its canonical metric tensor, and the activation
is Ψ(x; w) = ϕ(⟨w, x⟩) for some smooth ϕ : R → R. Suppose |ϕ′ |, |ϕ′′ | ≲ 1, and the distribution
of x satisfies the conditions of Assumption 1.
The following assumption plays an important role in the analysis.
Assumption 4. (W, g) satisfies the curvature-dimension condition Ricg ≽ ϱdg for an absolute
constant ϱ > 0. Further, there exists some µ̄ ∈ P(W) such that Jˆ0 (µ̄) ≤ ε̄ and H(µ̄ | τ ) ≤ ∆
                                                                                              ¯ for
                   ¯ where τ is the uniform distribution on W.
some constants ε̄, ∆,
For the unit sphere Sd−1 , we have Ricg ≽ (d − 2)g; thus, the curvature-dimension condition is
satisfied for sufficiently large d. Moreover, if there exists some µ with Jˆ0 (µ) ≤ ε̄ (e.g. the minimizer
of Jˆ0 ) for which H(µ | τ ) = ∞, one can construct µ̄ such that Jˆ0 (µ̄) ≤ Õ(ε̄) and H(µ̄ | τ ) ≤ Õ(d),
by smoothing µ via convolution with box kernels (see (Chizat, 2022a, Theorem 4.1) and its proof).
Therefore in the worst-case, we have ∆  ¯ = Θ̃(d). However, under a reasonable model assumption, we
can verify Assumption 4 with ∆    ¯ = o(d), which is demonstrated in the below proposition.
Proposition 8. Let y = Ψ(x; ·)dµ∗ for some µ∗ ∈ P(W) such that dµ∗ ∝ ef dτ for f : W → R.
                            R

Then, Jˆ0 (µ∗ ) = 0 and H(µ∗ | τ ) ≤ f (dµ∗ − dτ ) ≤ osc(f ) where osc(f ) := sup f − inf f .
                                       R

                                                                                   ¯ = osc(f ) which
In the above result, the constants in Assumption 4 can be identified as ε̄ = 0 and ∆
is the oscillation of the log-density of µ∗ . Consequently, if the neurons in the teacher model are
sufficiently present in all directions of the weight space, we get osc(f ) = o(d); consider e.g. the
extreme case µ∗ = τ which implies f is constant. Interestingly, in the case of k-multi-index models,
this condition implies that k grows with dimension, ruling out the case k = O(1). We include a
natural example of target functions of interest in the form of Proposition 8 in Appendix D.
For MFLD to converge to a minimizer of Jˆ0 , the parameter β needs to satisfy β ≥ Ω̃(∆)    ¯ to ensure
the entropic regularization is not the dominant term in the objective Fβ . In the Euclidean setting, this
                                           ¯ resulting in a computational complexity exp(Õ(∆))
implies an LSI constant of order exp(Õ(∆)),                                                      ¯ as
shown in Theorem 3. In what follows, we demonstrate via the Bakry-Émery theory (Bakry & Émery,
1985) that in the Riemmanian setting, under a uniform lower bound on the Ricci curvature, the LSI
constant can be independent of ∆  ¯ and d as long as we have ∆¯ = o(d). We include a natural example
of target functions of interest in the form of Proposition 8 in Appendix D.
Proposition 9. Suppose Assumption 4 holds and the loss ρ is Cρ -Lipschitz. Then, for all µ ∈ P(W)
and β < ϱd/Cρ K, the probability measure νµ ∝ exp(−β Jˆ0′ [µ]) satisfies the LSI with constant
                                        CLSI ≤ (ϱd − βCρ K)−1 ,                                    (4.1)
                                      2

where K = sup∥v∥g =1 ESn v, ∇w Ψ(x; w)v , and ESn [·] denotes the expectation under empir-
ical data distribution over n samples.

Remark. In the setting of Example 7 with n ≥ Ω̃(tr(Σ)/∥Σ∥), we have K ≲ ∥Σ∥ with probability
at least 1 − O(n−q ) for some constant q > 0. Consequently, the LSI constant is independent of d.
We can now present the following global convergence guarantee to the minimizer of J0 for large d.
Theorem 10. Suppose Assumption 4 holds, and let K be as in Proposition 9. Let (µt )t≥0 denote the
                                         ¯ and d ≥ 2Cρ K ∆/ϱε.
law of the MFLD. For any ε > 0, let β = ∆/ε                 ¯       Then, we have
                                                         ¯
                                                         ∆

                                                                  Fβ (µ0 )

                    ˆ
                   J0 (µT ) ≲ ε̄ + ε, whenever T ≥           ln              .              (4.2)
                                                        εϱd          ε

                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                          ¯
Moreover, in the setting of Example 7 and for a 1-Lipschitz loss function, if we have d ≳ ∆/ϱε and
      ¯                2                           4
n ≥ Ω(∆(1 + ε̄/ε)/ε ) ∨ Ω̃(tr(Σ)/∥Σ∥) ∨ Ω̃(1/ε ), then

                                                                 ¯
                                                                 ∆

                                                                         Fβ (µ0 )

                        J0 (µT ) ≲ ε̄ + ε,   whenever     T ≥       ln              ,                 (4.3)
                                                                εϱd         ε

with probability at least 1 − O(n−q ) over the randomness of data, for some constant q > 0.

The sample complexity is controlled by the maximum of ∆       ¯ and tr(Σ)/∥Σ∥ up to log factors. We
remark that dependence on ε is not our main focus, and it may be possible to improve 1/ε4 with a
more refined analysis. Remarkably, the time complexity improves in high dimensions, thanks to the
effect of the Ricci curvature. While the above result is for the continuous-time infinite-width MFLD,
the uniform-in-time propagation of chaos for MFLD strongly suggests that the cost of time/width
discretizations will be polynomial, see e.g. Suzuki et al. (2023a) for the Euclidean setting, and Li &
Erdogdu (2023) for the time-discretization of the Langevin diffusion on the hypersphere under LSI.
To compare the setting of this section to that of Section 3, as explored in Appendix A, we remark that
the Euclidean ℓ2 and entropic regularizations can be combined into a single effective regularizer of
the form β −1 H(µ | γ), where γ = N (0, (λβ)−1 I2d+2 ); therefore, in the Euclidean setting, γ plays
the role of τ . √
                Further in the proof of Lemma 20, we show that in the Euclidean setting, ∆ ¯ ≍ λβ/rx2
                                                                               ¯     2   2
and ε̄ ≍ cx / λβ; thus, to learn with any non-trivial accuracy, we have ∆ ≍ cx /rx = deff . As
                                                                                        ¯ Unlike its
discussed above, controlling the effect of entropic regularization necessitates β ≥ Ω̃(∆).
Riemannian counterpart, the Euclidean LSI estimate of Proposition 2 scales with exp(β), ultimately
resulting in a large computational gap between the two settings under the same ∆.  ¯ This leaves open
the question of whether ∆   ¯ ≍ deff can be achievable in the Riemannian setting for k-multi-index
models with k = O(1), which is an interesting direction for future exploration.


5      C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we investigated the mean-field Langevin dynamics for learning multi-index models. We
proved that the statistical and computational complexity of this problem can be characterized by an
effective dimension which captures the low-dimensional structure in the input covariance, along with
its correlation with the target directions. In particular, the sample complexity scales almost linearly
with the effective dimension, while without additional assumptions, the computational complexity may
scale exponentially with this quantity. Through this effective dimension, we showed both statistical
and computational adaptivity of the MFLD to low-dimensions when training neural networks,
outperforming rotationally invariant kernels and statistical query learners in terms of statistical
complexity, and fixed-grid convex optimization methods in terms of computational complexity.
Further, we studied conditions under which achieving a polynomial LSI in the inverse temperature,
and subsequently a polynomial-in-d runtime guarantee for the MFLD is possible. Specifically,
we showed that under certain assumptions, which are verified for teacher models with diverse
neurons, constraining the weights to a Riemannian manifold with positive Ricci curvature such as
the hypersphere can lead to such polynomial dependence. In contrast, the same assumptions in the
Euclidean setting result in an LSI constant scaling exponentially with the inverse temperature.
We conclude with some limitations of our work, along with future directions.

    • Further assumptions are required to go beyond the current exponential computational complexity
      of the MFLD. We leave the study of such conditions as an important direction for future work.
    • While we focused on k = O(1), the versatility of the MFLD analysis may allow us to let k grow
      with dimension as in Ghorbani et al. (2019); Martin et al. (2023); Oko et al. (2024), or g to exhibit
      a more complex hierarchical structure (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020; Nichani et al., 2023). Learning
      these functions with the MFLD is an interesting direction for future research.
    • Another important future direction is developing lower bounds for learning multi-index models
      with gradient-based methods, under more realistic assumptions (e.g., non-adversarial noise) than
      the statistical query setup. These lower bounds can highlight when exponential computation is
      inevitable for optimal sample complexity, and present rigorous information-computation tradeoffs.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Lénaı̈c Chizat, Mufan (Bill) Li, Fanghui Liu, and Taiji Suzuki for useful discussions.
MAE was partially supported by the NSERC Grant [2019-06167], the CIFAR AI Chairs program,
and the CIFAR Catalyst grant.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
 necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
 networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2022.
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. Sgd learning on neural networks:
 leap complexity and saddle-to-saddle dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11055, 2023.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Backward feature correction: How deep learning performs deep
  learning. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2001, 2020.
Luigi Ambrosio, Nicola Gigli, and Giuseppe Savaré. Gradient flows: in metric spaces and in the
  space of probability measures. Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
Luca Arnaboldi, Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, Luca Pesce, and Ludovic Stephan. Repetita iu-
  vant: Data repetition allows sgd to learn high-dimensional multi-index functions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.15459, 2024.
Jimmy Ba, Murat A Erdogdu, Taiji Suzuki, Zhichao Wang, Denny Wu, and Greg Yang. High-
  dimensional Asymptotics of Feature Learning: How One Gradient Step Improves the Representa-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01445, 2022.
Jimmy Ba, Murat A Erdogdu, Taiji Suzuki, Zhichao Wang, and Denny Wu. Learning in the presence
  of low-dimensional structure: a spiked random matrix perspective. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 18(1):629–681, 2017.

Dominique Bakry and Michel Émery. Diffusions hypercontractives. In Séminaire de Probabilités
 XIX 1983/84: Proceedings, pp. 177–206. Springer, 1985.
Dominique Bakry, Ivan Gentil, and Michel Ledoux. Analysis and geometry of Markov diffusion
  operators, volume 103. Springer, 2014.
Jean Barbier, Florent Krzakala, Nicolas Macris, Léo Miolane, and Lenka Zdeborová. Optimal errors
  and phase transitions in high-dimensional generalized linear models. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 116(12):5451–5460, 2019.
Andrew R Barron. Universal approximation bounds for superpositions of a sigmoidal function. IEEE
 Transactions on Information theory, 39(3):930–945, 1993.
Gerard Ben Arous, Reza Gheissari, and Aukosh Jagannath. Online stochastic gradient descent on
  non-convex losses from high-dimensional inference. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 22:106–1, 2021.
Raphaël Berthier, Andrea Montanari, and Kangjie Zhou. Learning time-scales in two-layers neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00055, 2023.
Alberto Bietti, Joan Bruna, Clayton Sanford, and Min Jae Song. Learning single-index models with
  shallow neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Alberto Bietti, Joan Bruna, and Loucas Pillaud-Vivien. On learning gaussian multi-index models
  with gradient flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19793, 2023.
Andrea Caponnetto and Ernesto De Vito. Optimal rates for the regularized least-squares algorithm.
 Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 7(3):331–368, 2007.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fan Chen, Zhenjie Ren, and Songbo Wang. Uniform-in-time propagation of chaos for mean field
  langevin dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03050, 2022.
Sitan Chen and Raghu Meka. Learning polynomials in few relevant dimensions. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, 2020.
Zixiang Chen, Yuan Cao, Quanquan Gu, and Tong Zhang. A generalized neural tangent kernel
  analysis for two-layer neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  13363–13373, 2020.
Sinho Chewi, Atsushi Nitanda, and Matthew S Zhang. Uniform-in-n log-sobolev inequality for the
  mean-field langevin dynamics with convex energy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10440, 2024.
Lénaı̈c Chizat. Convergence rates of gradient methods for convex optimization in the space of
   measures. Open Journal of Mathematical Optimization, 3:1–19, 2022a.
Lénaı̈c Chizat. Mean-field langevin dynamics: Exponential convergence and annealing. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2202.01009, 2022b.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the Global Convergence of Gradient Descent for Over-
  parameterized Models using Optimal Transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2018.
Lénaı̈c Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent for Wide Two-layer Neural
   Networks Trained with the Logistic Loss. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2020.
Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On Lazy Training in Differentiable Programming.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Elizabeth Collins-Woodfin, Courtney Paquette, Elliot Paquette, and Inbar Seroussi. Hitting the
  high-dimensional notes: An ode for sgd learning dynamics on glms and multi-index models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.08977, 2023.
Felipe Cucker and Steve Smale. On the mathematical foundations of learning. Bulletin of the
  American mathematical society, 39(1):1–49, 2002.
Alex Damian, Eshaan Nichani, Rong Ge, and Jason D Lee. Smoothing the landscape boosts the
  signal for sgd: Optimal sample complexity for learning single index models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Alex Damian, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, Jason D Lee, and Joan Bruna. The computational complexity
  of learning gaussian single-index models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05529, 2024.
Alexandru Damian, Jason Lee, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Neural Networks can Learn Representa-
  tions with Gradient Descent. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2022.
Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, Bruno Loureiro, Luca Pesce, and Ludovic Stephan. Learning two-layer
  neural networks, one (giant) step at a time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18270, 2023.
Yatin Dandi, Emanuele Troiani, Luca Arnaboldi, Luca Pesce, Lenka Zdeborová, and Florent Krzakala.
  The benefits of reusing batches for gradient descent in two-layer networks: Breaking the curse of
  information and leap exponents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03220, 2024.
Monroe D Donsker and SR Srinivasa Varadhan. Asymptotic evaluation of certain markov process
 expectations for large time. iv. Communications on pure and applied mathematics, 36(2):183–212,
 1983.
Rishabh Dudeja and Daniel Hsu. Learning single-index models in gaussian space. In Conference On
  Learning Theory, pp. 1887–1930. PMLR, 2018.
Weinan E, Chao Ma, and Lei Wu. The barron space and the flow-induced function spaces for neural
 network models. Constructive Approximation, 55(1):369–406, 2022.
B. Ghorbani, Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Limitations of Lazy Training
  of Two-layers Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Behrooz Ghorbani, Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. When Do Neural
  Networks Outperform Kernel Methods? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.
Richard Holley and Daniel W Stroock. Logarithmic sobolev inequalities and stochastic ising models.
  Journal of Statistical Physics, 46, 1986.
Kaitong Hu, Zhenjie Ren, David Siska, and Lukasz Szpruch. Mean-field langevin dynamics and
  energy landscape of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07769, 2019.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. Neural Tangent Kernel: Convergence and
  Generalization in Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Richard Jordan, David Kinderlehrer, and Felix Otto. The variational formulation of the fokker–planck
  equation. SIAM journal on mathematical analysis, 29(1):1–17, 1998.
Nirmit Joshi, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Nathan Srebro. On the complexity of learning sparse
  functions with statistical and gradient queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05622, 2024.
Yunbum Kook, Matthew S Zhang, Sinho Chewi, Murat A Erdogdu, and Mufan (Bill) Li. Sampling
  from the mean-field stationary distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07355, 2024.
Jason D. Lee, Kazusato Oko, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Neural network learns low-dimensional
  polynomials with sgd near the information-theoretic limit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01581, 2024.
Mufan (Bill) Li and Murat A Erdogdu. Riemannian langevin algorithm for solving semidefinite
 programs. Bernoulli, 29(4):3093–3113, 2023.
Fanghui Liu, Leello Dadi, and Volkan Cevher. Learning with norm constrained, over-parameterized,
  two-layer neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(138):1–42, 2024.
Arvind Mahankali, Haochen Zhang, Kefan Dong, Margalit Glasgow, and Tengyu Ma. Beyond ntk
  with vanilla gradient descent: A mean-field analysis of neural networks with polynomial width,
  samples, and time. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Simon Martin, Francis Bach, and Giulio Biroli. On the impact of overparameterization on the training
  of a shallow neural network in high dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03794, 2023.
Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-
  layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):E7665–E7671,
  2018.
Georg Menz and André Schlichting. Poincaré and logarithmic Sobolev inequalities by decomposition
  of the energy landscape. The Annals of Probability, 42(5), 2014.
Marco Mondelli and Andrea Montanari. Fundamental limits of weak recovery with applications to
 phase retrieval. In Conference On Learning Theory, pp. 1445–1450. PMLR, 2018.
Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Sejun Park, Manuela Girotti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Murat A Erdogdu.
  Neural networks efficiently learn low-dimensional representations with SGD. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.
Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Denny Wu, Taiji Suzuki, and Murat A Erdogdu. Gradient-based feature
  learning under structured data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023b.
Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D Lee. Provable guarantees for nonlinear feature learning
  in three-layer neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Atsushi Nitanda. Improved particle approximation error for mean field neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.15767, 2024.
Atsushi Nitanda and Taiji Suzuki. Stochastic particle gradient descent for infinite ensembles. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1712.05438, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Atsushi Nitanda, Denny Wu, and Taiji Suzuki. Convex analysis of the mean field langevin dynamics.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 9741–9757. PMLR, 2022.
Atsushi Nitanda, Kazusato Oko, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Improved statistical and computational
  complexity of the mean-field langevin dynamics under structured data. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Kazusato Oko, Yujin Song, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Learning sum of diverse features: compu-
  tational hardness and efficient gradient-based training for ridge combinations. In Conference on
  Learning Theory. PMLR, 2024.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2007.
Grant M Rotskoff and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Neural networks as Interacting Particle Systems:
  Asymptotic convexity of the Loss Landscape and Universal Scaling of the Approximation Error.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00915, 2018.
Filippo Santambrogio. Optimal transport for applied mathematicians. Birkäuser, NY, 55(58-63):94,
   2015.
Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos. Mean field analysis of neural networks: A law of
  large numbers. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 80(2):725–752, 2020.
Taiji Suzuki, Atsushi Nitanda, and Denny Wu. Uniform-in-time propagation of chaos for the
  mean-field gradient langevin dynamics. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Taiji Suzuki, Denny Wu, and Atsushi Nitanda. Convergence of mean-field langevin dynamics: Time
  and space discretization, stochastic gradient, and variance reduction. In Thirty-seventh Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023a.
Taiji Suzuki, Denny Wu, Kazusato Oko, and Atsushi Nitanda. Feature learning via mean-field
  langevin dynamics: classifying sparse parities and beyond. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023b.
Alain-Sol Sznitman. Topics in propagation of chaos. Lecture notes in mathematics, pp. 165–251,
  1991.
Shokichi Takakura and Taiji Suzuki. Mean-field analysis on two-layer neural networks from a kernel
  perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14917, 2024.
Matus Telgarsky. Feature selection and low test error in shallow low-rotation relu networks. In The
 Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Roman Vershynin. High-Dimensional Probability: An Introduction with Applications in Data Science.
  Cambridge University Press, 2018.
Cédric Villani. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Nuri Mert Vural and Murat A. Erdogdu. Pruning is optimal for learning sparse features in high-
  dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08658, 2024.
Martin J. Wainwright. High-Dimensional Statistics: A Non-Asymptotic Viewpoint. Cambridge
 University Press, 2019.
Guillaume Wang, Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, and Lénaı̈c Chizat. Mean-field langevin dynamics
  for signed measures via a bilevel approach. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Colin Wei, Jason D Lee, Qiang Liu, and Tengyu Ma. Regularization matters: Generalization and
  optimization of neural nets vs their induced kernel. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.



                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOFS OF S ECTION 3
Before presenting the layout of the proofs, we introduce a useful reformulation of the objective
Fβ,λ (µ). Recall that
                                                  λ         1
                              Fβ,λ (µ) = Jˆ0 (µ) + R(µ) + H(µ).
                                                  2         β
                       2
Let γ ∝ exp −λβ 2 ∥w∥     be the centered Gaussian measure on R2d+2 with variance 1/(λβ). Then,
we can rewrite the above as

                                      ˆ        1            d     λβ
                         Fβ,λ (µ) = J0 (µ) + H(µ | γ) +       ln       .
                                               β           2β     2π
As a result, we can define
                                                      1
                                F̃β,λ (µ) := Jˆ0 (µ) + H(µ | γ),                                (A.1)
                                                      β
which is non-negative and equivalent to Fβ up to an additive constant. Notice that

                             µ∗β := arg min Fβ,λ (µ) = arg min F̃β,λ (µ).
                                       µ                   µ

This reformulation, which was also used in Suzuki et al. (2023b), allows us to combine the effect
of weight decay and entropic regularization into a single non-negative term H(µ | γ). Furthermore,
the simple density expression for the Gaussian measure γ allows us to achieve useful estimates for
H(µ | γ). In particular, as we will show below, it is possible to control H(µ∗β | γ) with effective
dimension rather than ambient dimension, which leads to dependence on deff rather than d in our
bounds.
We break down the proof of Theorem 3 into three steps:

      1. In Section A.2 we show that there exists a measure µ∗ ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ) where ŷ(·; µ∗ ) can
         approximate g on the training set with bounds on R(µ∗ ). This construction provides upper
         bounds on Jˆ0 (µ∗β ) and H(µ∗β | γ).
      2. In Section A.3, given the bound on H(µ∗β | γ), we perform a generalization analysis via
         Rademacher complexity tools which leads to a bound on J0 (µ∗β ).
      3. Finally, in Section A.4, we estimate the LSI constant and constants related to smooth-
                                                                       m                           ∗
         ness/discretization along the trajectory, which imply that Fβ,λ  (µm
                                                                            l ) converges to Fβ (µβ ),
                  m
         where Fβ,λ  is an adjusted objective over P(R(2d+2)m ) defined in (A.6). This bound implies
         the convergence of EW ∼µm  l
                                      [J0 (W )] to J0 (µ∗β ), which was bounded in the previous step.

Before laying out these steps, in Section A.1, we will introduce the required concentration results.
In the following, we will use the unregularized population J0 (µ) := E[ℓ(ŷ(x; µ), y)] and empirical
Jˆ0 (µ) = ESn [ℓ(ŷ(x; µ), y)] risks, and also consider the finite-width versions J0 (W ) := J0 (µW )
and Jˆ0 (W ) := Jˆ0 (µW ). Additionally, we will use ϕ∞ (z) := z ∨ 0 to denote the ReLU activation.

A.1   C ONCENTRATION B OUNDS

We begin by specifying the definition of subGaussian and subexponential random variables in our
setting.

Definition 11 (Wainwright (2019)). A random variable x is σ-subGaussian if E eλ(x−E[x]) ≤
   2 2                                                                  2 2
eλ σ /2 for all λ ∈ R, and is (ν, α)-subexponential if E eλ(x−E[x]) ≤ eλ ν /2 for all |λ| ≤ 1/α. If
x is σ-subGaussian, then
                                                            −t2
                                   P(x − E[x] ≥ t) ≤ exp          .                          (A.2)
                                                            2σ 2
If x is (ν, α)-subexponential, then
                                                         1     t2 t
                             P(x − E[x] ≥ t) ≤ exp −       min 2 ,                              (A.3)
                                                         2     ν α

                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Moreover, for centered random variables, let |·|ψ2 and |·|ψ1 denote the subGaussian and subexponen-
tial norm respectively (Vershynin, 2018, Definitions 2.5.6 and 2.7.5). Then x is σ-subGaussian if and
only if σ ≍ |x − E[x]|ψ2 , and is (ν, ν)-subexponential if and only if ν ≍ |x − E[x]|ψ1 .
Next, we bound several quantities that appear in various parts of our proofs.
Lemma 12. Under Assumption 1, for any q > 0 and all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, with probability at least 1 − n−q ,
                                                  p
                          U x(i) ≤ rx 1 + σu 2(q + 1) ln n = r̃x .

                                                                                            (A.4)

Proof. By subGaussianity of ∥U x∥ from Assumption 1 and the subGaussian tail bound, with
probability at least 1 − n−q−1
                                                     p
                            U x(i) ≤ E[∥U x∥] + σu rx 2(q + 1) ln n
                                               p
                                   ≤ rx + σu rx 2(q + 1) ln n.
The statement of lemma follows from a union bound over 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
                                                 h      i
                                                      2
Lemma 13. Under Assumption 1, we have ESn ∥x∥             ≲ c2x with probability at least 1 −
exp(−Ω(n)).

Proof. By the triangle inequality,

       |∥x∥|ψ2 ≤ |∥x∥ − E[∥x∥]|ψ2 + |E[∥x∥]|ψ2 ≲ σn Σ1/2                         + tr(Σ)1/2 ≲ tr(Σ)1/2 .
                                                                            F

Recall c2x := tr(Σ). Furthermore, by (Vershynin, 2018, Lemma 2.7.6) we have
                                               2                2
                                         ∥x∥            = |∥x∥|ψ2 ≲ c2x .
                                                   ψ1
                                                                                 2          2       2
We arrive at a similar result for the centered random variable ∥x∥ − E[∥x∥] = ∥x∥ − c2x . We
conclude the proof by the subexponential tail inequality,
                              h       i
                                    2
                      P ESn ∥x∥ − c2x ≥ tc2x ≤ exp(− min(t, t2 )Ω(n)).



Lemma 14. Under Assumption 1, we have ESn y 2 ≲ 1 with probability at least 1 − n−q .


Proof. By the local Lipschitzness of g, on the event of Lemma 12, we have
                                    2                                   2
                                 |y| ≤ 3g(0)2 + 3O(1/rx2 )∥U x∥ + 3ξ 2 .
By a similar argument to Lemma 13 we have
                 2                 2                                2                   2
         ∥U x∥            = |∥U x∥|ψ2 ≤ 2|∥U x∥ − E[∥U x∥]|ψ2 + 2 E[∥U x∥] ≲ (1 + σu2 )rx2 ,
                     ψ1
       h       i
             2
since E ∥U x∥ = rx2 . As a result, by the subexponential tail bound,
                          h          i    h        i
                                   2             2
                      ESn ∥U x∥ − E ∥U x∥ ≲ (1 + σu2 )rx2 ≲ rx2 ,
                                                                             2
with probability at least 1 − exp(−Ω(n)). Similarly, ξ 2 ψ ≤ |ξ|ψ2 ≲ ς 2 , therefore,
                                                          1
                                        2        2       2
                                   ESn ξ − E ξ ≲ ς ≲ 1,
with probability at least 1 − exp(−Ω(n)). The statement of the lemma follows by a union bound.

                                                                            c2
Lemma 15. Under Assumption 1, for any q > 0 and n ≳ ∥Σ∥
                                                      x
                                                        (1 + σn2 (q + 1) ln(n)) ln(dnq ),
               at least 1 − O(n−q ) we have ESn xx⊤

with
 h probability                                        ≲ ∥Σ∥. Further, if q ≥ 1, then
        ⊤   1/2 i          1/2
E ESn xx            ≲ ∥Σ∥ .


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. First, note that by subGaussianity of ∥x∥, for every fixed i, we have with probability at least
1 − n−q−1 ,
                                                          p
                            x(i) − E[∥x∥] ≤ σn Σ1/2           2(q + 1) ln n.
                                                         F
Since E[∥x∥] ≤ cx , via a union bound, with probability at least 1 − n−q ,
                                                p
                             x(i) ≤ cx + σn cx 2(q + 1) ln n =: c̃x .
                                                c̃x
Define the clipped version of x via xc = x(1 ∧ ∥x∥  ). Then, on the above event,

                                    ESn xx = ESn xc x⊤
                                          ⊤
                                                            c .

Moreover,
                                 h            i        h          i
                                            2                   2
                E xc x⊤                                             = E xx⊤ .

                      c   = sup E  ⟨x c , v⟩    ≤ sup E  ⟨x, v⟩
                              ∥v∥≤1                   ∥v∥≤1

Finally, by the covariance estimation bound of (Wainwright, 2019, Corollary 6.20) for centered
subGaussian random vectors and the condition on n given in the statement of the lemma,
                              ESn xc x⊤    − E xc x⊤      ≲ E xx⊤

                                       c              c

with probability at least 1 − O(n−q ). Consequently, we have ESn xx⊤ ≲ ∥Σ∥ with probability


at least 1 − O(n−q ).
For the second part of the lemma, let E denote the event on which the above ESn xx⊤ ≲ ∥Σ∥

holds. Then,
           h              1/2 i    h                   1/2 i     h                    1/2 i
          E ESn xx⊤             = E 1(E) ESn xx⊤             + E 1(E C ) ESn xx⊤


                                       1/2         1/2                  1/2
                                ≲ ∥Σ∥ + P E C           E ESn xx⊤


                                       1/2
                               ≲ ∥Σ∥   + O(n−q/2 )cx .
                                               h           1/2 i      1/2
Suppose q ≥ 1. Then for n ≳ c2x /∥Σ∥, we have E ESn xx⊤

                                                                 ≲ ∥Σ∥ , which completes
the proof.

We summarize the above results into a single event.
                              c2
Lemma 16. Suppose n ≳ ∥Σ∥  x
                              (1 + σn2 (q + 1) ln(n)) ln(dnq ). There exists an event E such that
P(E) ≥ 1 − O(n−q ), and on E:

      1.  U x(i) ≤ r̃x for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
            h      i
                 2
      2. ESn ∥x∥ ≲ c2x .

          ESn xx⊤ ≲ ∥Σ∥.

      3.
          h          1/2 i      1/2
      4. E ESn xx⊤

                           ≲ ∥Σ∥ .

      5. ESn y 2 ≲ 1.

We recall the variational lower bound for the KL divergence, which will be used at various stages of
different proofs to relate certain expectations to the KL divergence.
Lemma 17 (Donsker-Varadhan Variational Formula for KL Divergence (Donsker & Varadhan, 1983)).
Let µ and ν be probability measures on W. Then,
                                            Z             Z
                                                             f
                           H(µ | ν) = sup       f dµ − ln   e dν .
                                        f :W→R


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, we state the following lemma which will be useful in estimating smoothness constants in the
convergence analysis.
Lemma 18. Suppose (z, x) ∈ R × Rd are drawn from a probability distribution D. Then,
                                            q
                                 ∥ED [zx]∥ ≤ ED [z 2 ]∥ED [xx⊤ ]∥.

Proof. We have
      ∥ED [zx]∥ = sup ⟨v, ED [zx]⟩ = sup ED [z⟨v, x⟩]
                    ∥v∥≤1                  ∥v∥≤1
                                                   r               h         i
                                                                           2
                                       ≤ sup           ED [z 2 ] ED ⟨v, x⟩       (Cauchy-Schwartz)
                                           ∥v∥≤1
                                           r
                                       ≤       ED [z 2 ] sup ⟨v, ED [xx⊤ ]v⟩
                                                        ∥v∥≤1
                                           q
                                       =       ED [z 2 ]∥ED [xx⊤ ]∥.



Notice that the distribution D can be both the empirical as well as the population distribution.

A.2   A PPROXIMATING THE TARGET F UNCTION

We begin by stating the following approximation lemma which is the result of (Bach, 2017, Proposi-
tion 6) adapted to our setting.
Proposition 19. Suppose g : Rk → R is L-Lipschitz and |g(0)| = O(Lr̃x ). On the event of
Lemma 16, there exists a measure µ ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ) with R(µ) ≤ ∆2 /r̃x2 such that
                                                             −2
                                                         ∆   k+1      ∆   ln 4
               max g(U x(i) ) − ŷ(x(i) ; µ) ≤ Ck Lr̃x           ln        +      ,
                  i                                     Lr̃x         Lr̃x      κ
for all ∆ ≥ Ck , where Ck is a constant depending only on k, provided that the hyperparameter ι
                             2k/(k+1)
                       ∆
satisfies ι ≥ Ck Lr̃x Lr̃ x
                                      .

Proof. Throughout the proof, we will use Ck to denote a constant that only depends on k, whose
value may change across instantiations. Let z := U x ∈ Rk and z̃ := (z ⊤ , r̃x )⊤ ∈ Rk+1 . Recall
that on the event of Lemma 12 we have ∥z (i) ∥ ≤ r̃x and |g(z (i) )| ≲ Lr̃x for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Let τ
denote the uniform probability measure on Sk . By (Bach, 2017, Proposition 6), for all ∆ ≥ Ck , there
exists p ∈ L2 (τ ) with ∥p∥L2 (τ ) ≤ ∆ such that
                         Z             1D            E                  ∆   k+1
                                                                              −2        ∆
                   (i)
         max g(z ) −         p(v)ϕ∞         v, z̃ (i) dτ (v) ≤ Ck Lr̃x            ln        .
           i              Sk            r̃x                            Lr̃ x           Lr̃x

In fact, we have a stronger guarantee on p. Specifically, p(v) is given by
                                              X
                                      p(v) =      λ−1   j
                                                    j r hj (v),
                                                j≥1

where r ∈ (0, 1), λj , hj : Sk → R are introduced by (Bach, 2017, Appendix D). In particular,
                                                   r̃ v
                                                     x 1:k
                                       h(v) = g            v k+1 ,
                                                    v k+1
                                                           P
with the spheircal harmonics decomposition h(v) =             j≥0 hj (v). It is shown in (Bach, 2017,
                                (k+1)/2
Appendix D.2) that λj ≤ Ck j            , and one can prove through spherical harmonics calculations
(omitted here for brevity) that |hj (v)| ≤ Ck supv∈Sk h(v)j (k−1)/2 ≤ Ck Lr̃x j (k−1)/2 . As a result,
                   X                       X                            X             Ck Lr̃x
         |p(v)| ≤       λ−1   j
                          j r |hj (v)| ≤      λ−1    j
                                                j r |hj (v)| ≤ Ck Lr̃x      j k rj ≤          .
                                                                                     (1 − r)k
                   j≥0                  j≥1                                j≥1



                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                          2/(k+1)
Using 1 − r = Ck Lr̃x /∆          as in (Bach, 2017, Appendix D.4) yields
                                                          ∆  2k/(k+1)
                                     |p(v)| ≤ Ck Lr̃x                    .
                                                           Lr̃x

Define p+ (v) := p(v) ∨ 0 and p− (v) := (−p(v)) ∨ 0. Then, by positive 1-homogeneity of ReLU,
Z            1                     Z               1                    Z               1
    p(v)ϕ∞        ⟨v, z̃⟩ dτ (v) =     p+ (v)ϕ∞        ⟨v, z̃⟩ dτ (v) −      p− (v)ϕ∞        ⟨v, z̃⟩ dτ (v)
 Sk           r̃x                    k             r̃x                     k             r̃x
                                   ZS        p (v)                    Z S
                                              +
                                                                                p− (v) D          E
                                 =     ϕ∞           ⟨v, z̃⟩ dτ (v) −      ϕ∞             v, z̃ (i) dτ (v)
                                     k        r̃x                      Sk         r̃x
                                   ZS                            Z
                                 =       ϕ∞ (⟨v, z̃⟩)dµ̃1 (v) −         ϕ∞ (⟨v, z̃⟩)dµ̃2 (v)
                                    Rk+1                           Rk+1
                                   Z                               Z
                                 =       ϕ∞ (⟨w, x̃⟩)dµ1 (w) −            ϕ∞ (⟨w, x̃⟩)dµ2 (w),
                                        Rd+1                             Rd+1

where µ̃1 := (·)pr̃+x (·) #τ and µ̃2 := (·)pr̃−x (·) #τ are the corresponding pushforward measures, µ1 =
TU #µ̃1 and µ2 = TU #µ̃2 , where TU (v) = (U ⊤ v k , vk+1 )⊤ ∈ Rd+1 for v = (v ⊤                   k , vk+1 )
                                                                                                             ⊤
                                                                                                               ∈
                                                                                                   ⊤
R k+1
      . In other words, w ∼ µ1 is generated by sampling v ∼ µ̃1 and letting w = (U v k , vk+1 )⊤ ,
with a similar procedure for w ∼ µ2 . Furthermore,
            Z                         Z                           Z                       Z
                          2                           2                        2                      2
  R(µ) =            ∥w∥ dµ1 (w) +               ∥w∥ dµ2 (w) =             ∥v∥ dµ̃1 (v) +          ∥v∥ dµ̃2 (v)
              R d+1                    R d+1                        R k+1                   R k+1

                                                                        p(v)2           ∆2
                                                                  Z
                                                                =              dτ (v) ≤ 2 .
                                                                    Sk    r̃x2          r̃x
The last step is to replace ϕ∞ with ϕκ,ι . Note that for all i, and almost surely over w ∼ µ1 , we
       D        E                              2k/(k+1)
have w, x̃(i) ≤ p+ (v) ≤ Ck Lr̃x Lr̃      ∆
                                            x
                                                        , with a similar bound holding for w ∼ µ2 . As
                                          2k/(k+1)                   D          E           D           E
                                      ∆                                     (i)                     (i)
a result, by choosing ι ≥ Ck Lr̃x Lr̃  x
                                                   , we have  ϕ κ,ι    w, x̃        =  ϕ κ    w, x̃        for
all i and almost surely over w ∼ µ1 and w ∼ µ2 . By the triangle inequality, we have
                                      Z         D         E           D          E
         g(U x(i) ) − ŷ(x(i) ; µ) ≤      ϕκ,ι w, x̃(i) − ϕ∞ w, x̃(i)                  dµ1 (w)
                                         Z         D         E
                                                                                  (i)
                                     +        ϕκ,ι w, x̃(i) − ϕ∞ ⟨w, x̃⟩                 dµ2 (w)
                                                     Z       D          E
                                     + g(U x(i) ) − ϕ∞ w, x̃(i) (dµ1 (w) − dµ2 (w))

                                       2 ln 2            ∆   k+1
                                                             −2      ∆
                                   ≤          + Ck Lr̃x          ln      ,
                                         κ              Lr̃x        Lr̃x
which completes the proof.

Next, we control the effect of entropic regularization on the minimum of F̃β,λ via the following
lemma.
Lemma 20. Suppose ρ is Cρ Lipschitz. For every µ∗ ∈ P(R2d+2 ), we have
                                                            √
                                          ˆ   ∗   λ   ∗    2 2Cρ
                 min         F̃β,λ (µ) ≤ J0 (µ ) + R(µ ) + √       ESn [∥x̃∥].
             µ∈P ac (R2d+2 )                      2          πλβ

Proof. We will smooth µ∗ by convoliving it with γ, i.e. we consider µ = µ∗ ∗ γ. Let u ∼ γ
independent of w ∼ µ∗ and denote u = (u⊤    ⊤ ⊤
                                       1 , u2 ) with u1 , u2 ∈ R
                                                                 d+1
                                                                     . We first bound Jˆ0 (µ∗ ∗ γ).


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using the Lipschitzness of the loss and of ϕκ,ι , we have
                                  Z                                          Z
 Jˆ0 (µ∗ ∗ γ) − Jˆ0 (µ∗ ) =ESn ℓ      Ψ(x; w)d(µ∗ ∗ γ)(w) − y − ℓ                Ψ(x; w)dµ∗ (w) − y
                                   Z                               Z
                          ≤Cρ ESn      Ψ(x; w)d(µ∗ ∗ γ)(w) − Ψ(x; w)dµ∗ (w)
                                   Z
                          =Cρ ESn      (Eu [Ψ(x; w + u)] − Ψ(x; w))dµ∗ (w)
                                   Z
                          ≤Cρ ESn     Eu [|ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 1 + u1 , x̃⟩) − ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩)|]dµ∗ (w)
                                      Z
                            + Cρ ESn     Eu [|ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 2 + u2 , x̃⟩) − ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 2 , x̃⟩)|]dµ∗ (w)
                                   Z
                          ≤Cρ ESn     {Eu1 [|⟨u1 , x̃⟩|] + Eu2 [|⟨u2 , x̃⟩|]}dµ∗ (ω)
                             √
                            2 2Cρ
                          = √      ESn [∥x̃∥].
                              πλβ
Next, we bound the KL divergence via its convexity in the first argument,
                          Z                           Z
            ∗
       H(µ ∗ γ | γ) = H      γ(· − w )dµ (w ) | γ ≤ H(γ(· − w′ ) | γ(·))dµ∗ (w′ ).
                                       ′   ∗   ′


Furthermore,
                                                                                               2
                                       λβ                                 λβ∥w′ ∥
                                   Z
                    ′                                2     2
        H(γ(· − w ) | γ(·)) =             − ∥w − w′ ∥ + ∥w∥ γ(dw − w′ ) =         .
                                        2                                    2
Consequently,
                                                             λβ
                                        H(µ∗ ∗ γ | γ) ≤         R(µ∗ ),
                                                              2
which finishes the proof.

Combining above results, we have the following statement.
Corollary 21. Suppose the event of Lemma 16 holds, ρ is Cρ Lipschitz, and λ ≲ 1. Then,
                                                    −2
                                                                    Cρ λ∆2 Cρ (cx + r̃x )

                                          r̃x rx ∆ k+1    rx ∆
   min        F̃β,λ (µ) − ESn [ρ(ξ)] ≲ Cρ              ln        +      + 2 +         √    ,
   ac
µ∈P (R 2d+2 )                             rx r̃x           r̃x       κ      r̃x         λβ
for all ∆ ≥ Ck , provided that ι ≥ Ck ∆2k/(k+1) (rx /r̃x )(k−1)/(k+1) .

Proof. We will use Lemma 20 with µ∗ ∈ P(R2d+2 ) constructed in Proposition 19. Then, for all
∆ ≥ Ck ,
             Jˆ0 (µ∗ ) = ES [ρ(ŷ(x; µ∗ ) − y)]
                             n

                        = ESn [ρ(ŷ(x; µ∗ ) − g(U x) − ξ)]
                        ≤ ESn [ρ(ξ)] + Cρ ESn [|ŷ(x; µ∗ ) − g(U x)|]
                                                             2
                                                         − k+1
                                              r̃x rx ∆             rx ∆      Cρ ln 4
                        ≤ ESn [ρ(ξ)] + Ck Cρ                   ln          +         .
                                              rx r̃x                 r̃x       κ
Furthermore, Proposition 19 guarantees R(µ∗ ) ≤ ∆2 /r̃x2 . Combining these bounds with Lemma 20
completes the proof.


A.3   G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS

Let
                        µ∗β :=     arg min         Fβ,λ (µ) =     arg min         F̃β,λ (µ).
                                 µ∈P2ac (R2d+2 )                µ∈P2ac (R2d+2 )



                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Corollary 21 gives an upper bound on Jˆ0 (µ∗ ). In this section, we transfer the bound to J0 (µ∗ ) via a
Rademacher complexity analysis. Since Corollary 21 implies a bound on H(µ | γ), we will control
the following quantity,
                                       sup       J0 (µ) − Jˆ0 (µ).
                                    µ:H(µ | γ)≤∆2

To be able to provide guarantees with high probability, we will prove uniform convergence over a
truncated version of the risk instead, given by
                                        sup        J0κ (µ) − Jˆ0κ (µ),
                                   µ:H(µ | γ)≤∆2

where
                J0κ (µ) := E[ρκ (ŷ(x; µ) − y)],     Jˆ0κ (µ) := ESn [ρκ (ŷ(x; µ) − y)],
and ρκ (·) := ρ(·) ∧ κ. We will later specify the choice of κ.
We are now ready to present the Rademacher complexity bound.
Lemma 22 ((Chen et al., 2020, Lemma 5.5), (Suzuki et      √al., 2023b, Lemma 1)). Suppose ρ is either a
Cρ -Lipschitz loss or the squared error loss. Let ϑ := 2κ for the squared error loss and Cρ for the
Lipschitz loss. Recall γ = N (0, Iλβd+1
                                         ). Then,
                     "                                               #      r
                                                      κ         ˆ κ            2M
                   E               sup               J0 (µ) − J0 (µ) ≤ 4ϑι         .
                       {µ∈P ac (R2d+2 ):H(µ | γ)≤M }                             n

                                                                        n
                                                                √ (ξi )i=1 denote i.i.d. Rademacher
Proof. We repeat the proof here for the reader’s convenience. Let
random variables. Notice that for the squared error loss, ρκ is 2κ Lipschitz. Then, by a standard
symmetrization argument and Talagrand’s contraction lemma, we have
         "                               #       "                 n
                                                                                          #
                                                                1
                        J0 (µ) − Jˆ0 (µ) ≤ 2 E
                                                                  X
                                                                                 (i)
        E      sup                                     sup             ξi ρ(ŷ(x ; µ) − y)
           µ:H(µ | γ)≤M                            µ:H(µ | γ)≤M n i=1
                                                   "                 n
                                                                                      #
                                                                  1X            (i)
                                           ≤ 2ϑ E        sup             ξi ŷ(x ; µ)
                                                    µ:H(µ | γ)≤M n i=1

Next, we proceed to bound the Rademacher complexity. Specifically,
   "                 n
                                           #      "                      n
                                                                                             #
                  1X                                 1                αX
                          Z                                         Z
                                (i)                                                (i)
Eξ       sup            ξi Ψ(x ; w)dµ(w) = Eξ              sup              ξi Ψ(x ; w)dµ(w)
     µ:H(µ | γ)≤M n i=1                              α µ:H(µ | γ)≤M   n i=1
                                                            " Z            n
                                                                                         !      #
                                               M       1               αX            (i)
                                             ≤      + Eξ ln exp               ξi Ψ(x ; w) dγ(w)
                                                α      α               n i=1
                                                                  "        n
                                                                                         !#
                                               M       1               αX
                                                           Z
                                                                                     (i)
                                             ≤      + ln Eξ exp               ξi Ψ(x ; w) dγ(w),
                                                α      α               n i=1

where the first inequality follows from the KL divergence lower bound of Lemma 17. Additionally,
by sub-Gaussianity and independence of (ξi ) and Lipschitzness of ϕκ,ι , we have
                    "           n
                                               !#                n
                                                                                 !
                             αX          (i)                α2 X         (i)   2
                  Eξ exp           ξi Ψ(x ; w)     ≤ exp           Ψ(x ; w)
                             n i=1                         2n2 i=1
                                                           2 2
                                                           2α ι
                                                   ≤ exp
                                                             n
Plugging this back into our original bound, we obtain
                            "                 n
                                                            #
                                           1X                  M   2αι2
                         Eξ       sup            ξi ŷ(x; µ) ≤   +      .
                              µ:H(µ | γ)≤M n i=1               α    n


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



               q
                   Mn
Choosing α =       2ι2 , we obtain
                              "               n
                                                            #     r
                                           1X                       2M
                           Eξ     sup            ξi ŷ(x; µ) ≤ 2ι      ,
                              µ:H(µ | γ)≤M n i=1
                                                                     n
which completes the proof.

We can convert the above bound in expectation to a high-probability bound as follows.
Lemma 23. In the setting of Lemma 22, for any δ > 0, we have
                                                              r        r
                                                                M         ln(1/δ)
                        sup             J0 (µ) − Jˆ0 (µ) ≲ ϑι
                                         κ         κ
                                                                    +κ            ,
                  ac
              µ∈P (R  2d+2 ):H(µ | γ)≤M                         n             n
with probability at least 1 − δ.

Proof. As the truncated loss is bounded by κ, the result is an immediate consequence of McDiarmid’s
inequality.

Next, we control the effect of truncation by bounding J0 (µ) via J0κ (µ), which is achieved by the
following lemma.
Lemma 24. Suppose H(µ | γ) ≤ M . Then,
                                                  1/2    −Ω(κ 2 )
                    J0 (µ) − J0κ (µ) ≲ ι + E y 2         e        + n−q−1 .

Proof. Notice that since the loss is Cρ -Lipschitz and ρ(0) = 0, we have |ρ(ŷ − y)| ≤ Cρ |ŷ − y|.
Recall that we use L for the Lipschitz constant of g, and |ŷ(x; µ)| ≤ 2ι. Then,
           J0 (µ) − J0κ (µ) ≤ E[1(ρ(ŷ(x; µ) − y) ≥ κ)ρ(ŷ(x; µ) − y)]
                                                         1/2                    1/2
                            ≤ Cρ P(ρ(ŷ(x; µ) − y) ≥ κ) E (ŷ(x; µ) − y)2
                                                                        1/2        1/2
                                                     1/2
                            ≤ Cρ P(2ι + |y| ≥ κ/Cρ )       E ŷ(x; µ)2      + E y2       .

Additionally, by local Lipschitzness of g,

      P(2ι + |y| ≥ κ/Cρ ) ≤ P {2ι + |y| ≥ κ/Cρ } ∩ {∥U x∥ ≤ r̃x } ∪ ∥U x∥ ≥ r̃x
                             ≤ P(2ι + |g(0)| + L∥U x∥ + |ξ| ≥ κ/Cρ ) + P(∥U x∥ ≥ r̃x )
                             ≤ P(2ι + |g(0)| + L∥U x∥ + |ξ| ≥ κ/Cρ ) + n−(q+1) .
Furthermore, Let κ/Cρ ≥ 4ι + 2|g(0)| + 2Lrx + 2 E[|ξ|], and recall that L = O(1/rx ). Then, by a
subGaussian concentration bound, we have
                                                                        2

                                                                                 κ
                                                                1/2        −Ω    2 C2
                                                                                σu
                     P(2ι + |g(0)| + L∥U x∥ + ξ ≥ κ/Cρ )              ≤e            ρ   .
We conclude the proof by remarking that by our assumptions, σu and Cρ are absolute constants.

Finally, we combine the steps above to give an upper bound on J0 (µ∗β ), stated in the following
lemma.
                                                       2   2                                 1
                                              deff +r̃x  /rx
Lemma 25. Suppose λ = λ̃rx2 and β =                ε2 λ̃
                                                             for ε, λ̃ ≲ 1. Let ε̃ := Õ(λ̃ k+2 ) + ε + κ−1 .
                       2   2 2               k            2(k+1)
              (deff +r̃x /rx )ι
Suppose n ≳          λ̃ε4
                                and ι ≳ λ̃− k+2 (r̃x /rx ) k+2 . Then,

                J0 (µ∗β ) − E[ρ(ξ)] ≲ ε̃,    and β −1 H(µ∗β | γ) ≲ E[ρ(ξ)] + ε̃ ≲ 1.

Proof. By Corollary 21 and a standard concentration bound on ESn [ρ(ξ)] with sufficiently large n to
induce neglibile error in comaprison with the rest of the terms in the corollary, we have
                                                       −2
                                                                          λ∆2

    ˆ   ∗      −1       ∗                 r̃x rx ∆ k+1         rx ∆                (cx + r̃x )  1
   J0 (µβ ) + β H(µβ | γ) − E[ρ(ξ)] ≲                       ln         + 2 + √                 + .
                                          rx r̃x                 r̃x       r̃x         λβ       κ

                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By choosing
                                             r2   21 · k+1   r̃   21 · 3k+5
                                               x       k+2       x      k+2
                                     ∆=                                           ,
                                               λ               rx
and assuming cx ≳ r̃x ,
                                                        1
                                                       k+2             k+1
                                               λ               r̃x     k+2
                                                                                      r̃x rx         cx   1
             β −1 H(µ∗β | γ) ≲ E[ρ(ξ)] +                                     ln                    +√    + .
                                               rx2             rx                       λ             λβ  κ
Note that the above choice on ∆ translates to a lower bound on ι in Corollary 21, given by
                                                      k    r̃x   2(k+1)
                                         ι ≳ λ̃− k+2              k+2
                                                                        .
                                                           rx
                                                                                         c2
By choosing λ = λ̃rx2 and using the fact that r̃x ≤ Õ(rx ) and β = r2 λ̃ε
                                                                        x
                                                                          2
                                                                            , we have the simpification,
                                                                                        x

                                                                       1                 1
                          β −1 H(µ∗β | γ) ≲ E[ρ(ξ)] + Õ(λ̃           k+2   )+ε+           ≲ 1,
                                                                                         κ
and,
                                                           1           1
                             Jˆ0 (µ∗β ) − E[ρ(ξ)] ≲ Õ(λ̃ k+2 ) + ε + =: ε̃.
                                                                       κ
Note that Jˆ0κ (µ∗β ) ≤ Jˆ0 (µ∗β ). Using the generalization bound of Lemma 23 with the choice of
δ = n−q for some constant q > 0, we have with probability 1 − O(n−q ),
                                                       r          r
                                κ    ∗      ˆ κ  ∗         β         ln n
                             J0 (µβ ) − J0 (µβ ) ≲ ι          +κ
                                                           n          n
                                                       r              r
                                                            deff         ln n
                                                   ≲ι             +κ          .             (A.5)
                                                           nλ̃ε 2         n
Furthermore, by Lemma 24 we have
                                                                              2
                                 J0 (µ∗β ) − J0κ (µ∗β ) ≲ ιe−Ω(κ ) .
                                                         √
Combining the above with (A.5) and choosing on κ ≍ ln n, we have
                                                                 s
                                                                     ln2 n
                                                       r
                                                          deff
                        J0 (µ∗β ) − E[ρ(ξ)] ≲ ε̃ + ι           +           ,
                                                         nλ̃ε2         n
which holds with probability at least 1 − O(n−q ) over the randomness of Sn .


A.4    C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS

So far, our analysis has only proved properties of µ∗β . In this section, we relate these properties to µml
via propagation of chaos. In particular, Suzuki et al. (2023a) showed that for W ∼ µm         l , ŷ(x; µm
                                                                                                         l )
converges to ŷ(x; µ∗β ) in a suitable sense characterized shortly, as long as the objective over µm      l
converges to Fβ,λ (µ∗β ). Notice that µmℓ  is a measure   on  P(R  (2d+2)m
                                                                            ) instead of P(R 2d+2
                                                                                                    ). Thus,
we need to adjust the definition of objective by defining the following

                                                           λ               1
                       m
                     Fβ,λ (µm ) := EW ∼µm Jˆ0 (W ) + R(W ) +                   H(µm ).                 (A.6)
                                                           2              mβ
We can use the same reformulation introduced earlier in (A.1) to define
                                           h         i     1
                       m
                     F̃β,λ (µm ) := EW ∼µm Jˆ0 (W ) +         H(µm | γ ⊗m ),                                   (A.7)
                                                          mβ
                          m
which is equivalent to Fβ,λ   up to an additive constant. With these definitions, we can now control
               m             ∗
EW ∼µm l
         [J0 (µl )] via J0 (µβ ). The following lemma is based on (Suzuki et al., 2023a, Lemma 4),
with a more careful analysis to obtain sharper constants.


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             1/2
Lemma 26. Let r̄x := ∥Σ∥         ∨ r̃x , and suppose ρ is Cρ ≲ 1-Lipschitz. Then,
                                                        s
                                                                           ∗ ⊗m + ι2

                                                ∗
                                                          r̄x2 W22 µm l , µβ
                     EW ∼µm   [J0 (W )] − J0 (µβ ) ≲                                    .          (A.8)
                            l
                                                                        m
In particular, combined with (Suzuki et al., 2023a, Lemma 3), the above implies
                                               r
                                         ∗       r̄x2 βCLSI m m                             ι2
            EW ∼µm    [J0 (W )] − J0 (µβ ) ≲                   F̃β,λ (µl ) − F̃β,λ (µ∗β ) + .      (A.9)
                   l
                                                       m                                    m
Proof. Notice that
                [J0 (W )] = EW Ex ρ(ŷ(x; µW ) − ŷ(x; µ∗β ) + ŷ(x; µ∗β ) − y)

         EW ∼µm
              l

                          ≤ Ex ρ(ŷ(x; µ∗β ) − y) + Cρ EW Ex ŷ(x; µW ) − ŷ(x; µ∗β )

                                          r h       h                          ii
                                  ∗
                          ≤ J0 (µβ ) + Cρ Ex EW (ŷ(x; µW ) − ŷ(x; µ∗β ))2
                                            ′       ′         ′      ∗ ⊗m
Suppose W = (w1 , . . . , wm ) ∼ µml and W = (w 1 , . . . , w m ) ∼ µβ    . Let Γ denote the optimal
                                 ′                    ′
W2 coupling between W and W , and assume W , W ∼ Γ. Then,
EW (ŷ(x; µW ) − ŷ(x; µ∗ ))2 = EW ,W ′ (ŷ(x; µW ) − ŷ(x; µW ′ ) + ŷ(x; µW ′ ) − ŷ(x; µ∗β ))2


                                ≤ 2 EW ,W ′ (ŷ(x; µW ) − ŷ(x; µW ′ )2 + 2 EW ′ (ŷ(x; µW ′ ) − ŷ(x; µ∗β ))2


Moreover, by Jensen’s inequality,
                                         m
                                      1 X
EW ,W ′ (ŷ(x; µW ) − ŷ(x; µW ′ )2 ≤       EW ,W ′ (Ψ(x; wi ) − Ψ(x; w′i ))2

                                      m i=1
                                              m                                    m
                                           2 X          h
                                                                            2
                                                                              i 2 X          h
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                   i
                                       ≤         EW ,W ′ ⟨ω i1 − ω ′i1 , x̃⟩ +        EW ,W ′ ⟨ω i2 − ω ′i2 , x̃⟩ .
                                           m i=1                                m i=1
Hence,

                                                      2 Σ̃        h
                                                                           2
                                                                             i
            Ex EW ,W ′ (ŷ(x; µW ) − ŷ(x; µW ′ ))2 ≤      EW ,W ′ W − W ′ F

                                                        m
                                                               2 Σ̃
                                                                                ∗ ⊗m
                                                                      W22 µm

                                                           =               t , µβ      .
                                                             m
For the second term, notice that ŷ(x; µ∗β ) = EW ′ [ŷ(x; µW ′ )] = Ew′i [Ψ(x; w′i )] for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m.
By independence of (w′i ) and Jensen’s inequality, we have
                                              1
       EW ′ (ŷ(x; µW ′ ) − ŷ(x; µ∗β ))2 =     Ew′ (Ψ(x; w′ ) − ŷ(x; µ∗ ))2

                                              m      " Z                                        2 #
                                              1                     ′                   ∗
                                           =    Ew′        (Ψ(x; w ) − Ψ(x; w))dµβ (w)
                                              m
                                               ι2
                                           ≲      .
                                               m


                                                                              m                  ∗
Thus, the rest of this section deals with establishing convergence rates for Fβ,λ (µm
                                                                                    l ) → Fβ,λ (µβ ).
To use the one-step decay of optimality gap provided by Suzuki et al. (2023a), we depend on the
following assumption.
Assumption 5. Suppose there exist constants L, CL , and R, such that
      1. (Lipschitz gradients of the Gibbs potential) For all µ, µ′ ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ) and w, w′ ∈
         R2d+2 ,
                       ∇Jˆ0′ [µ](w) − ∇Jˆ0′ [µ′ ](w′ ) ≤ L(W2 (µ, µ′ ) + ∥w − w′ ∥),   (A.10)
          where W2 is the 2-Wasserstein distance.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2. (Bounded gradients of the Gibbs potential) For all µ ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ) and w ∈ R2d+2 , we
         have ∇Jˆ′ [µ](w) ≤ R.
                    0


      3. (Bounded second variation) Denote the second variation of Jˆ0 (µ) at w via Jˆ0′′ [µ](w, w′ ),
         which is defined as the first variation of µ 7→ Jˆ0′ [µ](w) (see (2.6) for the definition of first
         variation). Then, for all µ ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ) and w, w′ ∈ R2d+2 ,
                                                                         2
                                Jˆ0′′ [µ](w, w′ ) ≤ L(1 + CL (∥w∥ + ∥w′ ∥ )).
                                                                 2
                                                                                                    (A.11)


We can now state the one-step bound.
                                                        ˆ
                                                     i J0 satisfies Assumption 5. Assume λ ≲ 1,
Theorem 27. (Suzuki et al., 2023a, Theorem 2)h Suppose
                                                 i 2
β, L, R ≳ 1, and the initialization satisfies E w0     ≲ R2 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Then, for all
η ≤ 1/4,

                           ∗               −η   m m
      m
          (µm                                   Fβ,λ (µl ) − Fβ,λ (µ∗β ) + ηAm,β,λ,η ,

     Fβ,λ   l+1 ) − Fβ,λ (µβ ) ≤ exp                                                                (A.12)
                                         2βCLSI
where
                                                                                               !
                       R2   2 η
                        2           L   1     R2   d   CL   L
   Am,β,λ,η := C L d +     η +    +         + 2 +         +                                         (A.13)
                       λ       β    mβ CLSI   λ   λβ CLSI   β

for some absolute constant C > 0.

We now focus on bounding the constants that appear in Assumption 5.
Lemma 28 (Lipschitzness of ∇Jˆ0′ ). Suppose ρ is either the squared error loss or is Cρ Lipschitz
and has a Cρ′ Lipschitz derivative. Assume κ ≳ 1. Notice that for the squared error loss, Cρ′ = 1.
Then, for all µ, ν ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ) and w, w′ ∈ R2d+2 , we have
                                              h     i                      h     i
   ∇Jˆ0′ [µ](w) − ∇Jˆ0′ [µ′ ](w′ ) ≲ κCρ ESn x̃x̃⊤ ∥w − w′ ∥ + Cρ′ ESn x̃x̃⊤ W2 (µ, µ′ ),

for the Lipschitz loss, and
                                    q                                   h     i
 ∇Jˆ0′ [µ](w) − ∇Jˆ0′ [µ′ ](w′ ) ≲ κ Jˆ0 (µ) ESn x̃⊗4 2→2 ∥w − w′ ∥+ ESn x̃x̃⊤ W2 (µ, µ′ ),


                                                              h             i
                                                                      2
for the squared error loss, where ESn x̃⊗4 2→2 := sup∥v∥≤1 ESn ⟨x̃, v⟩ x̃x̃⊤ .



Proof. Recall that Jˆ0′ [µ](w) = ESn [ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ) − y)Ψ(x; w)], where Ψ(x; w) = ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩) −
ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 2 , x̃⟩). We start with the triangle inequality,

 ∇Jˆ0′ [µ](w) − ∇Jˆ0′ [µ′ ](w′ ) ≤ ∇Jˆ0′ [µ](w) − ∇Jˆ0′ [µ](w′ ) + ∇Jˆ0′ [µ](w′ ) − ∇Jˆ0′ [µ′ ](w′ ) .

We now focus on the first term. For the Lipschitz loss,

 ∇ω1 Jˆ0′ [µ](w) − ∇ω1 Jˆ0′ [µ](w′ ) = ESn ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ) − y)(ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩) − ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω ′1 , x̃⟩)x̃


                                                                                           1/2    h       i 1/2
                                     ≤ Cρ ESn (ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩) − ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω ′1 , x̃⟩))2      ESn x̃x̃⊤


                                                                  2 1/2
                                                h                  i            h       i 1/2
                                     ≤ Cρ κESn ⟨ω 1 − ω ′1 , x̃⟩          ESn x̃x̃⊤
                                                  h     i
                                     ≤ Cρ κ ESn x̃x̃⊤ ∥ω 1 − ω ′1 ∥,


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the first inequality follows from Lemma 18, and the second inequality follows from the fact
that |ϕ′′κ | ≤ κ. For the squared error loss, we have
  ∇ω1 Jˆ0′ [µ](w) − ∇ω1 Jˆ0′ [µ](w′ ) = ESn (ŷ(x; µ) − y)(ϕ′κ,ι (⟨w, x̃⟩) − ϕ′κ,ι (⟨w′ , x̃⟩)x̃


                                        = sup ESn (ŷ(x; µ) − y)(ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩) − ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω ′1 , x̃⟩)⟨v, x̃⟩

                                           ∥v∥≤1
                                                    r                            h                                                     i
                                                                                                                                     2
                                        ≤ sup           ESn [(ŷ(x; µ) − y)2 ]ESn (ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩) − ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω ′1 , x̃⟩))2 ⟨v, x̃⟩
                                           ∥v∥≤1
                                             s                    D      h                       i E
                                        ≤ κ Jˆ0 (µ) sup
                                                                                           2
                                                                   v, ESn ⟨ω 1 − ω ′1 , x̃⟩ x̃x̃⊤ v
                                                          ∥v∥≤1
                                             r         h                        i
                                        ≤ κ Jˆ0 (µ) ESn ⟨ω 1 − ω ′1 , x̃⟩ x̃x̃⊤
                                                                         2

                                           q
                                        ≤ κ Jˆ0 (µ) ESn x̃⊗4 2→2 ∥ω 1 − ω ′1 ∥.


Similar bounds apply to the gradient with respect to ω 2 , which completes the bound on the first term
of the triangle inequality.
We now consider the second term of the triangle inequality. Here we consider Lipschitz losses and
the squared error loss at the same time since both have a Lipschitz derivative.
  ∇ω1 Jˆ0′ [µ](ω ′ ) − ∇ω1 Jˆ0′ [µ](ω ′ ) = ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ) − y) − ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ′ ) − y) ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω ′1 , x̃⟩)x̃


                                                 h                                      2 i1/2           h    i 1/2
                                          ≤ ESn ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ) − y) − ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ′ ) − y)             ESn x̃x̃⊤
                                                                              1/2    h       i 1/2
                                          ≤ Cρ′ ESn (ŷ(x; µ) − ŷ(x; µ′ ))2      ESn x̃x̃⊤

                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                             (A.14)
                                                                            2d+2       2d+2
where the first inequality follows from Lemma 18. Let γ ∈ P2 (R                  ×R       ) be a coupling of µ
and µ′ (i.e. the first and second marginals of γ are equal to µ and µ′ respectively). Recall that,
                        Z
ŷ(x; µ)− ŷ(x; µ′ ) =      ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩)−ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 2 , x̃⟩)−ϕκ,ι (⟨ω ′1 , x̃⟩)+ϕκ,ι (⟨ω ′2 , x̃⟩ dγ(w, w′ ).


                                                                  1/2
Therefore by the triangle inequality for the L2 norm ESn (·)2          and Jensen’s inequality,
                                         Z                                              1/2
                              1/2                                                   2
ESn (ŷ(x; µ) − ŷ(x; µ′ ))2                 ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩) − ϕκ,ι (⟨ω ′1 , x̃⟩) dγ

                                  ≤ESn
                                                Z                                                 1/2
                                                                                            2
                                                     ϕκ,ι (⟨ω 2 , x̃⟩) − ϕκ,ι (⟨ω ′2 , x̃⟩) dγ

                                     + ESn
                                     Z                               Z
                                                           2 1/2                              2 1/2
                                           h                i                 h                i
                                                   ′
                                    ≤ ESn ⟨ω 1 − ω 1 , x̃⟩       dγ + ESn ⟨ω 2 − ω ′2 , x̃⟩         dγ
                                             h   i 1/2   Z
                                     ≤ ESn x̃x̃⊤            (∥ω 1 − ω ′1 ∥ + ∥ω 2 − ω ′2 ∥)dγ(w1 , w2 )
                                       s
                                               h     i Z
                                                                        2
                                     ≤ 2 ESn x̃x̃⊤           ∥w − w′ ∥ dγ(w, w′ ).

By choosing γ whose transport cost attains (or converges to) the optimal cost, we have
                                                    r         h     i
                                              1/2
                ESn (ŷ(x; µ) − ŷ(x; µ′ ))2      ≤ 2 ESn x̃x̃⊤ W2 (µ, µ′ ).


Plugging the above result into (A.14), we have
                                                               √           h     i
                 ∇ω1 Jˆ0′ [µ](ω ′ ) − ∇ω2 Jˆ0′ [µ′ ](ω ′ ) ≤       2Cρ′ ESn x̃x̃⊤ W2 (µ, µ′ ).
Notice that the same bound holds for gradients with respect to ω 2 . Thus the bound of the second
term in the triangle inequality and the proof is complete.


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 29 (Boundedness of ∇Jˆ0′ ). In the same setting as Lemma 28, for all µ ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ) and
w ∈ R2d+2 , we have
                                           √           h    i 1/2
                         ∇Jˆ0′ [µ](w) ≤ 2C̃ρ ES x̃x̃⊤       n
                                                                  ,
                                                 q
where C̃ρ = Cρ when ρ is Lipschitz and C̃ρ =         2Jˆ0 (µ) when ρ is the squared error loss.

Proof. Notice that ϕ′κ,ι ≤ 1. Therefore,

                        ∇ω1 Jˆ0′ [µ](w) = ESn ρ′ (ŷ − y)ϕ′κ,ι (⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩)x̃

                                         r                         h        i
                                           ≤   ESn [ρ′ (ŷ − y)2 ] ESn x̃x̃⊤
                                                    h      i 1/2
                                           ≤ C̃ρ ESn x̃x̃⊤       ,

where the first inequality follows from Lemma 18.

Lemma 30 (Boundedness of Jˆ0′′ ). In the same setting as Lemma 28, for all µ ∈ P2 (R2d+2 ) and
w, w′ ∈ R2d+2 , we have
                                                h      i
                                                                      2
                     Jˆ0′′ [µ](w, w′ ) ≤ Cρ′ ESn x̃x̃⊤
                                                              2
                                                           ∥w∥ + ∥w′ ∥ ,

where we recall that Cρ′ = 1 for the squared error loss.

Proof. Via the definition given by (2.6), it is straightforward to show that

                     Jˆ0′′ [µ](w, w′ ) = ESn [ρ′′ (ŷ(x; µ) − y)Ψ(x; w)Ψ(x; w′ )].
Then, by the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality,
                                                          1/2                 1/2
                    Jˆ0′′ [µ](w, w′ ) ≤ Cρ′ ESn Ψ(x; w)2      ESn Ψ(x; w′ )2

                                                                                  .
Moreover, by the Lipschitzness of ϕκ,ι ,
                                1/2      h             i1/2       h           i1/2
                                                     2                      2
                  ESn Ψ(x; w)2

                                    ≤ ESn ⟨ω 1 , x̃⟩        + ESn ⟨ω 2 , x̃⟩
                                      √       h         i 1/2
                                    ≤ 2 ESn x̃x̃⊤             ∥w∥

We can similarly bound the expression for w′ , and arrive at the statement of the lemma via Young’s
inequality,
                                  h     i                        h     i
                                                                                        2
         Jˆ0′′ [µ](w, w′ ) ≤ 2 ESn x̃x̃⊤ Cρ′ ∥w∥∥w′ ∥ ≤ ESn x̃x̃⊤
                                                                                2
                                                                          ∥w∥ + ∥w′ ∥ .



We collect the smoothness estimates and simplify them under the event of Lemma 16 in the following
Corollary.
Corollary 31. Suppose ρ and ρ′ are Cρ and Cρ′ Lipschitz respectively, with Cρ , Cρ′ ≲ 1. Recall that
                                                         h     i
Σ := E xx⊤ . On the event of Lemma 16, we have ESn x̃x̃⊤ ≲ ∥Σ∥ ∨ r̃x2 , and consequently,


Jˆ0′ satisfies Assumption 5 with constants L ≲ κ(∥Σ∥ ∨ r̃x2 ), R ≲ ∥Σ∥ ∨ r̃x , and CL = κ−1 .
                                                                      1/2


                                                                           m
Using the estimates above, we can present the following convergence bound Fβ,λ (µ∗β ) − Fβ,λ (µ∗β ).
Proposition 32. Let r̄x := ∥Σ∥ ∨ r̃x , and for simplcity assume CLSI ≥ β. For any ε ≲ 1, suppose
the step size satisfies
                                                    ε
                                   η≲                             ,
                                         CLSI κ r̄x (d + r̄x2 /λ)
                                                2 4



                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the width of the network satisfies,
                                                    2       1 κr̄2 CLSI

                                                  r̄x   d
                                      κr̄x2 1 +   λ2 + λβ   κ +
                                                                 x
                                                                  β
                            m≳                                                  ,
                                                            ε
and the number of iterations satisfies
                                                   m            ∗
                                         βCLSI    Fβ,λ (µm
                                                         0 ) − Fβ
                                  l≳           ln                   .
                                           η             ε
               m                  ∗
Then, we have Fβ,λ (µm
                     l ) − Fβ,λ (µβ ) ≤ ε.

                                                                              ∗ :=
Proof. Throughout the proof, we will assume the event of Lemma 16 holds. Let Fβ,λ   Fβ,λ (µ∗β ).
Notice that by iterating the bound of Theorem 27, we have
             m             ∗            −lη   m m            ∗         ηAm,β,λ,η
          Fβ,λ  (µml ) − Fβ,λ ≤ exp           (Fβ,λ (µ0 ) − Fβ,λ )+           −η

                                       2βCLSI                       1 − exp 2βC      LSI

                                      −lη   m m            ∗
                               ≤ exp        (Fβ,λ (µ0 ) − Fβ,λ ) + 4βCLSI Am,β,λ,η ,
                                     2βCLSI
where the second inequality holds for η ≤ 2βCLSI since 1 − e−x ≥ x/2 for x ∈ [0, 1]. We now
bound Am,β,λ,η so that the RHS of the above is less than O(ε) by choosing a sufficiently large m
and a sufficiently small η. Recall that given constants L and R from Assumption 5,
                               R2   2 η            L   1         R2    d   CL      L
         Am,β,λ,η ≍ L2 d +           η +       +             + 2 +               +     .
                                λ           β    mβ CLSI         λ    λβ CLSI      β
                                                      1/2
From Corollary 31, L ≍ κ(∥Σ∥ ∨ r̃x2 ), R ≍ ∥Σ∥ ∨ r̃x , and CL = κ−1 . To avoid notational clutter,
let r̄x2 := ∥Σ∥ ∨ r̃x2 . Then, to control the terms containing η, it suffices to choose
                                              ε                           ε
                              r
                          η≲                                ∧                           ,
                                 βCLSI κ2 r̄x4 (d + r̄x2 /λ) CLSI κ2 r̄x4 (d + r̄x2 /λ)
for which we can simply choose
                                                          ε
                                        η≲                              .
                                             CLSI κ2 r̄x4 (d + r̄x2 /λ)
Further, to control the term containing the number of particles m, we need
                                              r̄ 2      1 κr̄2 CLSI

                                                    d
                                   κr̄x2 1 + λx2 + λβ   κ +
                                                                x
                                                                 β
                             m≳                                        .
                                                    ε
To drive the suboptimality bound below ε, we also need to let the number of iterations l satisfy
                                                  m            ∗
                                        βCLSI    Fβ,λ (µm
                                                        0 ) − Fβ,λ
                                 l≳           ln                     .
                                          η              ε
With the above conditions, we can guarantee
                                           m            ∗
                                          Fβ,λ (µm
                                                 l ) − Fβ,λ ≲ ε,

which finishes the proof.

Further, we now present the proof of the LSI estimate given by Proposition 2.
Proof. [Proof of Proposition 2] Recall that
                                                              λ
                           Jˆλ′ [µW l ](w) = Jˆ0′ [µW l ](w) + ∥w∥ .
                                                                  2
                                                              2
Thus we have νµW l   (w) ∝ γ(w) exp(−β Jˆ′ [µW l ](w)). Since γ satisfies the LSI with constant
                                           0
1/(βλ), by the Holley-Stroock perturbation argument (Holley & Stroock, 1986), νµW l satifies the
LSI with constant
                                         exp(β osc(Jˆ0′ [µW l ]))
                                CLSI ≤                            .
                                                 βλ

                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Additionally,
                                                  n
                                    1X ′
                  Jˆ0′ [µW l ](w) =       ρ (ŷ(x; µW l ) − y)Ψ(x(i) ; w) ≤ 2Cρ ι,
                                    n i=1

which completes the proof.

Finally, we are ready to present the proof of Theorem.

A.5    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3 AND C OROLLARY 4
                                                2   2
                                       deff +r̃x  /rx            (d +r̃ 2 /r 2 )ι2
Recall that λ = λ̃rx2 , and let β =         ε2 λ̃
                                                         and n ≥ eff λ̃εx4 x       for some ε ≲ 1, where
             1                                          2
                                                     r̃
                       −1
ε̃ := Õ(λ̃ k+2 + ε + κ ). Then, as long as ι ≳ λ̃r2 , from Lemma 25, we have J0 (µ∗β ) − E[ρ(ξ)] ≲ ε̃.
                                                        x
                                                         x
                                                        k       2(k+1)
Note that while Lemma 25 only asks for ι ≳ λ̃− k+2 (r̃x /rx ) k+2 , we simplify this expression in the
statement of Theorem 3 so that the choice of ι does not depend on k.
On the other hand, given the step size η, width m, and number of iterations l by Proposition 32, we
       m                  ∗
have Fβ,λ (µm
            l ) − Fβ,λ (µβ ) ≤ ε. Therefore,
                                                          r
                                                    ∗       r̄x2 βCLSI ε ι2
                       EW ∼µm    [J 0 (W )] − J 0 (µβ ) ≲               + .
                               l
                                                                  m      m
Additionally, from Lemma 25, we have
                                                                           1
                       β −1 H(µ∗β | γ) ≲ E[ρ(ξ)] + Õ(λ̃ k+2 ) + ε + κ−1 ≲ 1.
                        r̄ 2 (d   +r̃ 2 /r 2 )C
Consequently, for m ≥ x eff λ̃εx3 x LSI ∨ ει2 , we have EW ∼µm
                                                             l
                                                               [J0 (W )]−J0 (µ∗β ) ≤ ε. Therefore,
combining the bounds above, we have
                                                                                1
                        EW ∼µm
                             l
                               [J0 (W )] − E[ρ(ξ)] ≲ Õ(λ̃ k+2 ) + ε + κ−1 .

Consequently, we can take λ̃ = on (1), ε = on (1), κ−1 = on (1), which finishes the proof of
Theorem 3.
We finally remark that under the LSI estimate of Proposition 2 and the choice of hyperparameters in
Theorem 3, the sufficient number of neurons and iterations can be bounded by
                r̄4 d      r̄2                  r̄4 d     d    r̄x2   Õ(deff )
                                                      eff
      m ≤ Õ 4x         + x2 eÕ(deff ) ≤ Õ x 4                                  ≤ Õ deÕ(deff ) ,

                                                          2 +    2
                                                                     e
                cx deff    rx                      cx deff     cx
and                                           r̄4 d
                                                  x
                                                      eÕ(deff )       ≤ Õ deÕ(deff ) ,

                                   l ≤ Õ
                                                  c4x
which completes the proof of Corollary 4.

B     P ROOFS OF S ECTION 4
We begin with the proof of Proposition 8.
Proof. [Proof of Proposition 8] Note that Jˆ0 (µ∗ ) = 0 by definition. Moreover, the bound on
H(µ∗ | τ ) is a simple application of Jensen’s inequality, namely,
                                  ef
                          Z                    Z             Z      Z
             H(µ∗ | τ ) = ln R f dµ∗ = f dµ∗ − ln ef dτ ≤ f (dµ∗ − dτ ).
                                  e dτ



Next, using the Bakry-Émery curvature-dimension condition (Bakry & Émery, 1985), we prove the
following dimension-free LSI bound.


                                                              29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. [Proof of Proposition 9] By the curvature-dimension condition (Bakry et al., 2014, Section
5.7), the Gibbs measure νµ ∝ exp(−β Jˆ0′ [µ]) satisfies the LSI with constant CLSI ≤ α−1 as long as
                                  Ricg + β∇2 Jˆ0′ [η](w) ≥ αg,
for all w ∈ W and some α > 0. By the bound on the Ricci curvature from Assumption 4, it suffices
to show
                                ϱdg + β∇2 Jˆ0′ [η](w) ≽ αg.
Recall that                              Z
                         ˆ
                        J0 (µ) = ESn ρ      Ψ(x; w)dµ(w) − y .
Therefore,
                            Jˆ0′ [µ](w) = ESn [ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ) − y)Ψ(x; w)],
and
                        ∇2w Jˆ0′ [µ](w) = ESn ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ) − y)∇2w Ψ(x; w) .


Consider the case where ρ is Cρ Lipschitz. Then,
             λmin (∇2w Jˆ0′ [µ](w)) = inf ES ρ′ (ŷ(x; µ) − y) v, ∇2w Ψ(x; w)w

                                               n
                                     ∥v∥g ≤1

                                                            v, ∇2w Ψ(x; w)v

                                   ≥ −Cρ sup ESn
                                          ∥v∥g ≤1

                                   = −Cρ K.


Before stating the proof of Theorem 10, we adapt the generalization analysis of Appendix A.3
to the Riemannian setting of this section. Recall the truncated risk functions J0κ (µ) =
E[ρ(ŷ(x; µ) − y) ∧ κ] and Jˆ0κ (µ) = ESn [ρ(ŷ(x; µ) − y) ∧ κ]. Then, we have the following uni-
form convergence bound.
Lemma 33. Under the setting of Example 7, where we recall |φ(0)| ≲ 1 and |φ′ (z)| ≲ 1 for all z,
we have      "                                         #      r
                                         κ        ˆ κ          M               1/2
           E            sup             J0 (µ) − J0 (µ) ≲ Cρ         1 + E Σ̂        ,
               µ∈P ac (W):H(µ | τ )≤M                           n
               Pn              ⊤
where Σ̂ := n1 i=1 x(i) x(i) . Combined with McDiarmid’s inequality, the above bound implies
                                                r                           r
                         κ          ˆ κ             M            1/2          ln(1/δ)
              sup      J0 (µ) − J0 (µ) ≲ Cρ            1 + E Σ̂         +κ            ,
           H(µ | τ )≤M                               n                           n
with probability at least 1 − δ.
Proof. Based on the same argument as Lemma 22, for any α > 0, we have
             "                            #        "               n
                                                                                  #
                                                                1
                          J0 (µ) − Jˆ0 (µ) ≤ 2Cρ E
                                                                  X
                           κ         κ                                       (i)
           E      sup                                  sup            ξi ŷ(x ; µ)
              H(µ | τ )≤M                           H(µ | τ )≤M n i=1

where (ξi ) are i.i.d. Rademacher random variables. Once again following Lemma 22, we have,
     "                  n
                                      #             " Z               n
                                                                                   !       #
                     1X          (i)     M      1                α2 X       (i)  2
  Eξ       sup            ξi ŷ(x ; µ) ≤     + E ln exp                 Ψ(x ; w) dτ (w) .
      H(µ | τ )≤M n i=1                   α    α                2n2 i=1
Furthermore,
             n
                          !                                          n
                                                                                    !
                                                                 2
        α2 X                                             α2 ∥φ′ ∥∞ XD
                                       2
                                      α φ(0)2
Z                                              Z                                 E2
                   (i)  2                                                    (i)
  exp           Ψ(x ; w) dτ (w) ≤ exp              exp                  w, x         dτ (w)
        2n2 i=1                          n2                  n2    i=1
                                                                             !
                                                                 2
                                                         α2 ∥φ′ ∥∞ D
                                       2
                                      α φ(0)2
                                               Z                           E
                                ≤ exp              exp              w, Σ̂w dτ (w)
                                         n                   n
                                      h               2
                                                              i
                                       α2 φ(0)2 + ∥φ′ ∥∞ Σ̂
                                ≤ exp                          .
                                                 n


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore,
                                                                     2
                                                        φ(0)2 + ∥φ′ ∥∞ Σ̂
                  "              n
                                                #
                              1X           (i)     M
               Eξ    sup            ξi ŷ(x ; µ) ≤   +α                   .
                  H(µ | τ )≤M n i=1                α             n

Using |φ(0)|, ∥φ′ ∥∞ ≲ 1 and optimizing over α yield
                      "                n
                                                      # r
                                    1X           (i)      M        1/2

                   Eξ      sup            ξi ŷ(x ; µ) ≲     1 + Σ̂      .
                        H(µ | τ )≤M n i=1                 n

Taking expectation with respect to the training set concludes the proof.

We can also control the effect of truncating similar to that of Lemma 24.
Lemma 34. Under the setting of Example 7, for any µ ∈ P(W), we have
                                                       ′ 2
                                                 2
                                                                    2
                                κ         2 2φ(0) + 2∥φ ∥∞ ∥Σ∥ + E y
                      J0 (µ) − J0 (µ) ≤ 2Cρ ·                          .
                                                               κ

Proof. Similarly to the arguments in Lemma 24, by using the Cauchy-Schwartz and Markov inequali-
ties, we have
             J0 (µ) − J0κ (µ) ≤ E[1(ρ(ŷ(x; µ) − y) ≥ κ)ρ(ŷ(x; µ − y))]
                                                        1/2                1/2
                              ≤ P(ρ(ŷ(x; µ) − y) ≥ κ) E ρ(ŷ(x; µ) − y)2
                                                             1/2                1/2
                              ≤ Cρ P(|ŷ(x; µ) − y| ≥ κ/Cρ ) E (ŷ(x; µ) − y)2
                                                    2

                                 2 E (ŷ(x; µ) − y)
                              ≤ Cρ
                                            κ
                                     E ŷ(x; µ)2 + E y 2
                              ≤ 2Cρ2                       .
                                               κ
Moreover, we have
                       Z                                     Z
                                                         2           2
       E ŷ(x; µ)2 ≤ E   Ψ(x; w)2 dµ(w) ≤ 2φ(0)2 + 2∥φ′ ∥∞ E

                                                               ⟨w, x⟩ dµ(w)
                                                                       2
                                                 ≤ 2φ(0)2 + 2∥φ′ ∥∞ ∥Σ∥,
concluding the proof of the lemma.

Finally, we can state the proof of the main theorem of this section.
                                                      ¯                  ¯
Proof. [Proof of Theorem 10] Note that given β = ∆    ε and d ≥ 2Cρ K ∆/(ϱε), Proposition 9
guarantees that CLSI ≤ 2/(ϱd) along the trajectory. Consequently, by the convergence guarantee
of (2.10), we have
                                           ϱdT
                 Fβ (µT ) ≤ Fβ (µ∗β ) + e− β (Fβ (µ0 ) − Fβ (µ∗β )) ≤ Fβ (µ∗β ) + ε.
Further, by µ̄ of Assumption 4, we have
                                                             ¯ ≤ ε̄ + ε.
                             Fβ (µ∗β ) ≤ Fβ (µ̄) ≤ ε̄ + β −1 ∆

As a result, Jˆ0 (µT ) ≤ Fβ (µT ) ≤ ε̄ + 2ε, and similarly H(µT | τ ) ≤ β(ε̄ + 2ε).
                                                                 h     i
Note that Jˆ0κ (µT ) ≤ Jˆ0 (µT ). Using the fact that Cρ , ∥Σ∥, E |y| ≲ 1, and combining the bounds
                                                                     2

of Lemma 33 and Lemma 34, with a porbability of failure δ = O(n−q ) for some constant q > 0, we
have                                       r                r
                                             β(ε̄ +  ε)       ln n    1
                    J0 (µT ) − Jˆ0 (µT ) ≲              +κ         + .
                                                  n            n      κ

                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Optimizing over κ implies
                                                r                   1/4
                                                β(ε̄ + ε)     ln n
                          J0 (µT ) ≲ ε̄ + ε +             +
                                                    n          n
                                              r                        1/4
                                                ¯
                                                ∆(1 + ε̄/ε)

                                                                 ln n
                                   ≲ ε̄ + ε +               +              .
                                                      n            n
Choosing n according to the statement of the theorem completes the proof.


C     C OMPARISONS WITH THE F ORMULATION OF N ITANDA ET AL . (2024)
Here, we provide a number of comparisons with results of Nitanda et al. (2024). In Section C.1, we
show that the statistical model (2.1) is more general than their formulation, even for parity learning
problems. In Section C.2, we provide an informal comparison of their effective dimension to our
setting, exhibiting the improvement in our definition of effective dimension.

C.1    G ENERALITY OF THE F ORMULATIONS

We begin by pointing out that the formulation of k-index model of (2.1) is strictly more general than
that of Nitanda et al. (2024), even for learning k-sparse parities. Recall that in their setting, they
consider inputs of the type x = Σ1/2 z for√ some positive definite Σ, where z ∼ Unif({±1}d ) (their
original formulation uses z ∼ Unif({±1/ d}d ), but we rescale the input to be consistent with the
notation of this paper). The labels are given by
                                     k
                                     Y                      k D
                                                            Y               E
                         y = sign         ⟨ũi , z⟩ = sign     Σ−1/2 ũi , x ,                       (C.1)
                                    i=1                     i=1

where {ũi }ki=1 are orthonormal vectors. Then, we can define an orthonormal set of vectors {ui }ki=1
such that span(u1 , . . . , uk ) = span(Σ−1/2 ũ1 , . . . , Σ−1/2 ũk ), and define g such that
                                      D               E        D             E

       ⟨u1 , x⟩       ⟨uk , x⟩
                                         Σ1/2 u1 , z             Σ1/2 uk , z               Y k
   g     √ ,..., √                 = g     √             ,...,       √          = sign        ⟨ũi , z⟩ ,
           k                k                  k                         k                  i=1

for all z ∈ {±1}d . Therefore, the parity formulation of (C.1) can be seen as a special case of the
k-index model (2.1). Note that g is only defined on 2d points, and we can extend it to all of Rk such
that g : Rk → R is Lipschitz continuous.
In contrast, the k-index model can represent parity problems that cannot be represented by (C.1).
Starting from an orthonormal set of vectors {ui }ki=1 in Rd , let
                                                                   k
                              ⟨u1 , x⟩      ⟨uk , x⟩              Y
                       y=g      √ ,..., √               = sign       ⟨ui , x⟩ .            (C.2)
                                  k              k                i=1
                                                      D             ED          E
Consider the case where k = 2, then y = sign Σ1/2 u1 , z Σ1/2 u2 , z . To be able to
reformulate this to (C.1), we need to be find orthonromal ũ1 , ũ2 ∈ Rd such that
                  D            ED            E
           sign Σ1/2 u1 , z Σ1/2 u2 , z          = sign(⟨ũ1 , z⟩⟨ũ2 , z⟩), ∀z ∈ {±1}d .

If Σ has rank less than d such that Σ1/2 u1 = Σ1/2 u2 , then the above implies sign(⟨ũ1 , z⟩⟨ũ2 , z⟩) ≥
0 for all z ∈ {±1}d . In particular, we must have some z where sign(⟨ũ1 , z⟩⟨ũ2 , z⟩) > 0, which
implies that
                     2d                                  2d
                                                  *                    +
                    X                                    X
                                                                  ⊤
                        ⟨ũ1 , z i ⟩⟨ũ2 , z i ⟩ = ũ1 ,    z i z i ũ2 = 2d ⟨ũ1 , ũ2 ⟩ > 0,       (C.3)
                   i=1                              i=1
which is in contradiction with ⟨ũ1 , ũ2 ⟩ = 0. Therefore, for such Σ, we cannot formulate (C.2) as a
special case of (C.1). This argument is robust with respect to small perturbations of Σ which make it


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


full-rank. Specifically, suppose Σ1/2 u2 = Σ1/2 u1 + δ. Notice that we can choose Σ1/2 u1 such
     D           E2
that Σ1/2 u1 , z ̸= 0 for all z ∈ {±1}d , e.g. by choosing Σ1/2 u1 ∝ e1 , i.e. the first standard
basis vector. It is straightforward to construct full-rank Σ, u1 , and u2 such that ∥δ∥ is arbitrarily
small, in which case
           D              ED           E           D           E2 D              E
     sign Σ1/2 u1 , z Σ1/2 u2 , z         = sign Σ1/2 u1 , z + Σ1/2 u1 , z ⟨δ, z⟩ ≥ 0.
Following (C.3), once again the above would be in contradiction with ⟨ũ1 , ũ2 ⟩ = 0. This implies
that the k-index model (2.1) is strictly more general than (C.1) when considering full-rank covariance
matrices.

C.2   C OMPARISON WITH THE E FFECTIVE D IMENSION OF N ITANDA ET AL . (2024)

A close inspection of the proofs in Nitanda et al. (2024) demonstrates that one can define their
                                                                                   2
effective dimension in a scale invariant manner as d˜eff := tr(Σ)
                                                                  Pk
                                                                         Σ−1/2 ũi . From the
                                                                            i=1
previous section, we observed that to reduce their setting to ours, we need to choose a set {ui }ki=1
of normalized vectors that spans the set of vectors {Σ−1/2 ũi }ki=1 . In particular, we can choose
        Σ−1/2 ũi                                    Σ1/2 ui
ui = Σ              , or equivalently write ũi = Σ            . While {ui }ki=1 are not orthogonal, our
       ∥ −1/2 ũi ∥                                 ∥ 1/2 ui ∥
proofs do not strictly rely on the orthogonality assumption and it is only made for simplicity. Hence,
we have
                                                     2
                                     k                              k             −2
                                             u
                      d˜eff = tr(Σ)
                                               i
                                    X                              X
                                                       ≤ k tr(Σ)        Σ1/2 ui      .
                                            1/2
                                    i=1 Σ        ui                i=1

Note that the above upper bound is sharp when k = 1, and is lower bounded by our definition of
effective dimension stated in Definition 1. Therefore, we use the above bound in Table 1.

D     E XAMPLES OF TARGET F UNCTIONS IN P ROPOSITION 8
In this section, we provide a natural example of a target function of the form given in Proposition
                                                  2                                      A1/2 v
8. Suppose W = Sd−1 , and Ψ(x; w) = ⟨w, x⟩ . Define µ∗ = T #τ , where T (v) = A                  , for
                                                                                        ∥ 1/2 v∥
some PSD matrix A to be defined later. Let
                                                       *                              +
                                                                  h A1/2 vv ⊤ A1/2 i
              y = ŷ(x; µ∗ ) = x, Ew∼µ∗ ww⊤ x = x, Ev∼τ

                                                                                    x .
                                                                      ∥A1/2 v∥2
                              h 1/2 ⊤ 1/2 i                                2
By defining B = d · Ev∼τ A ∥Avv          A
                                    1/2 v∥2   , we have y = d1 B 1/2 x . Additionally, note that
                  2                                                                               √
ŷ(x; τ ) = d1 ∥x∥ . Before proceeding further, we remark that the typical ∥x∥ should be of order d
to get Θ(1) output, which is due to choosing the unit sphere as the weight space.
Next, we construct A. Suppose distribution of x is such that with probability 1/2 we have x = e1 ,
the first standard basis vector. Let A = diag(λ1 , 1, . . . , 1). Then,
                                                           λ1 dv12

                           y = ŷ(e1 ; µ∗ ) = Ev∼τ                        ≤ cλ1 ,
                                                     1 + (λ1 − 1)v12
where c is an absolute constant. On the other hand, ŷ(e1 ; τ ) = 1. Choosing λ1 = d1 , we observe
that for sufficiently large d, with probability at least 1/2 the distance |ŷ(x; µ∗ ) − ŷ(x; τ )| ≥ C for
some absolute constant C > 0. This means that µ∗ and τ are meaningfully different, and from an
initialization of τ one needs to train the network (e.g. with MFLD) to recover µ∗ . It remains to find
an estimate on H(µ∗ | τ ).
                                                                      v
Let T : Rd → Sd−1 denote the normalization mapping, i.e. T(v) = ∥v∥     . Then, note that τ =
                   ∗
T#N (0, Id ), and µ = T#N (0, A). Therefore, by the data processing inequality,
                                                    d tr(A) 1            ln d
           H(µ∗ | τ ) ≤ H(N (0, A) | N (0, Id )) = − +     − ln det(A) ≤      ,
                                                    2   2   2             2

                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           ¯ = ln d = o(d), and we can apply Theorem 10 to obtain polynomial
where λ1 = d1 . Therefore, ∆    2
convergence time, as desired.

E    N UMERICAL S IMULATION
In this section, we perform numerical simulations to verify the intuitions from Theorem 3. Specifically,
we train a two-layer neural network with width m = 50 and ReLU activation, where the first layer
weights are initialized uniformly on the sphere, and fix the first half of the second layer coordinates
at +1/m, and the second half at −1/m. The input follows the distribution x ∼ N (0, Σ) (with an
                                                                                 −1
extra 1 appended for bias), where Σ = diag(σ 2 ) with σ12 = 1 and σi2 = deff  d−1 for input dimension
d = 50. The labels are generated by a single-index model of the following form
                                                                  2
                                                       ⟨e1 , x⟩ − 1
                                   y = g(⟨e1 , x⟩) =         √      .
                                                               2
Therefore, the effective dimension from Definition 1 is exactly equal to deff . We train the neural
network using the squared loss with MFLA, with a stepsize of 0.1, weight decay parameter 0.01,
temperature 0.001.
Figure 1b shows the test loss at the end of 200 it-             1.2      n=100
                                                                         n=200
erations of MFLA for different numbers of training                       n=500


                                                             Generalization Gap
samples n and effective dimension deff . For each               0.8
value of n and deff , we average the test loss over 5
independent runs with different realizations of data
                                                                0.4
and initialization. In Figure 2 we measure the gener-
alization gap, i.e. the average loss difference on the
training set of n samples, and a test set of 100000             0.0

samples, at the end of 3000 iterations of training                   1     10   20      30 40   50
                                                                                   deff
with MFLA. For this experiment, we try n = 100,
n = 200, and n = 500. As seen from both figures,
deff controls the generalization gap and test loss, both Figure 2: Generalization gap measured by variy-
of which decay with larger n.                            ing the effective dimension.

The code to reproduce the experimental results is
provided at: https://github.com/mousavih/MFLD-Learnability.


                                                  34
