Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


UKAN: U NBOUNDED KOLMOGOROV-A RNOLD N ET-
WORKS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         We present Unbounded Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (UKANs), a novel algo-
         rithm that eliminates the need for bounded grids in traditional Kolmogorov-Arnold
         Networks (KANs). The key innovation is a coefficient generator (CG) model that
         dynamically produces B-spline coefficients, operating on an infinite symmetric
         grid. UKANs integrate multilayer-perceptrons with KANs, using positional en-
         coding of grid groups as input to the CG model. This approach enables function
         approximation on unbounded domains without data normalization. Additionally,
         to reduce UKAN and KAN computational cost, we introduce a GPU-accelerated
         library that reduces B-spline evaluation complexity by a factor of O(grid size)
         compared to existing libraries, enabling efficient large-scale learning. Our exper-
         iments on regression, classification, and generative tasks demonstrate UKANs’
         effectiveness, while benchmarks confirm superior memory and computational ef-
         ficiency compared to existing methods. This work advances function approxi-
         mation techniques, offering a flexible solution for complex, large-scale learning
         problems.


1   BACKGROUND
Neural networks (MLPs) are the workhorse of the current AI and Deep Learning revolution, driv-
ing advances in computer vision, language models, computational science, and more recently bi-
ology and molecular science LeCun et al. (2015); Goh et al. (2017); Schütt et al. (2018); Pandey
et al. (2022); Raissi et al. (2017). The universal approximation theorem guarantees that MLPs with
enough parameters can fit any function. The widespread adoption of MLPs across various disci-
plines has led to the emergence of exciting applications such as ChatGPT in LLM and AlphaFold in
protein structure prediction Vaswani et al. (2017); Jumper et al. (2021). However, MLPs suffer from
a few drawbacks, particularly generalization for regression tasks.
Recently, the Kolmogorov-Arnold network (KAN) Liu et al. (2024) has gained attention as a promis-
ing alternative to traditional MLPs, especially in scientific applications, with various variants cur-
rently under development Bozorgasl & Chen (2024); Genet & Inzirillo (2024); Abueidda et al.
(2024); Kiamari et al. (2024). The KAN architecture is partially based on the Kolmogorov-Arnold
representation theorem Kolmogorov (1961); Braun & Griebel (2009), which states that any multi-
variate function on a bounded domain can be obtained by a finite composition of continuous uni-
variate functions and summation. Mathematically, this can be represented as:

                                            2n+1            n
                                                                               !
                                             X              X
                                  f (x) =          ϕq             ϕq,p (xp )                       (1)
                                            q=1             p=1

where ϕp,q : [0, 1] → R and ϕq : R → R. For a more detailed explanation of the KAN architecture
and mathematics, we refer eager readers to the original KAN paper Liu et al. (2024).
Despite their potential, practical use of KANs is currently hindered by compute and memory ineffi-
ciencies, which stems from implementation challenges and the partial reliance on grid update tricks.
Without grid update tricks, KAN learning stagnates as inputs into the layer can fall outside of the
grid domain fixed at the beginning of training. Additionally, the numerical instability of the grid up-
date implementation prevents the original KAN from fully leveraging the capabilities of graphical


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 1: Compute complexity of Torch- and Warp-KAN for single layer B-spline evaluation.
                  Model          Complexity
                  Torch KAN      O(Kdg din dout )
                  Warp KAN       O(Kdin dout )
                  Warp UKAN O(Kdin dout ) + OCG (d2emb + demb dout K)


processing units (GPUs), which are driving current AI advancements. Another drawback of KAN is
its inability to leverage batch computation due to the B-spline evaluation being implemented with a
complexity of O(kdg din dout ), where k, dg , din , and dout are the degree of B-spline and grid, input,
and output dimensionalities, respectively. However, this computational complexity issue is resolved
in this work for the original KAN. We note that B-splines have been used in other works before
KAN to learn activation functions, and our library can also be used to accelerate them Bohra et al.
(2020). Furthermore, our library facilitates a rigorous and unbiased comparison between KANs and
MLPs in terms of floating-point operations (FLOPs), thereby bridging the gap between the typically
naive implementations of KANs and the extensively optimized implementations of MLPs that have
been refined over decades Yu et al. (2024).

2    A LGORITHM

The solution to compute and memory issues of KANs lies in exploring the local nature of B-splines
instead of the recursive formula over the entire grid. In other words, the evaluation of the B-spline
function is local and depends on the k + 1 coefficients, leveraging this observation, we represent the
B-spline function with basis matrices Qin (1998) as shown in Equation 2.

                                              P (u) = U MP                                                (2)

where u = x/δg − ⌊x/δg⌋ and δg is the distance between two adjacent grid points. U is the vector
of (1, u, u2 , ..., uk ). M is basis matrix and P is the vector of B-spline coefficients (p0 , p1 , ..., pk ).
The basis matrices are obtained by applying recursive B-spline equations, and only depends on the
degree of the B-spline function, as commonly used in other disciplines Moradzadeh et al. (2018);
Mashayak et al. (2015). For a B-spline of order 3, the B-spline evaluation can be written as,
                                                         1    4     1 0       p0
                                                                          
                                            2    3 1 −3      0     3 0 p1 

                          P (u) = 1 u u u                                                                 (3)
                                                    6 3 −6 3 0 p2
                                                                          
                                                        −1 3 −3 1 p3

We provide efficient implementations of the above formula using NVIDIA Warp Macklin (2022) in a
new library called warpKAN with evaluation complexity of O(kdin dout ) along with PyTorch bind-
ings Paszke et al. (2019). This implementation offers both memory and computation efficiency, as
described in Table 1. However, the reduction in compute and memory cost of B-spline components
does not solve the issue of bounded range of the grid in the original KAN.
To achieve an unbounded domain for the KAN grid, we use an MLP to generate B-spline coeffi-
cients, called a coefficient-generator (CG) MLP. As shown in Equation 2, every B-spline of order k,
needs k + 1 coefficients (K = k + 1). One approach is to predict coefficient by calling K times
same MLP for K adjacent grid indexes, however, in our experimentation we notice this algorithm
fails.
To address this issue, we group K adjacent grid indexes together, called a group index, and use the
CG model to predict K coefficients for each group index. The selection process works as follows:
we first concatenate the K coefficients predicted by the previous group index and the one grid index
belongs to, resulting in a sequence of 2K coefficients. We then select the K coefficients starting from
index i = gid mod K to i + K (gid is the grid index). This ensures that we obtain the correct K
coefficients for each grid index, while minimizing the number of MLP and embedding calls. In other
words, instead of embedding every grid index we embed every grid group index i.e. the collection of
K adjacent grid indices. The input to the CG MLP is obtained by concatenating the embedding of


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The UKAN - model architecture including grid group positional encoding, coefficient-
generator MLP, and B-spline function.


the feature index and the sinusoidal positional encoding of the group index as used in transformers
Vaswani et al. (2017). The architecture of UKAN is depicted in Figure 1. Note that there exists
a one-to-one mapping between UKAN and KAN within specific grid bounds. After training, one
can evaluate the CG model for all inputs and the results can be stored as KAN parameters. This
transformation enables the application of all symbolic regression and pruning techniques used in
KAN, preserving interpretability while gaining the benefits of UKAN during training.

3     E XPERIMENT

We perform several experiments to benchmark the performance of current implementations and
capabilities of UKAN in regression, classification, and other tasks.

3.1   B ENCHMARKING

In Figures 2 and 3, we benchmark warp- and torch-KAN in different setups, i.e.: varying grid size
and order of the B-spline to evaluate the compute and memory improvements achieved in the current
work and the accompanied library. Particularly, in Figure 2, we compare compute cost of the forward
& backward passes, and their sum for a single layer KAN [32, 32] with different B-spline orders.
During this comparison grid size and batch size of 64 and 216 are used and all results for warpKAN
are normalized with respect to the PyTorch implementation of the original paper. The results indicate
a performance improvement of 5.5-15x which increases as order of B-spline increases.
In Figure 3, we benchmark the KAN [32, 32] with B-spline order of 3 on different grid sizes. A
batch size of 217 is used for this experiment, we observed that torchKAN (naive implementation of
B-spline) runs out of memory for a grid size equal and larger than 256, while warpKAN can reach
grid sizes of up to 218 , more than 1000x larger. By reducing the computational and memory costs
of B-spline evaluation, KANs can become a more viable option for large-scale applications, paving
the way for their widespread adoption beyond toy datasets.

3.2   TASKS

To evaluate the performance of UKAN in regression, we conducted three experiments.

       I. f (x, y) = exp(J0 (20x) + y 2 ), where J0 is the Bessel function of order 0.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Performance benchmarking of current and naive implementation of KAN with different
B-spline orders. We compared compute time of warp- versus torch-KAN for a single layer with
different B-spline orders, (32-dimensional input and output and grid size of 64 on NVIDIA A6000
GPU and batch size of 216 ). We find that warpKAN is on average 10x faster and up to 15x faster for
higher order B-splines.


Figure 3: Performance benchmarking of current and naive implementation of KAN with different
grid sizes. We compared compute time of warp KAN versus torch KAN with order 3 B-spline and
32-dimensional input and output over different number of grids on NVIDIA A6000 GPU and batch
size of 217 . Torch KAN rans out of memory due to implementation limitations beyond 128, while
warp KAN can reach up to 218 grids, translating to 1000x larger grid size. We find that warpKAN
is on average 12x faster and up to 24x faster for larger grid sizes.


     II. f (x, y) = exp(sin πx + y 2 )
                       1
                         Pn         4i
    III. f (x) = exp( 15    i sin(( 15 + 1)πxi )) , where i = 0, 1, . . . , 15 and is a high dimensional
         function compared with functions I and II.

We compare the results of UKAN, KAN and MLP [2, 5, 1] for 2D functions (functions I and II). For
function III, we use UKAN, KAN, and MLP [16, 32, 1]. We used a two-layer MLP with 8- and 16-
dimensional positional encodings and feature embeddings for 2D and 16D functions, respectively.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first layer of the CG MLP uses SiLU nonlinearity and generated coefficients are scaled by
another learnable parameter to improve learning, analogous to the original KAN paper. An Adam
optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning rate of 0.01 and weight decay of 1e−5 for 200,000
epochs is used to minimize the MSE loss. The learning rate is decayed exponentially with the rate
of 1 − 1e−4 and minimum learning rate of 1e−4 . The results are shown in Figure 4, where UKAN
and KAN perform much better than MLP, and KAN performs better than UKAN. In theory, KAN
and UKAN have the same learning capacity, but the MLP component of UKAN might slightly hurt
generalization and performance compared to KAN. One might switch to a KAN-based CG model
instead of an MLP-based CG model to resolve the generalization issues, but this comes with large
computational costs. In terms of a fixed FLOPs budget, our study provides a more robust and fair
comparison in terms of KAN and MLP accuracy, even though this was not a target of our study. We
additionally note that although the compute cost of a KAN is greater than that of an MLP by a factor
of K, KAN convergence often compensates for this factor.


Figure 4: The regression task results. a. RMSE over training epochs of function I with KAN,
UKAN, and MLP [2, 5, 1]. b. RMSE over training epochs of function II with KAN, UKAN, and
MLP [2, 5, 1]. c. RMSE over training epochs of function III with KAN, UKAN, and MLP [16, 32,
1].

KANs promise better generalization compared to MLPs for regression tasks, similar to equivari-
ant models allowing for the exploitation of symmetries for improved generalization. In particular,
E(n)-Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (EGNNs) are equivariant with respect to the translations,
rotations, and permutations Satorras et al. (2022). Here, we explore how combining equivariance
with KAN leads to improved performance in the study of n-body systems as described in the EGNN
paper Satorras et al. (2022). To evaluate this, we replace the final scalar predicting MLPs in EGNN
with UKAN and KAN layers. Specifically, the scalar outputs of ϕx and ϕv in Equation 4 are pre-
dicted with UKAN and KAN.


                                                       X
                         vil+1 = ϕv (hli )viinit + C    (xli − xlj )ϕx (ml+1
                                                                         ij )
                                                       j̸=i                                      (4)
                         xl+1
                          i   = xli + vil+1

                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We keep the rest of parameters and datasets identical to the original paper and their code on Github.
We also train the SE(3) Transformer model as another reference point. The results are shown in
Table 2, where we observe that UKAN and KAN improve the accuracy compared to the original
architecture, and the improvement of UKAN is better than the KAN model.


       Table 2: Mean Squared Error for the future position prediction in the N-body system.
                               Method                  MSE
                               EGNN                    0.00638
                               EGNN+KAN                0.00609
                               EGNN+UKAN               0.00591
                               SE(3) Transformer 0.02469

We explore the effectiveness of UKAN and KAN in physics-informed neural networks Karniadakis
et al. (2021) to solve the logistic growth model, which is used to model population dynamics in
biological and ecological systems. For this experiment, we use both UKAN and KAN [1, 5, 1]
without MLP component to solve the differential equation below,
                                       df
                                          = Rf (t)(1 − f (t))                                      (5)
                                       dt

where R is the growth rate set to 1.0 and the function f (t) represents the growth rate of the popu-
lation over time (t). We impose boundary condition of f (0) = 0.5 to uniquely specify the solution
and compare the results with the analytical solution of f (t) = 1+exp1 (−t) . We use domain of [−5, 5]
to sample data and Adam optimizer with the learning of rate of 1e−3 and weight decay of 1e−5
and follow the standard procedure for PINN minimization, i.e. minimizing MSE of the differential
equation residual over colocation points and boundary conditions. The results are shown in Figure
5, for and KAN [1, 5, 1] without the MLP component. UKAN and KAN acheive MSE of 1e−5 and
1e−6 , respectively on the sample dataset, indicating both models are applicable to physics-informed
neural networks scenarios.


Figure 5: KAN and UKAN used in PINNs. Solving logistic growth model with both KAN and
UKAN [1, 5, 1] over domain of -5 and 5. Both models match the analytical solution with good
approximation.

We devised two experiments to evaluate UKAN’s performance in classification tasks. In particular,
we trained UKAN and KAN over Moon- and MNIST-datasets. We report the accuracy of training
and validation of both models on the moon-dataset in Table 3, where we observe close to 100%
accuracy for Moon-dataset with 2D inputs with slight superior accuracy of UKAN over KAN in this
setup. Both UKAN and KAN [2, 4, 2] are trained using SGD optimizer with learning rate of 0.01
for 10000 epochs, and results are averaged over 3 different initializations.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Table 3: Moon dataset classification accuracy.
                             Model Training           Validation
                             KAN       98.46 ± 1.3 98.53 ± 0.4
                             UKAN 100.0 ± 0. 99.83 ± 0.17


The final classification task was performed on the MNIST dataset, where we trained both the UKAN
and KAN models with configurations [784, 32, 10] and a degree-3 B-spline. Both models were
optimized using the Adam optimizer combined with an Exponential scheduler, having a learning
rate of 2 × 10−4 and a decay rate of 1 − 10−4 . The KAN network incorporated 51 grid points
across the interval [−10, 10], whereas UKAN utilized a grid delta of 3.0 and a 48-dimensional
positional encoding. Notably, both models employed only the B-spline component without any
MLP components.
Figure 6 illustrates the learning curves for both the training and validation datasets. Training was
halted upon detection of overfitting in the training dataset. Furthermore, three rounds of independent
training with different initializations were conducted to compare the performance of UKAN and
KAN. The results, as presented in Table 4, indicate that UKAN outperforms KAN on the validation
dataset while slightly underperforming on the training dataset.


                          Table 4: MNIST dataset classification accuracy.
                            Model Training             Validation
                            KAN      98.93 ± 0.78 95.35 ± 0.04
                            UKAN 98.40 ± 0.24          96.29 ± 0.08


Figure 6: Classification task over MNIST dataset. Accuracy of training and validation datasets for
UKAN and KAN [784, 32, 10] as training progresses. UKAN uses a 48-dimensional positional
embedding and feature index embedding.

Finally, we evaluated the performance of three different architectures for Denoising Diffusion Prob-
abilistic Models (DDPM) Ho et al. (2020) on a synthetic 2D circle dataset with added noise. The first
architecture is only composed of MLPs, while other architectures use KAN and UKAN in the input
of temporal layers and output layer (see Appendix A for full architecture). We used Adam optimizer
with a learning rate of 5e−5 for 500 epochs with a batch size of 800. Our results demonstrated that
both KAN and UKAN significantly outperformed MLP in terms of the Wasserstein distance shown
in Table 5 and sample quality as shown in Figure 7. Data samples from original distribution and gen-
erated from DDPM with KAN, UKAN, and MLP architectures indicates superior performance of


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


KAN and UKAN compared to MLP and slightly superior performance of UKAN over KAN. This
result indicates possible applications of KAN and UKAN in generative tasks, where MLP alone
might fail to learn underlying data distribution especially in sample quality as we observed loss
values of MLP, KAN and UKAN were very small.


                          Table 5: DDPM with KAN, UKAN, and MLP
                                 Model         Wasserstein distance
                                  KAN                0.693
                                 UKAN                0.655
                                  MLP                1.058


                          Figure 7: DDPM with KAN, UKAN, and MLP.


4   CONCLUSION

In this work, we presented the Unbound Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (UKAN) which unifies multi-
layer perceptron networks (MLPs) with KANs along with an efficient GPU implementation of the
underlying components of KANs. GPU acceleration decouples the computational cost and memory
fingerprint of KAN from the grid size to the order of B-spline function by using local matrix repre-
sentations of B-spline functions. In addition, our proposed UKAN architecture allows using KANs
without any fixed grid range limitation by generating coefficients from a coefficient-generator MLP.
We evaluated our UKAN model on regression, classification and generative tasks and compared
learning efficiency and accuracy. We are excited about the potential of UKAN and its variants, as
well as the applications of our accompanying GPU optimized library which alleviates memory and
compute issues in existing implementations. We believe this work will enable application of ac-
celerated KAN and UKAN in areas such as molecular property predictions, protein docking, large
language models, and computer vision.

R EFERENCES
Diab W. Abueidda, Panos Pantidis, and Mostafa E. Mobasher. Deepokan: Deep operator network
  based on kolmogorov arnold networks for mechanics problems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2405.19143.

Pakshal Bohra, Joaquim Campos, Harshit Gupta, Shayan Aziznejad, and Michael Unser. Learning
  activation functions in deep (spline) neural networks. IEEE Open Journal of Signal Processing,
  1:295–309, 2020.

Zavareh Bozorgasl and Hao Chen. Wav-kan: Wavelet kolmogorov-arnold networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.12832, 2024.

Jürgen Braun and Michael Griebel. On a constructive proof of kolmogorov’s superposition theorem.
   Constructive approximation, 30:653–675, 2009.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remi Genet and Hugo Inzirillo. Tkan: Temporal kolmogorov-arnold networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.07344, 2024.
Garrett B Goh, Nathan O Hodas, and Abhinav Vishnu. Deep learning for computational chemistry.
  Journal of computational chemistry, 38(16):1291–1307, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang.
  Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6):422–440, 2021.
Mehrdad Kiamari, Mohammad Kiamari, and Bhaskar Krishnamachari. Gkan: Graph kolmogorov-
 arnold networks, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06470.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Andreı̆ Nikolaevich Kolmogorov. On the representation of continuous functions of several variables
  by superpositions of continuous functions of a smaller number of variables. American Mathemat-
  ical Society, 1961.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature, 521(7553):436–444,
  2015.
Ziming Liu, Yixuan Wang, Sachin Vaidya, Fabian Ruehle, James Halverson, Marin Soljačić,
  Thomas Y Hou, and Max Tegmark. Kan: Kolmogorov-arnold networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.19756, 2024.
Miles Macklin. Warp: A high-performance python framework for gpu simulation and graphics.
 https://github.com/nvidia/warp, March 2022. NVIDIA GPU Technology Confer-
 ence (GTC).
SY Mashayak, Mara N Jochum, Konstantin Koschke, NR Aluru, Victor Rühle, and Christoph Jung-
  hans. Relative entropy and optimization-driven coarse-graining methods in votca. PLoS one, 10
  (7):e0131754, 2015.
Alireza Moradzadeh, Mohammad H Motevaselian, Sikandar Y Mashayak, and Narayana R Aluru.
  Coarse-grained force field for imidazolium-based ionic liquids. Journal of Chemical Theory and
  Computation, 14(6):3252–3261, 2018.
Mohit Pandey, Michael Fernandez, Francesco Gentile, Olexandr Isayev, Alexander Tropsha, Abra-
 ham C Stern, and Artem Cherkasov. The transformational role of gpu computing and deep learn-
 ing in drug discovery. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(3):211–221, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Kaihuai Qin. General matrix representations for b-splines. In Proceedings Pacific Graphics’ 98.
  Sixth Pacific Conference on Computer Graphics and Applications (Cat. No. 98EX208), pp. 37–
  43. IEEE, 1998.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics informed deep learn-
 ing (part i): Data-driven solutions of nonlinear partial differential equations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1711.10561, 2017.
Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E(n) equivariant graph neural net-
  works, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.09844.


                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kristof T Schütt, Huziel E Sauceda, P-J Kindermans, Alexandre Tkatchenko, and K-R Müller.
  Schnet–a deep learning architecture for molecules and materials. The Journal of Chemical
  Physics, 148(24), 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Runpeng Yu, Weihao Yu, and Xinchao Wang. Kan or mlp: A fairer comparison, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16674.


A     A PPENDIX
The Decoder network is designed to transform input features through a series of linear and temporal
layers. Here we explain architecture without KAN or UKAN layers, i.e. with only linear layer and
SiLU nonlinearity, and mention the differences at the end. The architecture consists of an input
linear layer, three temporal layers, and an output linear layer.

A.1   A RCHITECTURE D ETAILS

The Decoder is constructed with the following layers:

       • Input Linear Layer: The initial fully connected layer transforms the input features from
         the input dimension to an intermediate dimension.
       • Temporal Layers: A series of temporal layers; specifically designed for the handling of
         time-dependent data. In our implementation, we use three temporal layers.
       • Output Linear Layer: The final fully connected layer transforms the intermediate features
         back to the original input dimension.
       • Nonlinearity: The intermediate features passed through SiLU non-linear activation func-
         tion before being processed by the temporal layers.

The Temporal Layer is designed to integrate temporal information into the feature transformation
process. This layer receives the input features and a temporal embedding, processes them through a
series of linear transformations, and combines the outputs with a skip connection to ensure that the
temporal information is effectively incorporated.
The Temporal Layer consists of the following components:

       • Fully Connected Layers: These layers perform linear transformations on the input fea-
         tures.
       • Temporal Encoding: This layer projects the temporal embedding to the same dimensional
         space as the output features.
       • Skip Connection: If the input and output features have the same dimension, an identity
         mapping is used. Otherwise, a linear transformation is applied to match the dimensions.
       • Output Linear Layer: This layer produces the final output by combining the transformed
         features with the skip connection.

Within KAN and UKAN architectures, we only replaced the output linear layers of the Decoder
network and Temporal layers with UKAN and KAN layers. We used UKAN with grid delta of 0.4
and 24 dimensional positional encoding and KAN with 11 grid between -2 and 2. Both KAN and
UKAN were order 3 B-spline functions without MLP component.


                                                10
