Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


V IDEO I N - CONTEXT L EARNING : AUTOREGRESSIVE
T RANSFORMERS ARE Z ERO -S HOT V IDEO I MITATORS
 Wentao Zhang1,2,†,∗ , Junliang Guo3,† , Tianyu He3 , Li Zhao3 , Linli Xu1,2,‡ , Jiang Bian3
 1
   School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
 2
   State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
 3
   Microsoft Research Asia
 wentaoz@mail.ustc.edu.cn, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn,
 {junliangguo,tianyuhe,lizo,jiang.bian}@microsoft.com
 https://aka.ms/vid-icl



                                              A BSTRACT

          People interact with the real-world largely dependent on visual signal, which are
          ubiquitous and illustrate detailed demonstrations. In this paper, we explore utiliz-
          ing visual signals as a new interface for models to interact with the environment.
          Specifically, we choose videos as a representative visual signal. And by training
          autoregressive Transformers on video datasets in a self-supervised objective, we
          find that the model emerges a zero-shot capability to infer the semantics from a
          demonstration video, and imitate the semantics to an unseen scenario. This allows
          the models to perform unseen tasks by watching the demonstration video in an
          in-context manner, without further fine-tuning. To validate the imitation capac-
          ity, we design various evaluation metrics including both objective and subjective
          measures. The results show that our models can generate high-quality video clips
          that accurately align with the semantic guidance provided by the demonstration
          videos, and we also show that the imitation capacity follows the scaling law. Code
          and models have been open-sourced.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Humans acquire skills through imitation, a fundamental aspect of learning demonstrated even in
early childhood. For instance, when children observe how to hold a spoon, they not only learn this
specific action but can also generalize it to grasp different spoons in varied contexts. These demon-
strations are primarily conveyed through visual signals, which are abundant in our environment and
provide intricate guidance. Similarly, for the development of general AI agents, the ability to learn
from visual demonstrations and generalize to new situations is crucial and desirable. This capability
to understand and imitate visual signals is not only appealing but also essential for advancing AI
towards more human-like learning and interaction.
Previous works (Bar et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a;b; Bai et al., 2023) have studied image in-context
learning in image-based visual tasks. By formulating image perception tasks such as segmentation
and detection to supervised image pair demonstrations in delicately designed structures, e.g., a joint
grid image (Bar et al., 2022) for MAE models (He et al., 2022) or a sequence (Bai et al., 2023) for
Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017), they encourage the model to mimic the task and generate
the prediction of a given image query. However, these works require explicitly formulating the
training samples in source-target pairs, which restricts in-context inference to a supervised capacity.
Furthermore, image-level generation struggles to produce coherent and contextually appropriate
sequences.
In this paper, we introduce the Video ImiTator (VidIT) model, an autoregressive Trans-
former (Vaswani et al., 2017; Touvron et al., 2023) trained with the next token prediction objective
    ∗
      Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia in March 2024.
    †
      Equal Contribution.
    ‡
      Corresponding author.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Demonstration: Turning the camera from right to left       Query                 Generation


            Turning the camera from left to right


                Place Object into Receptacle


               Place Object from Receptacle


Figure 1: Illustrations of VidIT. Given a query video clip, the model generates different results
based on the provided demonstration video clips. The generated results are coherent with the query
in content and semantically consistent with the demonstrations. Text descriptions are annotated for
clarity and not used as model input.



on video datasets. VidIT uses videos as the primary unit for both inputs and outputs, with each train-
ing sample consisting of a sequence of frames from a single video, encoded as discrete tokens using a
vector-quantized encoder (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Patil et al., 2024). The model learns to predict
future frames based on preceding ones through self-supervised learning. Though demonstration-
generation pairs are not provided during training, the autoregressive paradigm enables the model to
discern the underlying structures and patterns within the videos, leading to the emergence of a zero-
shot imitation capability. Consequently, when the model encounters demonstration videos during
inference, it can generalize and apply these learned patterns to generate coherent and contextually
appropriate video sequences. This zero-shot capability echoes findings observed in large language
models (Brown et al., 2020).
Specifically, demonstration videos are highly versatile and capable of conveying a wide range of
information, such as examples for tasks including object manipulation, or movements of the camera
in an ego-centric video. Guided by these demonstrations, the model receives a query video clip set
in a new scene and generates a subsequent video sequence that mimics the semantic actions from
the demonstrations (see Figure 1 for examples). This allows VidIT to address multiple downstream
tasks, such as embodied planning and simulating, by letting a query robot imitate the actions demon-
strated by humans or other agents. Given that videos excel in describing low-level details (where
language may fall short) and temporal dynamics (where images are insufficient), VidIT acts as a
crucial interface for models to interact with the real world.
To comprehensively and accurately evaluate the model performance in VidIT, we develop both ob-
jective and subjective metrics to assess the generated videos in terms of visual quality, semantic
accuracy, and consistency with the prompted demonstrations. Our extensive experiments demon-
strate that the model not only produces high-quality video clips but also successfully adheres to the
semantic guidance provided by the demonstration examples. In addition, we show that the zero-shot
imitation capacity also follows the scaling law (Kaplan et al., 2020) of large models, illustrating the
potential of future works. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:

       • We propose and study the task of video imitation, which enables the model to interact with
         real-world demonstrations through video generation.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • We train a large Transformer model VidIT that exhibits powerful video imitation learning
        capacity, which also follows the scaling law of large models.
      • We propose various evaluation metrics to evaluate the visual quality and semantic accuracy
        of generated videos, providing a solid benchmark for the evaluation of video imitation
        learning.


2   R ELATED WORK

Imitation Learning and In-context Learning Imitation Learning is a crucial paradigm in rein-
forcement learning, wherein the expected behavior is acquired by mimicking demonstration’s ac-
tions (Zare et al., 2024). By learning on state-action pairs from an expert, the model is expected
to map the current state to the corresponding actions. Such learning paradigm is close to human
behavior and is appealing in interactive circumstances.
This ability to imitate has also been identified as a key feature in large language models (Radford
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2023), which is referred
to as in-context learning in LLM area. By conditioning on a sequence of text templates, an LLM
generates coherent content based on these templates. This paradigm obviates the need for parameter
updates and thereby benefiting the downstream usage of LLMs (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al.,
2023).
Different prompting designs (Wei et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023) empower LLMs to
deal with a wide range of natural language understanding and generation tasks.
As for the in-context paradigm in vision area, current research mainly focus on teaching the model
to mimic the vision task provided by demonstrations. Pioneering works construct vision imitation
as an image inpainting (Bar et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a;b) task. Given multiple query-answer
image pairs arranged in a grid image, models are optimized to reconstruct the masked answers
under the MAE projective (He et al., 2022). Recently, LVM (Bai et al., 2023) flatten image pairs
into a sequence and train an auto-regressive Transformer with next token prediction. These models
show powerful capacity to imitating vision tasks such as semantics segmentation and detection from
the demonstrations, but rely on training on supervised datasets. In addition, when extending the
basic elements (i.e., demonstrations, queries and predictions) from images to videos, unfortunately,
existing models struggle to handle the increased complexity as they are not designed to capture
the spatial-temporal relationships of inputs. Specifically, though LVM (Bai et al., 2023) is able to
generate consecutive frames of a query video clip, the video imitation capacity (e.g., generating
different consequences with different demonstrations) is not demonstrated.

Video Generation The studied video imitation learning can be considered as a conditional video
generation problem, which has recently become a prominent focus in research. Text is the most
commonly utilized condition, and various text-to-video models have shown promising results in
generating high-fidelity videos (Ho et al., 2022b;a; Brooks et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2023; Villegas
et al., 2023; Kondratyuk et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023b). Recently, video generation models are
spread to other related domains such as embodied AI (Yang et al., 2024), where they are utilized in
visual planning (Du et al., 2023) and simulation (Yang et al., 2023) with actions and observations as
conditions, illustrating the potential of this area. As for model architectures, Diffusion models (Ho
et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) and Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are both widely
adopted in different scenarios, and we choose the autoregressive Transformer as the backbone model
in this paper, as its abilities to model long-range dependencies and contextual relationships are
crucial for video imitators.


3   V IDEO I MITATOR

We introduce the proposed Video Imitator in this section. We begin with the problem definition
of both image and video imitation in Section 3.1, highlighting the differences between them. We
then elaborate on the training and inference pipeline of VidIT in Section 3.2. Dataset selection is
discussed in Section 3.3.


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Training                                                  Imitation Inference


                              Cross Entropy Loss                                              Visual Decoder
      𝑡1        𝑡2       𝑡3                       𝑡𝑁−1    𝑡𝑁    EOS       𝑡1𝐷   𝑡2𝐷   𝑡3𝐷          𝑄
                                                                                                  𝑡1     𝑄
                                                                                                        𝑡2        𝑄
                                                                                                                 𝑡𝑞−1
                                                                                                                         𝑄
                                                                                                                        𝑡𝑞
                                                                                                                                𝑄
                                                                                                                               𝑡𝑞+1


                          Transformer                                                       Transformer
      BOS       𝑡1       𝑡2                       𝑡𝑁−2   𝑡𝑁−1   𝑡𝑁        BOS   𝑡1𝐷   𝑡2𝐷         𝑡𝑑𝐷   𝑡1𝑄
                                                                                                                  𝑄
                                                                                                                 𝑡𝑞−2    𝑄
                                                                                                                        𝑡𝑞−1    𝑡𝑞𝑄


                               Visual Tokenizer                                               Visual Tokenizer


                     Training : continuous video clips                                Prompt: Demonstration + Query

Figure 2: The framework of VidIT. Left: Training the VidIT. The data used for training are contin-
uous video clips and the Transformer is trained by next token prediction objective. Right: Video
Imitation Inference. The model is conditioned on demonstration videos and generates the subse-
quent frames of a given query video.


3.1    P ROBLEM D EFINITION

Typically, the image task imitator models follow the setting akin to question answering: the demon-
stration is composed of k image pairs DI = {sqi , sai }ki=1 , where sqi ∈ R(3,nr ,nr ) denotes the input
image with resolution nr and sai denotes its target (usually an image with task-specific annota-
tions (Bai et al., 2023)). Given a query image xI , the model predicts its target y I conditioned on the
demonstration:
                                        fθ (xI ) = P (y I |xI , DI ),                                (1)
where fθ (·) represents the utilized vision model such as an MAE-pretrained ViT (Wang et al., 2023a;
Bar et al., 2022) or an auto-regressive Transformer (Bai et al., 2023), which is expected to discern
the inherent task from image pairs (sqi , sai ) and process x accordingly.
Unlike image task imitators, VidIT takes videos as basic element, focusing on inheriting semantics
from demonstrations rather than discerning specific tasks. Specifically, the demonstration DV =
{(s1i , · · · , sni i )}ki=1 comprises k video clips, and each clip consists of ni frames. Given a query
                                   n
video clip xV = (s1q , · · · , sq q ), the objective of VidIT can be formulated as:

                                                         fθ (xV ) = P (y V |xV , DV ),                                                (2)
            V                     n
where y         = (s1y , · · · , sy y ) denotes the generated video clip, which should be perceptually coherent
                       V                                                               V
with the query x while semantically consistent with the demonstration D at the same time.

3.2    A PPROACH

Training a Transformer for vision tasks typically consists of two stages, 1) training a visual tokenizer
such as VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Esser et al., 2021) to convert each image to discrete
tokens; 2) each training sample is constructed as a sequence of tokens to train the Transformer
decoder. For the first stage, we utilize a public pretrained checkpoint (Patil et al., 2024) with 16×
spatial compression rate as the VQ tokenizer. Our framework also fits for recent tokenizers with both
spatial and temporal compressions (Yu et al., 2023a;b), and we leave it for future work. Formally,
for a training video clip xV = (s1 , · · · , sn ) with n frames, the VQ tokenizer converts it to a flat
sequence xt = (t1 , · · · , tnt , tnt +1 , · · · , tN ), where nt denotes the number of quantized ids that
represents one frame, and N = n · nt denotes the total length of the sequence. We append special


                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tokens [bos] and [eos] to the front and end of the sequence, and no special tokens are inserted
between sequences of different frames.
Then, in the second stage, we follow the architecture of LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) utilizing
RMSNorm normalizing (Zhang & Sennrich, 2019) and Rotary Embeddings (Su et al., 2024), and
train a Transformer decoder in an autoregressive way:
                                                    N
                                                    Y
                                       fθ (xt ) =           P (ti |t<i ),                           (3)
                                                    i=1

where the model predicts each token conditioned on previous ones. Note that in the training stage,
each sequence is sampled from one original video, and we do not concatenate video clips from
different videos.

Imitation Inference The imitation inference format differs from that in the training. Following
Equation (2), a number of video clips are selected as the demonstration DV , which is appended in
front of the query clip xt<j = (t1 , · · · , tj−1 ) to let the model generate corresponding responses:
                                                  N
                                                  Y
                                   fθ (xt>j ) =         P (ti |xt<i , DV ).                         (4)
                                                  i=j

The generation results xt≥j = (tj , · · · , tN ) are vector-quantized IDs, which are then fed to the
pretrained VQ decoder to reconstruct as images. We provide an illustration of training and inference
pipelines in Figure 2.

Zero-shot Capacity The training and inference processes of the model differ in that the demon-
stration DV is not provided during training. Despite this, the model exhibits zero-shot video imi-
tation capabilities. This can be attributed to two key reasons. Firstly, no special separation token
is inserted between frames, allowing the preceding sequences t<i in Equation (3) to be implicitly
viewed in a demonstration-query format, i.e., P (ti |t<i,>j , t≤j ) where j < i. This implies that
the model has inherently learned to handle sequences resembling the demonstration-query structure
during training. Secondly, the autoregressive nature of the Transformer enables it to seamlessly ex-
tend its sequence prediction capabilities to scenarios where the demonstration and query come from
different videos, thus facilitating smooth generalization to the imitation paradigm. Our experiments
further show that training the model with explicit imitation examples does not yield significant im-
provements over the zero-shot approach. Refer to Sec 5.1 for more discussions.

Incorporate Other Modalities We mainly focus on videos as the demonstration in this paper, but
our approach can be easily extended to acquiring other modalities such as text. To do so, we just need
to transfer original text descriptions into latent representations denoted as c by a pretrained language
model (Raffel et al., 2020), then take c as an additional condition while training the Transformer
(Equation (3)) as well as imitation inference (Equation (4)). We show in experiments Sec 5.5 that
our model understands and reacts to both text and video demonstrations.

3.3   DATA

While large language models are trained on vast amounts of data (usually trillions of tokens (Hoff-
mann et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023)), high-quality video data is constrained. In addition, VidIT
prefers videos that exhibit not only rich content but also clear causal relationships and interactivity.
As a result, among various public video datasets, we focus on these accomplish embodied tasks and
select two primary datasets as our main training data sources: 1) Ego4d (Grauman et al., 2022),
an egocentric video dataset featuring abundant first-person activities; and 2) Kinetics-600 (Carreira
et al., 2018), a comprehensive video dataset comprising diverse human activities.
Additionally, we incorporate self-collected videos that contains a large amount of general real-world
videos, to augment the variety of video content.
To validate the VidIT’s imitation capability, we choose the Something-Something v2 (SSv2) as the
main evaluation dataset (Goyal et al., 2017) where each video depicts a basic action that occurs in the


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


physical world, such as moving objects in a direction. These videos convey strong semantic informa-
tion, which can be utilized to construct the demonstrations. We utilize the evaluation split of SSv2
as the evaluation set for all experiments. In addition, we include the Robotics Transformer-1 (RT-
1) (Brohan et al., 2022) dataset and MineRL1 to demonstrates VidIT’s effectiveness on embodied
AI and interactive tasks.

4       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

We design tailored evaluation pipelines to assess the VidIT’s capacity to perform video imitation.
We introduce the proposed evaluation metrics in Section 4.1, and summarize the details of our
implementations in Section 4.2.

4.1      E VALUATION

The evaluation of VidIT should include two aspects, the first is the visual quality as a normal video
generation task, and the second is semantic accuracy which is more critical as it reflects whether
the model understands and follows the semantic guidance provided by demonstrations. To validate
semantic accuracy, we design four kinds of demonstrations.

          • No Demonstration. This setting is akin to unconditional video prediction, where the model
            is asked to complete the query xV without any demonstration.
          • Random Demonstration. In this type of demonstration, video clips are chosen from arbi-
            trary videos within the entire SSv2 dataset.
          • In-class Demonstration. Given a video clip query, the demonstrations are sampled from
            videos with the same action label as the query.
          • Contrastive Demonstration. In contrast to the previous one, the sampled demonstrations
            have the contrast action label to the query.

We then evaluate the model in two settings, 1) using ground truth query labels to evaluate results,
to test whether the demonstrations enhance or deviate from the generation results; 2) using demon-
stration labels, to assess whether the model accurately acquires the semantic guidance and generates
corresponding results. We define various metrics to deal with these two settings.

Automatic Metrics For visual quality, we adopt several widely utilized metrics including PSNR
and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) to perform a frame-by-frame comparison between the generation
results and the ground truth video clip, i.e., the consequences of the query. Additionally, we include
the FID (Heusel et al., 2017) and FVD (Unterthiner et al., 2018) score to quantify the distribution
difference. These metrics are suitable for the first setting where ground truth is available.
For semantic accuracy, we propose two classification-based metrics:

          • Video Accuracy (V-Acc). We utilize an off-the-shelf video classifier (Tong et al., 2022)
            trained on the SSv2 dataset to calculate the classification accuracy of the generated video
            clips. Specifically, we predict the action label of each generated video clip and com-
            pare it with the ground truth label of the query. This metric provides a perceptual as-
            sessment of the semantic information in generation results. In particular, we use the
            videomae-base-finetuned-kinetics2 checkpoint.
          • Probing Accuracy (P-Acc). While V-Acc relies on a pretrained classifier and judges on vi-
            sual signals, we propose another metric named P-Acc to operate on the latent representation
            of VidIT. To directly validate the semantic information contained in latent representations,
            inspired by the widespread use of probing in vision feature extractors (He et al., 2022;
            Huang et al., 2023; Bardes et al., 2023), we train a probing classifier which takes hiddens
            in the last Transformer layer of the generation results as input and predicts the correspond-
            ing action label.
    1
        https://github.com/minerllabs/minerl
    2
        https://huggingface.co/MCG-NJU/videomae-base-finetuned-kinetics


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Most automatic metrics are only suitable for the first setting where ground truth video is available.
For the second setting without ground truth, only the probing accuracy can be utilized. As a supple-
mentary, we also introduce human evaluation.

Human Evaluation We manually select a subset from the SSv2 validation set, by picking out
action labels with contrastive semantics, such as Pulling [something] from left to right and Pulling
[something] from right to left. For a query video clip, we sample two demonstrations from the
same and contrastive class respectively, constructing a pair of evaluation samples (just as shown
in Figure 1). We involve 10 experienced users to score 20 pairs of samples from several aspects,
i.e., visual quality, semantic alignment and control. Alignment indicates whether each generation
is semantically consistent with the demonstration, while control justifies whether the pair of results
perform contrastive behavior following the demonstrations. Participants were presented with a pair
of videos at a time and asked to rate each video for each score on a scale of 1 to 5. We calculated
the average score as the final result.

4.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Preprocessing For each dataset, we assign a stride to sample frames at regular intervals in order to
capture human-recognizable video clips. The stride varies among datasets depending on the average
FPS but remains consistent within each dataset. Subsequently, we resize and center-crop the images
to a fixed size of 256 × 256 resolution.The pretrained VQ-GAN tokenizer (Patil et al., 2024) takes in
256 × 256 sized images and produces 16 × 16 = 256 discrete tokens with a compression coefficient
f = 16. Tokens of different frames are concatenated in the order of original frames, and each
training sequence contains 16 images and 4096 discrete tokens.

Transformer Architecture we adopt the LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) architecture, a typical
decoder-only transformer model for auto-regressive modeling with designs advantageous to large-
scale modeling. we experiment with different sets of hyper-parameters which result in models with
300M, 700M and 1.1B parameters separately. The details of hyper-parameter settings are shown in
Table 8. We introduce more training details in Appendix B.3

Inference In our main experiments, we set k = 1 to restrict the demonstration to one video. In this
way, the demonstration clip contains 8 frames, while the query and generation results both consist
of 4 frames. We also study different compositions such as k = 2 demonstrations sampled from
different videos and each with 4 frames. Please refer to Section 5.5 for more discussions.

Baselines We compare the proposed VidIT model with recent visual generative models based on
auto-regressive Transformer. LVM (Bai et al., 2023) is a natural baseline that shows strong image
imitation capacity. DeLVM (Guo et al., 2024) is a data efficient version of LVM, which involves
extra knowledge distilling step and have fewer parameters. LWM (Liu et al., 2024) is designed to
understand and generate long-context video contents, which is trained on aligned text-video pairs.
To evaluate the generalizability of our model, we train several variants: Pretrain, which is trained
without SSv2 in the training set; Pretrain w/ In-domain finetune, which is fine-tuned on SSv2 from
the Pretrain model where each sample consists of continuous 16 frames, similar to the pretraining
stage; and Pretrain w/ Imitation finetune, which is fine-tuned using the same data format as imitation
inference, consisting of two 8-frame videos from the same class.

5     R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
5.1   M AIN RESULTS

If not specified, we use our largest 1.1B model to generate results. We first evaluate the VidIT
results using the ground truth query label. In this setting, all automatic metrics can be utilized. The
quantitative results are presented in Table 1, where each row corresponds to a different demonstration
type. We draw the following conclusions from the results.
In-class Demonstrations Contribute to Stronger Semantic Accuracy Our analysis begins by
focusing on the result of the Pretrain model in the first block. We observe a significant enhancement


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: The Semantic Accuracy metrics and Visual Quality metric of different demonstration type
and training strateges. The best result in each block is bolded and second best result is underlined.
                                  Semantic Accuracy                         Visual Quality
            Demonstration
                                  V-Acc ↑ P-Acc ↑            PSNR ↑         LPIPS ↓ FID ↓           FVD ↓
        Pretrain
        No Demonstration            22.9          29.6       13.20          0.442          20.94    119.51
        Random Demonstration        22.7          28.3       13.01          0.450          22.53    131.34
        In-class Demonstration      24.7          36.7       13.07          0.447          21.95    125.77
        Pretrain w/ Imitation Finetune
        No Demonstration            24.2          26.7       13.02          0.460          22.21    129.68
        Random Demonstration        23.1          25.6       13.01          0.454          20.66    115.76
        In-class Demonstration      25.7          40.7       13.08          0.450          20.49    113.52
        Pretrain w/ In-domain Finetune
        No Demonstration            25.0          30.8       13.09          0.446          20.87    108.12
        Random Demonstration        24.9          34.1       13.16          0.440          19.17     95.72
        In-class Demonstration      25.9          48.8       13.21          0.438          18.92     88.63

        Table 2: Results on automatic and human evaluation of VidIT and baseline models.

                                         Automatic Metrics             Human Evaluation
           Baselines
                                         P-Acc     PSNR          Quality Alignment Control
           LVM (Bai et al., 2023)          27.1      12.45           3.50           2.71           1.81
           DeLVM (Guo et al., 2024)        32.8      12.69           3.21           2.28           2.11
           LWM (Liu et al., 2024)          24.9      11.89           3.39           2.33           2.05
           VidIT (ours)                    38.5      13.07           4.12           3.73           3.01



in the semantic accuracy when using in-class video clips as demonstrations, compared to without
demonstration or using randomly selected ones. Specifically, there is a notable 7.1% / 8.4% improve-
ment in P-Acc and a 1.8% / 2.0% gain in V-Acc over no or prompting with random demonstrations
respectively. These findings validate our proposition that when prompted with semantically related
demonstrations, the model more accurately generates video clips that adhere to the original trace, in
a zero-shot way on both the domain and the imitation ability.
Random Demonstrations Mislead the Semantics Beyond the inferior performance compared to
in-class demonstrations, random ones also reveal a gap of 0.2% in V-Acc and 0.7% in P-Acc to the
no demonstration setting. This indicates that prompting with unrelated demonstrations negatively
impacts the semantics of the generated results.
In-domain Finetuning Leads to General Improvement We further analyze the results presented
in the second and third blocks of Table 1, focusing on different fine-tuning strategies. The superiority
of in-domain finetuning over the initial Pretrain is evident, indicating a straightforward performance
boost when in-domain training data is available. In addition, when comparing in-domain finetuning
with imitation finetuning, the in-class P-Acc of the former rises to 48.8%, showcasing an 8.1%
improvement over the latter. These findings underscore the remarkable zero-shot capacity of VidIT,
showcasing the model’s capability at adapting to the imitation formatting through exclusive training
on continuous video clips, while explicit finetuning with the target format fails to yield significant
enhancements.
Evaluation with Demonstration Label We evaluate the Table 3: The Probing accuracy
generation results with the demonstration label to assess the evaluated by demonstration labels.
controllability of the model. We use results with both in-class
and contrastive demonstrations as described in Section 4.1 to
                                                                   Demonstration P-Acc
train the probing model. As shown in Table 3, both cases have
well above average probing accuracy, indicating that the repre-    Contrastive      35.5
sentations of generation results successfully obtain the seman-    In-class         33.8
tic information from demonstrations.                               Random           16.7

                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           FID and PSNR Metric              40     Probing Accuracy                   10    Probe Accuracy Gain
   26     26.33            13.06                                  36.7
                                 13.0       35                                         8                    7.45


                                                                         Probe-acc gain
                  12.96                                     31.6


                                    Probe-acc
   24                                       30                                         6


                                      PSNR
FID
                                  12.8      25                                         4
   22                     21.95                                                                       3.5
           12.67                            20 19.5                                    2 2.5
                   21.29          12.6
   200.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                    150.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                      00.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
         Model Parameters (B)                     Model Parameters (B)                      Model Parameters (B)
                   (a)                                   (b)                                     (c)
                     Figure 3: The performance when scaling model parameters.

5.2     C OMPARISON WITH BASELINE M ODELS

We compare our VidIT with baseline methods mentioned in Section 4.2 on the video imitation
abilities.
We report both automatic metrics and human evaluation results in Table 2. The full evaluation of
baseline models is reported in Table 6 in Appendix A.6. As shown in the results, our VidIT model
significantly outperforms the baseline models in both objective and subjective evaluations. We at-
tribute this difference to the training data formats of VidIT and other models. LVM and DeLVM
mainly relies on pairs of images and their annotations, which limits their ability to extract semantic
information across consecutive frames and generate coherent sequences correspondingly. Moreover,
the training process of LWM are not designed to capture the demonstration’s semantics, leading to
degradation on imitation performance.

5.3     S CALING B EHAVIOR

As describe in Section 4.2, we set up different sizes of model, respectively 300M, 700M and 1.1B.
In this section, we assess the models’ scaling behavior from the following aspects.
Scalability on Visual Quality We present the PSNR and FID scores of models in various sizes in
Figure 3a. The results indicate that larger models tend to produce samples of higher quality.
Scalability on Semantic Accuracy We present both the absolute probing accuracy scores of in-
class demonstrations and the performance gain over random demonstrations in Figure 3b and 3c.
From both results, we observe a clear trend that larger models yield more informative hidden repre-
sentations, and offer more precise control over the generation results when conditioned on different
demonstrations.

5.4     G ENERALIZATION A BILITY

In this section, we elaborate on the generalization ability of the VidIT model. Thanks to its self-
supervised training paradigm, VidIT can be smoothly adapted to multiple scenarios and tasks with
minimal modifications.
Firstly, we apply VidIT to Robotics Transformer dataset (Brohan et al., 2022) to imitate actions of
a robotic arm, such as opening and closing drawers and placing objects. The samples on Figure 4
demonstrates that VidIT can successfully mimic various robotic arm actions from demonstrations,
completing the frame sequences with the same movements.
Additionally, we highlight that VidIT can serve as an underlying video generation engine within
an interactive agent. In this setup, VidIT receives previous observations and generates subsequent
frames, which are then converted to action signals via the inverse dynamics mechanism. This pro-
cess ensures that the action signals reflect VidIT’s imitation intent. As depicted in Figure 6 in
Appendix A.1, agents perform specific actions guided by VidIT, showcasing the zero-shot imitation
ability of VidIT and revealing its potential to interact with the environment.
We also validate VidIT’s capability as a video task imitator. Following the approach of image task
imitators like LVM, we create video segmentation exemplars to form QA pairs on the VIPSeg (Miao
et al., 2022) dataset. The results, presented in Figure 7 in Appendix A.2, indicate that VidIT success-


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


fully learns the task format from the demonstrations. Moreover, we study how the model emerges
the imitation ability by analyzing the attention score in Appendix A.5
                    Demonstration                                   Query & Generated


                     Figure 4: Generation Samples of VidIT on RT-1 Dataset.

5.5    A BLATION AND A NALYSIS

Different Number of Demonstrations We investigate the impact of different numbers of demon-
strations on VidIT performance. Within a 16-frame context window, we fix the query length as 4
frames and the generation as 4 frames, and construct four demonstration formats: 1) no demonstra-
tion; 2) one 4-frame demonstration; 3) two 4-frame demonstrations sampled from different videos;
4) one 8-frame demonstration. The results in Table 4 demonstrate that providing demonstrations
generally improves both P-Acc and V-acc scores. Additionally, providing more (2 × 4 versus 1 × 4)
or longer demonstrations (1 × 8 versus 1 × 4) both result in better performance.
      Table 4: Semantic accuracy of different
      demonstration formats.                  Table 5: Results with text as demonstrations.

           Demonstration    P-Acc     V-Acc                                  V-Acc      FID
           No                29.6      22.9            Tune w/ text           28.8      19.46
           1 × 4 frames      35.6      22.9             + Infer w/o text      24.6      19.72
           2 × 4 frames      37.2      24.2            Tune w/o text          24.7      20.02
           1 × 8 frames      36.7      24.7


Text as Demonstrations To demonstrate the versatility of our model, we explore incorporating
text into the demonstrations. We fine-tune the 300M Pretrain model on the SSv2 dataset by append-
ing corresponding text annotations to the front of each video. The text annotations are encoded into
latent representations using a pretrained T5-large model (Raffel et al., 2020). The results, presented
in Table 5, indicate that our model can seamlessly adopt demonstrations in various modalities. Ad-
ditionally, adding textual descriptions enhances the model’s imitation capacity.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce Video Imitator, a novel model that extends imitation learning to video
data. By converting video frames into sequences of discrete tokens and training the autoregressive
Transformer with next token prediction, our VidIT model exhibits zero-shot imitation capabilities,
which can generate semantically coherent and contextually appropriate video sequences based on
provided demonstrations. Extensive experiments confirm that VidIT effectively captures and con-
veys the semantic information embedded in the demonstrations, demonstrating its potential to en-
hance various downstream tasks such as visual planning. Additionally, the model’s versatility is
verified by its ability to understand and integrate multi-modal demonstrations simultaneously.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
62276245).


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Yutong Bai, Xinyang Geng, Karttikeya Mangalam, Amir Bar, Alan Yuille, Trevor Darrell, Jitendra
  Malik, and Alexei A Efros. Sequential modeling enables scalable learning for large vision models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00785, 2023.
Amir Bar, Yossi Gandelsman, Trevor Darrell, Amir Globerson, and Alexei Efros. Visual prompting
 via image inpainting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:25005–25017,
 2022.
Adrien Bardes, Quentin Garrido, Jean Ponce, Xinlei Chen, Michael Rabbat, Yann LeCun, Mido
  Assran, and Nicolas Ballas. V-jepa: Latent video prediction for visual representation learning.
  2023.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian
  Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-
  nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deek-
  sha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez,
  Karl Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi,
  Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke, Austin Stone, Clayton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent
  Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and
  Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe
  Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh. Video
  generation models as world simulators. 2024. URL https://openai.com/research/
  video-generation-models-as-world-simulators.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Joao Carreira, Eric Noland, Andras Banki-Horvath, Chloe Hillier, and Andrew Zisserman. A short
  note about kinetics-600. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.01340, 2018.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):
  1–113, 2023.
Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans, and
  Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 12873–12883, 2021.
Raghav Goyal, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Joanna Materzynska, Susanne West-
  phal, Heuna Kim, Valentin Haenel, Ingo Fruend, Peter Yianilos, Moritz Mueller-Freitag, et al.
  The” something something” video database for learning and evaluating visual common sense. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 5842–5850, 2017.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Gird-
  har, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.
Jianyuan Guo, Zhiwei Hao, Chengcheng Wang, Yehui Tang, Han Wu, Han Hu, Kai Han, and
   Chang Xu. Data-efficient large vision models through sequential autoregression. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2402.04841, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian,
  and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful
  prompt optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08532, 2023.

Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.

Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022a.

Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8633–
  8646, 2022b.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pre-
 training for text-to-video generation via transformers. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023.

Zhicheng Huang, Xiaojie Jin, Chengze Lu, Qibin Hou, Ming-Ming Cheng, Dongmei Fu, Xiaohui
  Shen, and Jiashi Feng. Contrastive masked autoencoders are stronger vision learners. IEEE
  Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

Dan Kondratyuk, Lijun Yu, Xiuye Gu, José Lezama, Jonathan Huang, Rachel Hornung, Hartwig
  Adam, Hassan Akbari, Yair Alon, Vighnesh Birodkar, et al. Videopoet: A large language model
  for zero-shot video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14125, 2023.

Bei Li, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Hany Hassan, Arul Menezes, Tong Xiao,
  Jiang Bian, and JingBo Zhu. Deliberate then generate: Enhanced prompting framework for text
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19835, 2023.

Hao Liu, Wilson Yan, Matei Zaharia, and Pieter Abbeel. World model on million-length video and
  language with ringattention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08268, 2024.

Jiaxu Miao, Xiaohan Wang, Yu Wu, Wei Li, Xu Zhang, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang. Large-scale
   video panoptic segmentation in the wild: A benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
   on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.

Suraj Patil, William Berman, Robin Rombach, and Patrick von Platen. amused: An open muse
  reproduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01808, 2024.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
   hanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
Stephen Tian, Chelsea Finn, and Jiajun Wu. A control-centric benchmark for video prediction. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Zhan Tong, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Limin Wang. VideoMAE: Masked autoencoders are data-
  efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
  and Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ruben Villegas, Arkanath Pathak, Harini Kannan, Dumitru Erhan, Quoc V Le, and Honglak Lee.
  High fidelity video prediction with large stochastic recurrent neural networks. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual descriptions. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Xinlong Wang, Wen Wang, Yue Cao, Chunhua Shen, and Tiejun Huang. Images speak in images:
  A generalist painter for in-context visual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6830–6839, 2023a.
Xinlong Wang, Xiaosong Zhang, Yue Cao, Wen Wang, Chunhua Shen, and Tiejun Huang. Seggpt:
  Segmenting everything in context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03284, 2023b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Mengjiao Yang, Yilun Du, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter
 Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06114, 2023.
Sherry Yang, Jacob Walker, Jack Parker-Holder, Yilun Du, Jake Bruce, Andre Barreto, Pieter
  Abbeel, and Dale Schuurmans. Video as the new language for real-world decision making. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.17139, 2024.
Lijun Yu, Yong Cheng, Kihyuk Sohn, José Lezama, Han Zhang, Huiwen Chang, Alexander G
  Hauptmann, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Yuan Hao, Irfan Essa, et al. Magvit: Masked generative video
  transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 10459–10469, 2023a.
Lijun Yu, Jose Lezama, Nitesh Bharadwaj Gundavarapu, Luca Versari, Kihyuk Sohn, David Min-
  nen, Yong Cheng, Agrim Gupta, Xiuye Gu, Alexander G Hauptmann, et al. Language model
  beats diffusion-tokenizer is key to visual generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023b.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Maryam Zare, Parham M Kebria, Abbas Khosravi, and Saeid Nahavandi. A survey of imitation
 learning: Algorithms, recent developments, and challenges. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics,
 2024.
Biao Zhang and Rico Sennrich. Root mean square layer normalization. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In this section we provide more samples on different video datasets and benchmarks that VidIT
model produces. Synthesis videos on Something-something v2 dataset are presented in Table 9.
One can also navigate to our project page https://aka.ms/vid-icl for clearer presented
samples. Table 10 includes samples on Robotics Transformer-1 dataset, showcasing the ability of
VidIT to fit on various form of video datasets. Furthermore, VidIT as a versatile generalist, can act
as a simulator in reinforcement learning tasks, for which we provide detailed explanations.


A.1   V ID IT AS S IMULATOR

We demonstrate that VidIT can also function as a simulator in reinforcement learning tasks by eval-
uating it on the VP2 (Tian et al., 2023) benchmark. VP2 is a benchmark for video prediction mod-
els used in robotic manipulation via model-predictive control. VidIT generates future frames with
videos that accomplishing the same task as the demonstration, where the generated frames inversely
reflect the corresponding actions that correctly interact with the environment (i.e. inverse dynam-
ics). We compare the trajectories produced by the SVG (Villegas et al., 2019) baseline and VidIT in
Figure 5. Evaluating on the Push-red task, we find that VidIT provides more precise control over
the environment interaction.


                Figure 5: The trajectory produced by SVG and VidIT respectively.


Additionally, we evaluate VidIT on the MineRL environment as the underlying video generation
model, where VidIT take in previous game scenes as conditions to imitate and generate subsequent
scenes. Generated game scenes are then fed into inverse dynamics models to generate the next action
signal. We showcase two types of actions: Chop wood and Attack sheep. In Figure 6, the VidIT
correctly generate game scenes and produce corresponding action signal to finish the action.


Figure 6: The VidIT model functions as video generator for chop-wood and attack-sheep in MineRL.



                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2   V ID IT AS TASK I MITATOR

We expand the role of VidIT model to the task imitator on video, which mirrors the cases in image
imitation learning. In this section, we finetune VidIT in VIPSeg dataset (Miao et al., 2022) for a few
steps and show that VidIT can also smoothly generalize to video perceptual tasks like video seg-
mentation. As depicted in Figure 7, VidIT successfully learns the task format from demonstration,
and generates the segmentation outputs of the query video.

                            Demonstration + Query                                  Generated


      Figure 7: The VidIT can also imitate video perceptual tasks such as video segmentation.


A.3   C ASE S TUDY: BASELINE METHODS

In this section we compare the generated cases of VidIT with the baseline methods. As in Figure 8,
we see that conditioned on the same frames, VidIT is capable of generating more semantically ac-
curate and high-quality video than baseline models. Moreover, VidIT is lower in parameter budget,
highlighting the priority of VidIT as a video imitator model.


                     Figure 8: Generated cases of VidIT and baseline methods.



                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4   FAILURE C ASES

When prompted with semantically unrelated videos, VidIT may struggle to generate coherent con-
tent. In this section, we present failure cases where VidIT fails to align the query video with the
semantic context of the demonstration video (see Figure 9).
For instance, in the first row, the demonstration video conveys the semantic information of moving
a ball downward. However, when starting with a query video depicting an unrelated action, such as
folding a blanket, the model struggles to reconcile the two contexts. As a result, it tends to ignore
the demonstrated actions and generates content that lacks coherence with the demonstration.
Similar patterns are observed in other cases. These examples reveals VidIT’s potential difficulty
in maintaining semantic coherence when prompted with unrelated or ambiguous demonstrations.
Addressing this limitation presents a promising direction for future research.


                                  Figure 9: Failure cases of VidIT.


      Figure 10: The attention weight visualization during training and inference respectively.


A.5   I NTERPRETABILITY OF G ENERALIZATION

In this section, we highlight the interpretability of VidIT and its ability to generalize to imitation
tasks in a zero-shot manner. To demonstrate this, we analyze the attention weights from the lan-
guage model backbone to compare the similarity of attention patterns when provided with the same
demonstration during training and inference.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Specifically, we extract the attention weights from the last layer of the model and average them
across all attention heads. Since the tokens are flattened from the original frames in raster scan
order, we rebind the tokens to their corresponding regions in the frames for better visualization. The
results are shown in Figure 10.
The first row depicts the original frame sequence. The second row represents the training case,
where frames are drawn from a single video clip. The third row illustrates the inference case, where
the sequence begins from a different query frame. When generating a new token, we observe similar
attention patterns across the demonstration frames. Notably, the attention is concentrated around the
moving object within the frames.
This phenomenon indicates that the model effectively learns and leverages the semantic information
from previous frames, enabling it to perform imitation tasks even when starting from a different
scene.


                                                             Frame Aggregated Attention Weight
                                    Success(In-Class)          Demonstration Query & Generation
                                    Failure(Random)
 Frame Aggregated


                      0.15
   Attention Weight


                      0.10

                      0.05

                                1                2              3          4              5          6               7
                                                                       Frame Index

           Figure 11: The aggragated attention score distribution in demonstration and query frames.


Additionally, we analyze the failure cases in detail from the perspective of attention weights. Specif-
ically, we examine how new frames attend to previous frames during generation. Intuitively, when
a new frame is effectively guided by the demonstration, it tends to allocate more attention to the
frames in the demonstration video, rather than only attending to the query frames.
To illustrate this, we visualize the attention distribution of generated frames on previous frames,
as shown in Figure 11. Clearly, successful generation samples exhibit a tendency to allocate more
attention to the demonstration frames, indicating an ability to comprehend and utilize its semantic
information. In contrast, the attention curve for failure cases reveals a higher focus on the query
frames, effectively ignoring the guidance provided by the demonstration part.


A.6                   F ULL E VALUATION M ETRICS ON BASELINES

In this section, we complete Table 2’s results with the all the evaluation metrics in Section 4.1. From
the results in Table 6, it is evident that the VidIT model consistently outperforms the baseline models
in video imitation tasks, reinforcing its superior capability in capturing both semantic alignment and
visual quality.



                             Table 6: Full automatic metrics for baseline models. The best result is bolded .
                                                        Semantic Accuracy                  Visual Quality
                               Demonstration
                                                        V-Acc ↑ P-Acc ↑        PSNR ↑      LPIPS ↓ FID ↓    FVD ↓
                      LVM (Bai et al., 2023)             21.2       27.1       12.45       0.489    27.58   163.13
                      DeLVM (Guo et al., 2024)           24.1       32.8       12.69       0.462    23.65   132.09
                      LWM (Liu et al., 2024)             21.8       24.9       11.89       0.474    29.91   191.56
                      VidIT (ours)                       25.9       38.5       13.07       0.450    22.30   126.32


                                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 7: The configuration of different size of models.

                        Hidden dim       MLP dim       Num. Heads        Num. Layers
               300M         1024           2688              8               22
               700M         1536           4096             16               24
               1.1B         2048           4096             16               26

                                   Table 8: Model hyperparameters.

                                   Hyperparameter            Value
                               Learning rate scheduler    inverse sqrt
                                   Learning rate              5e−4
                                   Warm up steps             10000
                                   Weight decay               0.01
                                     Optimizer              AdamW
                                   AdamW betas             (0.9, 0.95)
                                   Context length             4096


B     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

B.1   M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

We utilize LLaMA as the Transformer architecture in our work. To validate the scaling behavior,
we train three different sizes of the VidIT model within the LLaMA architecture: 300M, 700M,
and 1.1B. We carefully tune the hidden dimension, MLP intermediate dimension, and the number
of Transformer decoder layers to achieve different model sizes. The configuration details of these
models are presented in Table 7.

B.2   H YPERPARAMETERS

The hyperparameters used to train the VidIT model are presented in Table 8. We utilize inverse
square root scheduler and start model training with 10,000 warmup steps.

B.3   T RAINING D ETAILS

Our largest variant, VidIT 1.1B, is trained on 2x8H100 nodes, with Pytorch DDP parallel strategy
integrated in the Pytorch-Lightening trainer. The training time is about 3 hours per epoch and thus
the total training GPU hours is 720 (15 epochs).

C     L IMITATIONS

Despite the promising results, several limitations exist in this study. Firstly, while VidIT excels at
generating short video sequences, its performance on longer sequences has not been thoroughly eval-
uated. Secondly, the model’s dependence on the quality and relevance of provided demonstrations
can lead to inconsistencies, particularly when demonstrations are noisy or semantically misaligned.
Future work should address these limitations by utilizing visual tokenizers with temporal compres-
sion, and scaling or developing robust models to handle imperfect demonstrations.

D     E THICS S TATEMENT

Positive societal impacts of VidIT include its potential to enhance various downstream applications
such as embodied planning and robotic simulation by enabling models to imitate actions demon-
strated in videos. As for negative societal impacts, the widespread adoption of this technique may
raise concerns about privacy when powerful models gain the ability to analyze and generate video


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


content at scale. The datasets utilized in this study are publicly available and have been thoroughly
reviewed to ensure they do not include personally identifiable information or offensive content.
Nonetheless, as these datasets are sourced from the Internet, there may still be inherent biases. To
address this, we have implemented a rigorous filtering process on the training data to minimize the
potential for the model to generate inappropriate content.

     Table 9: More samples of VidIT generated samples on Something-something v2 dataset.

                  Demonstration                                      Query & Generation


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 10: More examples of VidIT generated samples on RT-1 dataset.

                 Demonstration                                 Query & Generation


                                               21
