Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING TO C OMMUNICATE T HROUGH I MPLICIT
C OMMUNICATION C HANNELS
 Han Wang                                                 Binbin Chen
 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen            ByteDance Inc.
 xwanghan@gmail.com                                       chenbinbin.1996@bytedance.com

 Tieying Zhang
 ByteDance Inc.
 tieying.zhang@bytedance.com

 Baoxiang Wang∗
 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
 Vector Institute
 bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn



                                              A BSTRACT

            Effective communication is an essential component in collaborative multi-agent
            systems. Situations where explicit messaging is not feasible have been common
            in human society throughout history, which motivate the study of implicit com-
            munication. Previous works on learning implicit communication mostly rely on
            theory of mind (ToM), where agents infer the mental states and intentions of others
            by interpreting their actions. However, ToM-based methods become less effective
            in making accurate inferences in complex tasks. In this work, we propose the
            Implicit Channel Protocol (ICP) framework, which allows agents to communicate
            through implicit communication channels similar to the explicit ones. ICP lever-
            ages a subset of actions, denoted as the scouting actions, and a mapping between
            information and these scouting actions that encodes and decodes the messages.
            We propose training algorithms for agents to message and act, including learn-
            ing with a randomly initialized information map and with a delayed information
            map. The efficacy of ICP has been tested on the tasks of Guessing Numbers, Re-
            vealing Goals, and Hanabi, where ICP significantly outperforms baseline methods
            through more efficient information transmission.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Effective communication is pivotal in collaborative multi-agent systems, especially in environments
characterized by incomplete information (Panait & Luke, 2005; Busoniu et al., 2008; Tuyls & Weiss,
2012). Communication acts as a vital conduit, enabling agents to exchange private information, co-
ordinate joint actions, and infer real-world states (Wang et al., 2021). These processes synergistically
foster tighter cooperation and enhance collective performance (Li et al., 2002; Cao et al., 2012). We
focus on multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods for communication, where commu-
nication is broadly categorized into explicit and implicit strategies (Dafoe et al., 2020).
Explicit communication uses direct channels independent of the environment dynamics (Sukhbaatar
et al., 2016; Foerster et al., 2016; Jiang & Lu, 2018), allowing agents to transmit observations, inten-
tions, and advice to facilitate decision-making and coordination (Zhu et al., 2022; Qu et al., 2021).
This approach, analogous to human language or verbal exchanges (Havrylov & Titov, 2017; Baker
et al., 1999), has been widely employed in MARL to enhance collaboration. However, dependence
on direct channels introduces significant computational and memory overheads (Roth et al., 2006),
    ∗
        Corresponding to: Baoxiang Wang


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which makes it challenging to implement in certain scenarios. Examples are tasks without commu-
nication channels or decentralized frameworks (Oliehoek et al., 2008; Kraemer & Banerjee, 2016).
Situations where explicit messaging is not feasible have been common in human society throughout
history. From early humans engaging in hunting and gathering through silent cooperation (Klein,
2009; Tomasello & Vaish, 2013), to modern military operations using gestures and codes for covert
communication (Tzu, 2008), and even in everyday social interactions where intentions are conveyed
through expressions, tone, and body language (Pease, 1984; Duncan Jr, 1969). Implicit communi-
cation has established an effective mechanism for information sharing without explicit language.
Learning methods for implicit communication have been investigated by the MARL community. A
prominent method is the theory of mind (ToM) (Premack & Woodruff, 1978), where agents infer
the mental states and intentions of others by interpreting their actions (Heider & Simmel, 1944). By
modeling the beliefs, desires, and intentions of other agents, ToM enables agents to coordinate in a
variety of simple tasks (Baker et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2020). However, ToM-
based approaches face significant challenges, including the difficulty of making accurate inferences
and the high computational complexity involved in modeling other agents. These issues become
particularly pronounced in dynamic environments where agents must constantly update their models
based on limited or ambiguous information.
To address these challenges associated with ToM methods, we introduce Implicit Channel Protocol
(ICP), a novel framework that allows agents to communicate through communication protocols in
implicit communication likewise how it was done in explicit communication. ICP leverages a sub-
set of actions, denoted as the scouting actions, which have no or uniform effects on environment
dynamics. A centralized mapping between information and these scouting actions is established
to encode and decode the messages. Agents exchange information by deliberately taking scouting
actions, forming an implicit communication channel. We further demonstrate how agents’ strate-
gies are trained on this channel, including training with a randomly initialized information map and
training with a delayed information map.
We validate the effectiveness of ICP through comprehensive experiments on the tasks of Guessing
Numbers, Revealing Goals, and Hanabi (Bard et al., 2020). These environments share a common
characteristic: they lack direct communication but agents must collaboratively make decisions to
achieve shared rewards. This setting introduces significant challenges, including sparse and delayed
reward feedback, along with difficulty in credit assignment both temporally and among agents. De-
spite these hurdles, our experiments on Guessing Numbers and Revealing Goals demonstrate that
ICP significantly enhances performance, through more efficient information transmission, compared
to baseline methods. In Hanabi, which is a popular card game played by humans, our approach
achieved an average score of 24.91 out of 25, which surpasses the best available learning algorithm
which obtains 23.81.

2   BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Process The cooperative multi-agent
problem can be formulated as a Dec-POMDP game (Bernstein et al., 2002), which is described
by the tuple G = (S, U, N, T , O, R, γ), where S represents the true global state of the environment.
At each discrete time step t, every agent i ∈ N := {1, . . . , n} selects an action ui from its action
space Ui . The state transition function T (s′ |s, u) : S × U × S → P (S) governs the transition of
states, where u = (u1 , . . . , un ) denotes the joint action. In POMDP, the global state remains in-
accessible, and each agent i can only perceive its individual observation oi through the observation
function Oi (s) : S × N → O. Ri (s, ui ) : S × Ui → R represents the reward function for each agent
i. In the cooperative scenarios, all agents share a common reward function R(s, u) : S × U → R,
known as team reward. The objective for each agent is to maximize the expected return, which
makes effective cooperation among all agents necessary.

Learning to Communicate Communication among agents is critical for effective collaboration
in MARL. Most researches in this field focused on explicit communication protocols (Tucker et al.,
2022; Peng et al., 2017; Kong et al., 2017; Pesce & Montana, 2020; Kim et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2020; Freed et al., 2020b;a; Gupta et al., 2023; Foerster et al., 2016), where agents exchange mes-
sages containing critical information. Additionally, techniques like attention mechanisms or graph-


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


based methods that used to build more effective communication connection (Jiang & Lu, 2018; Das
et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2018; Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2024; Tucker et al., 2022) and in-
tention sharing or theory of mind (ToM) reasoning to transmit more useful information (Wang et al.,
2021; Kim et al., 2020; Qu et al., 2021), further enhancing the effectiveness of MARL systems.
Explicit communication on direct channels often incurs significant communication overhead and
may not be available in environments with limited bandwidth and high communication costs. Im-
plicit communication, where agents convey information through their behaviors, has been explored
as an alternative approach (Li et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2023; Li et al., 2021; Shaw et al., 2022; Grupen
et al., 2022). ToM-based methods represent one main research strand for implicit communication,
where agents infer the intentions and beliefs of others to anticipate actions and adjust strategies ac-
cordingly. Methods in Rabinowitz et al. (2018); Tian et al. (2020); Nguyen et al. (2020); Zhao et al.
(2023) aim to enhance coordination by modeling and predicting others’ behavior based on observed
actions. However, ToM-based approaches can be computationally intensive and may struggle to
accurately infer intentions in complex environments.


3    S ETTING

Consider in a fully cooperative Dec-POMDPs, where no direct communication channel is available.
Each agent maintains a joint action-observation history τt,i = {o0,i , u0 , r1 , ..., rt , ot,i } and makes
decisions and executes actions based on it. Within this setting, we define a subset of actions as
scouting actions U s which have no or uniform effects on the state st or reward rt and mainly affect
the observation function Oi (st ). The remaining actions are defined as regular actions U r .
In an idealized situation, scouting actions serve to influence the observation mapping function, which
allows the agents to gather critical information from the environment to improve their decision-
making and coordination. A scouting action might reveal information about an agent’s surroundings
or the state of other agents without changing the environment unpredictably. For instance, in the
game of Hanabi, Hint actions reveal information to other players while consuming an information
token, thereby uniformly altering the game state. Similarly, in StarCraft II, scouting the map with
Scan from Terrans requires depleting energy, which impacts the environment and provides new
information in the agent’s observations.
We are interested in this setting because agents generally need to employ scouting actions to collect
sufficient information before taking other actions to obtain rewards. Both the information collection
phase and the reward acquisition phase may require cooperation among agents. For example, agents
will only receive positive rewards if one agent scouts the correct information for another agent, and
the latter correctly utilizes this information. In this context, sparse and delayed reward feedback,
along with the credit assignment problem both temporally and among agents, poses significant chal-
lenges for agents to learn optimal strategies.


4    I NFORMATION C ARRIED BY S COUTING ACTIONS

Scouting actions carry two types of information.

1. Information reflected through the environment. When an agent performs a scouting action, it
   influences the observation function, and the new observations provide information. This type of
   information depends on the observation function, the states, and the joint actions of all agents.
2. Information reflected through the choice of the scouting action. The specific scouting action
   chosen by an agent can carry intentional meaning. This type of information depends only on
   other agents’ scouting action policy. If the receiver agent cannot understand the sender agent’s
   intention, no information will be transmitted.

General multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods tend to focus more on the first type
of information. In Dec-POMDPs without modeling other agents’ strategies, both partial observation
of states and other agents’ policies introduce uncertainty. In the exploration phase of online MARL
training, the second type of information cannot be utilized due to the unknown policies of others.
Therefore, MARL methods mostly learn to use the information reflected through the environment.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the second type of information which is not limited by observation function and states, when
agents’ intention is understood correctly, it is more fixable and could be more useful for decision-
making and cooperation. Theory of mind (ToM) methods utilize the second type of information
by modeling strategies or inferring the intention of other agents. By estimating the internal states
of other agents, an agent can interpret the intentional choices behind their scouting actions. One
approach is to build an explicit belief model that infers the state from observed actions to achieve
communication. However, this method incurs a computational cost that grows exponentially with
the size of the game and the number of agents. Moreover, the precise state distribution information
is often difficult to fully utilize. Another approach involves training a neural network to map actions
to states or intentions, which requires exponentially more data compared to action policy training.
Since this method does not produce explicit inferences, the resulting information is inherently bi-
ased, which could negatively impact the agent’s decision-making process.
We propose a simpler and more effective solution to take advantage of the second type of information
conveyed by scouting actions while also mitigating the computational overhead and inaccuracies
of ToM methods. By establishing a shared communication protocol where all agents follow the
same strategy for selecting scouting actions, the intended information can be easily decoded from
the chosen action. This approach eliminates the need for state estimation and intention inference
required in ToM methods. In our setting, this communication protocol has the following benefits.

1. Low Computational Overhead and Accurate Information Transmission. By having all
   agents follow the same strategy for selecting scouting actions, there is no need for additional
   computational inference or training of a separate inference model to deduce intentions. The
   inverse of the strategy can be used to directly interpret the information, resulting in low compu-
   tational overhead and accurate transmission of intentions.
2. Efficient Communication Enabled by Broadcasted Information. Scouting actions are observ-
   able by all agents in the system, allowing any information conveyed through these actions to be
   inherently broadcasted. This characteristic facilitates the use of efficient embedding techniques,
   such as the hat mapping method, to achieve more effective communication.
3. Independence from Observation-Based Information. When different embeddings are used,
   the information conveyed by altering the observation function may differ, making the information
   carried by scouting actions not necessarily correlated with the environment-based information.
   Both types of information can be optimized concurrently to enhance cooperation and decision-
   making.


5    S TRATEGY T RAINING ON C ONSTRUCTED I MPLICIT C HANNEL

To establish a shared communication protocol, we propose Implicit Channel Protocol (ICP), a new
framework for agents’ implicit communication. In this framework, at each step, agents choose
whether to send information. If an agent chooses not to send information, a regular action ur will
be taken according to the action policy. If otherwise an agent wishes to convey message mi ∈ M , it
will output a scouting action us = P(mi ), which maps mi through the centralized mapping mecha-
nism P. This mechanism P needs to be decodable, which provides output messages from scouting
actions. By allowing agents to send information through encoded scouting actions and other agents
to decode the messages from the globally observed scouting actions, an implicit communication
channel is constructed.
As agents need to decide whether to send information, the new action space becomes U ′ = {U −
U s , send info}, then agents sample actions ui ∈ U ′ from new action policy ui ∼ πi (· | τt,i , m−i ),
where m−i are decoded messages transmitted from other agents. For message mi , it is selected by
the message strategy mi ∼ ϕi (· | τt,i , m−i ). Based on this process, we can formulate agents’ value
                                  PT
functions as V πi ,ϕi ,P (s) := E[ t=1 γ t−1 rt (st , ut , st+1 ) | s1 = s], for st+1 ∼ T (· | st , ut ) and
ut = (ut,1 , ..., ut,n ),

                                  
                                  us = P(mi ∼ ϕi (· | τt,i , m−i ))     if send info,
                     and ut,i =                                                                         (1)
                                  ur ∼ π (· | τ , m )                   else.
                                         i      t,i −i



                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Equation (1) highlights three essential components of the framework: the agents’ action policy π,
the message strategy ϕ, and the centralized mapping mechanism P. To develop these components,
we investigate two different methodologies. The first one is training with a random initial informa-
tion map and the second one is training with a delayed information map. Both approaches construct
an implicit communication channel within the environment, with which the agents exchange infor-
mation and achieve implicit coordination. In the rest of the section, we will discuss the details of
these approaches.

5.1   S TRATEGY T RAINING WITH R ANDOM I NITIAL M AP

In this approach, we first establish a one-to-one mapping between information and actions using
a randomly initialized embedding, that makes the size of the message the same as the size of the
scouting action space M = {1, ..., |U s |}. Once this one-to-one mapping is set, the inverse of P will
obtain the original message mi = P −1 (usi ).
In our implementation, we use a value-based method for training the action policy, incor-
porating parameter sharing and value decomposition techniques to facilitate effective coor-
dination among agents. For the information strategy, we use the communication gradient
method (Foerster et al., 2016), which is designed to optimize communication protocols within
a predefined channel. Both the action policy and the information strategy are parameter-
ized as Q-networks, for action policy πi (τt,i ) = argmax Qθ1,i (τt,i , ui ), and message strat-
egy ϕi (τt,i ) = argmax Qθ2,i (τt,i , mi ). Given the value function V πi ,ϕi ,P (s), the Q-functions
are defined by Qπi (τt,i , ui ) := Em∼ϕ,P [rt (st , ut , st+1 ) + γV πi ,ϕi ,P ], and Qϕi (τt,i , mi ) :=
Eur ∼π,P [rt (st , ut , st+1 ) + γV πi ,ϕi ,P ], where π = (π1 , ..., πn ), ϕ = (ϕ1 , ..., ϕn ) and m =
(m1 , ..., mn ).

Parameter Sharing and Value Decomposition Parameter sharing enables different agents with
the same observation and action spaces to learn from a shared network. Despite using the same
network, agents evolve different hidden states and receive distinct observations, allowing them to
behave differently. We incorporate the agent index i into the network input, allowing for specializa-
tion through rich representations in deep Q-networks.
To further enhance learning efficiency, we apply value decomposition (Sunehag et al., 2018) for the
action policies π. The joint action-value function Qπtot (τ, u) is expressed as the sum of individual
                               PN
value functions: Qπtot (τ, u) = i=1 Qπ (τt,i , ui ; θ1,i ), where τ = (τi , ..., τN ). This decomposition
simplifies learning by allowing the gradients to propagate through individual agents’ policies while
maintaining a shared reward structure, which accelerates the overall training process.

Communication Gradient Since our message space is M = {1, . . . , |U s |}, which is discrete and
non-binary, we introduce the Gumbel-Softmax technique (Havrylov & Titov, 2017; Jang et al., 2016)
to sample one-hot vector messages m.   ⃗ The Gumbel-Softmax method enables us to generate dis-
crete samples that are differentiable, facilitating end-to-end training with gradient descent. Specif-
ically, we sample the one-hot vector message m    ⃗ such that m⃗ i = 1 if i = arg maxj∈M (log(ϕ(· |
                          ⃗ i = 0 otherwise, where gj = − log(− log(uj )) and uj ∼ U (0, 1).
τt,i , m−i ) + gj )), and m
This method ensures a continuous relaxation between ϕ and m.  ⃗ As a result of this relaxation, the
game becomes fully differentiable and can be trained using the backpropagation algorithm. By
enabling gradients to flow smoothly through the communication process, this approach facilitates
more effective and efficient training of agents. Comparing the communication gradient implemen-
tation in DIAL (Foerster et al., 2016), we adopt this Gumbel-Softmax technique to replace the
Discretize/Regularize Unit (DRU). This substitution allows agents to send discrete and non-binary
messages during the learning phase, thereby enhancing the richness and accuracy of the information
exchanged.

5.2   S TRATEGY T RAINING WITH D ELAYED M AP

In the training process with a delayed map, we begin by learning the information strategies and ac-
tion policies using a direct communication channel. This initial phase provides agents with a flexible
environment that allows for direct communication and enable them to develop their strategies more


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


effectively. Once these strategies are established, we determine the mapping mechanism that maps
the messages to actions. Finally, we fine-tune both the action policies and information strategies in
the ICP framework to ensure optimal performance within the constraints of the final environment.
Given that the information strategies were initially trained using a direct communication channel,
there may be discrepancies between this channel and the implicit communication channel con-
structed by scouting actions, particularly in terms of capacity and whether the channel is discrete
or noiseless. To minimize any potential performance loss resulting from these differences, we can
limit the capacity of the direct channel or apply efficient embedding techniques (such as the hat map-
ping method) during the message-to-action mapping process. These steps help to align information
strategies developed in the direct channel with the constraints of the implicit channel and ensure
messages are decodable.
During implementation, we utilize standard explicit communication algorithms designed for direct
channels, such as RGMComm, to pre-train the information strategy. Then we use two kinds of map-
ping methods, including simple one-to-one mapping and the hat mapping method (Brown & Tanton,
2009; Bushi, 2012; Butler et al., 2009; Feige, 2004; Havil, 2011; Winkler, 2002) to obtain new in-
formation strategies. The one-to-one mapping ensures that each message corresponds directly to an
action, while the hat mapping allows an agent to communicate efficiently with multiple receivers.
Finally, we fine-tune both the information strategy and the action policy to optimize performance
within the implicit communication framework.

Pre-training with Direct Channel In the pre-training phase, we utilize a direct communication
channel to facilitate the learning of the communication strategies. During this phase, the message
size can be larger than the scouting action space, allowing for more complex and detailed communi-
cation between agents. This flexibility enables the agents to explore a wider range of communication
strategies and coordination behaviors, which are crucial for solving complex tasks in partially ob-
servable environments. However, after pre-training, the message strategy needs to transition to the
implicit communication framework and it is necessary to compress these messages without loss
of information. For one-to-one mapping, this mapping requires that the message size matches the
scouting action space exactly. It ensures a direct and consistent mapping between the learned mes-
sages and the corresponding actions.

Hat Mapping Implementation When the local observations of different agents’ have large over-
laps, the hat principle-based mapping method utilizes broadcast channels to achieve a single trans-
mission of messages to multiple receivers. The method is inspired by the multi-color hat guessing
game, where players use logical deduction based on limited communication to maximize team suc-
cess. In this game, players can observe the hat colors of others but not their own, and they must
guess their own hat color using a pre-defined strategy. A well-known strategy involves each player
leveraging the sum of the hat colors they observe, modulo the total number of possible colors. For
example, in an 8-color version of the game, each player can compute the sum of the colors they ob-
serve (assigned numerical values) and use a pre-determined rule, such as calculating the sum modulo
8, to make a logical deduction about their own hat color.
In our implementation, at each step, each agent computes local messages intended for every other
agent. These local messages are derived from the shared information strategy and the observations
that the target agent cannot see but are overlapped with other agents—much like the “hat” in the
hat guessing game. When an agent sends information, it transmits a structured public message
that combines all these local messages using a sum modulo operation. As a result, each receiving
agent can also use the sum modulo operation to combine the received public message with the local
messages of all agents except themselves and the sender. This allows them to infer their own specific
local message from the combined public message. This method enables a single broadcast to convey
individualized information to multiple agents simultaneously, enhancing communication efficiency
even when explicit communication is not possible.


6   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we explore the application of the ICP across various environments where no direct
communication is available. ICP plays a vital role in these settings by constructing an implicit


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Left: Guessing Numbers Environment. Agents cannot see their own digits, but can reveal
others’ segments’ states by collaboratively giving hints. They can deduce their own digit and obtain
shared rewards. Right: Revealing Goals Environment. The agents are positioned in a random spots
in a grid world and are assigned a unique target. However, they can only observe others’ targets
which do not include themselves. By revealing each other’s targets in the nearby grid, they can
eventually find their own targets and reach them.


communication channel that enhances the agents’ ability to share and interpret information. We
will demonstrate how ICP facilitates effective collaboration and decision-making in 3 tasks, namely
Guessing Numbers, the Revealing Goals, and the Hanabi card game. The first two tasks are designed
by us and can be reused by future works as testing environments. The Hanabi game is a popular
card game played by humans, and is described as The Hanabi Challenge (Bard et al., 2020) by the
community. Each of these environments presents unique challenges, and we will show how ICP
optimizes the use of scouting actions to improve overall performance and strategy.

6.1   G UESSING N UMBERS

In the Guessing Numbers game, we present a collaborative, turn-based multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning environment involving N agents. Each agent i is uniquely assigned a digit di ∈
{0, 1, . . . , 9}, which is visible to all other agents j ̸= i but remains unknown to agent i themselves.
The primary objective for each agent is to deduce and correctly guess their own digit di . During each
turn, an agent can choose to either guess their own digit by selecting dˆi ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 9} or provide
a hint about another agent’s digit using the Radioland Slim font—a seven-segment digital display
representation. Specifically, hints involve revealing the state (“on” or “off”) of one of the seven seg-
ments of another agent’s digit, and these hints are public and observable by all agents. Each agent’s
action space comprises 10 + 7 × (N − 1) actions: 10 options for guessing their own digit and 7 hint
options for each of the N − 1 other agents. The game encourages strategic collaboration, as agents
must balance between gathering information to deduce their own digit and assisting others through
informative hints, aiming for the collective success of all agents correctly guessing their digits.
In this game, successfully guessing their digit rewards an agent with 10, while performing a hint
action incurs a small penalty of −0.1 to encourage efficient communication and collaboration. The
game imposes a limit l on the number of hint actions, and each agent is allowed only 1 guess. The
game concludes when all agents have made their guesses, with the goal being to accurately guess all
digits within these constraints.
In the Guessing Numbers experiment, we evaluate the performance of 5 approaches: VDN-on-
policy, VDN-off-policy, ICP with the random initial map approach (ICN-DIAL-RM), ICP with the
delayed map approach (ICN-DIAL-DM), and a cheating approach where a direct communication
channel is available (DIAL-Cheat). Each approach is evaluated over 1k episodes with 6 random
seeds, and running on a Linux metal machine with 256 GB RAM and 3090Ti GPU for 36 hours.
For VDN-off-policy, we begin by warming up the replay buffer until its size exceeds the batch size.
During each training step, we add 10 episodes to the replay buffer and randomly sample a batch of
episodes from the buffer for training. In contrast, for VDN-on-policy and our proposed method, we
utilize a vectorized environment to sample a batch of episodes at each training step and use these
samples for training.
Despite differences in network architecture, these approaches share similar hyperparameters. Specif-
ically, we set the hidden size of the MLP and GRU to 256, use 2 layers in the GRU, and set the

                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            (a)                                            (b)

Figure 2: (a): The training curves of Guessing Numbers over a total of 100k steps with N = 3, l =
11. (b): Average episode length running by different algorithms in Guessing Numbers.


learning rate to 5 × 10−4 , batch size to 256. The target network update rate is set to 10, γ is set to
0.99, ϵ is set to 0.1, and we apply gradient clipping with a threshold of 10.
The results are presented in Figure 2. All algorithms are capable of eventually guessing their own
digit correctly, but the differences of number of hit actions needed is significant among the algo-
rithms. By examining the saved models and averaging over 10k episodes, we find that ICN-DIAL-
RM has an average episode length of approximately 8.63, while VDN-on-policy and VDN-off-
policy have average episode lengths of around 12.4. This observation further demonstrates that
ICN achieves more efficient information transfer by using scouting actions in implicit channels.

6.2   R EVEALING G OALS

In the Revealing Goals task, we present a non-sequential collaborative that emphasizes information
sharing among agents. The environment consists of N agents operating within an H ×H grid world.
Each agent i starts at a random position and is assigned a unique goal location gi that is at least two
grid units away from its starting position. Critically, agents cannot perceive their own goal locations;
they can only observe the goal locations of other agents j ̸= i. At each time step, agents select from
a fixed action space of eight actions: moving up, down, left, or right, and reveal information about
the adjacent grid cells in these directions. When an agent performs a reveal action, the adjacent grid
cell in the specified direction becomes revealed, and all agents gain information about whether their
own goals are located in that cell. The grid world features wrap-around edges, creating a toroidal
topology where, for example, moving left from cell (0, y) leads to cell (H − 1, y).
An agent observes the locations of all agents, the goal points of other agents, and any goals on the
revealed grids. Since they cannot directly perceive their own goals, agents must rely on information
revealed by themselves and others to infer the locations of their own goals. The objective is for each
agent to navigate to its designated goal location gi , upon which all agents receive a shared reward of
1. When an agent reaches its goal, a new goal is randomly assigned to it but is at least two grid units
away from its current position. The game proceeds for a total of T time steps. This environment
encourages strategic collaboration, as agents must balance between exploring the grid to find their
own goals and assisting others by revealing grid cells that may contain teammates’ goals. The agents
will need to communicate implicitly, using the fixed action space of size 8.
In the experiments for the Revealing Goals task, we use the same training hyperparameters and
model architecture as in the Guessing Numbers experiments. We also compare the performance of 5
approaches: DIAL-Cheat, ICN-DIAL-DM, ICN-DIAL-RM, VDN-on-policy, and VDN-off-policy.
The experimental results are shown in Figure 3(a). ICN-DIAL-RM significantly outperforms the
baseline methods by achieving an average score 2.17 times that of the baselines. One reason for
its effectiveness is that, in each round, each of the N agents can engage in N broadcast communi-
cations through implicit channels, which significantly enhances information efficiency compared to
relying solely on environmental feedback. This result further validates the effectiveness of ICP in
more complicated grid world tasks.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          (a)                                            (b)

Figure 3: (a): The training curves of Revealing Goals over total 100k train steps with N = 4, H =
5, T = 50. (b): The training curves of 4-players Hanabi with on-policy algorithms take around 150
hours and off-policy algorithms take around 20 hours.


6.3   H ANABI


To demonstrate ICP’s broader applicability, we also evaluate it in the game of Hanabi. Hanabi is
a fully cooperative card game where players work together to play cards in a specific order to form
sequences, aiming to achieve the highest possible score. When it is played by humans, people will
mute themselves and coordinate only through taking and observing actions. This game requires
effective implicit communication and strategic information sharing among the agents.
Because the game rule of Hanabi is quite involved, we refer it to a popular website https://
hanabi.github.io/ that discusses both rules and human-play strategies. The action space for
each agent includes three options: playing a card out of their 5-card hand, discarding a card, or
giving a hint towards another player’s 5-card hand. The hint could reveal all cards in a player’s
hand of a specific color or rank. Since they cannot see their own cards, agents must rely on hints
from others to infer what cards they hold. The success of the game heavily depends on the agents’
capacity to use these hints effectively to coordinate their actions and play the correct cards in order.
In our experiments, we focus on the 4-player full version of Hanabi. Since hint actions in Hanabi
are natural scouting actions, we select them to serve as information carriers for our ICP implementa-
tion. We implement several baseline algorithms, including VDN-off-policy and the original version
of SAD (Hu & Foerster, 2019), as well as a variant of SAD with the hint action masks removed.
For the ICP algorithm, we explore several variations, including ICN-DIAL-RM-on-policy, which in-
volves strategy training with a random initial map using DIAL’s communication gradient technique
resulting in an on-policy learning method. We also implement ICN-DIAL-RM-cut-gradient-off-
policy, similar to ICN-DIAL-RM-on-policy but with the communication gradient chain cut off to
enable off-policy learning. Additionally, we use ICN-RGMComm-DM, which is strategy training
with a delayed map using RGMComm (Chen et al., 2024), an off-policy MARL communication
algorithm, and ICN-RGMComm-DM-hat-mapping, an extension of ICN-RGMComm-DM that uti-
lizes the hat mapping method for improved communication.
Our presented results are based on the best runs selected from more than three random seeds. From
the results shown in Figure 3(b), we observe that the ICP method using the hat mapping approach,
ICN-RGMComm-DM-hat-mapping, achieved the best performance. The score achieved by ICP is
24.91, which surpasses the best available learning algorithm (SAD, 23.81 points) and vastly
outperforms theory of mind-based methods (Fuchs et al. (2021) 19.13 points) and average
human players (17 points, reported in Kantack (2021)). It is worth remarking that the state-of-
the-art strategy in the Hanabi game is a search-based algorithm, WTFWThat+search, which reports
an averaged score of 24.96 points (Lerer et al., 2020). With the maximum score of the game being
25, and there are certain deals that prevent the players from winning 25 points in any way, both ICP
and WTFWThat+search are close to fully solving the game.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For additional details on our implementation, please refer to Appendix A. A comparison between
ICP and Hanabi human conventions is provided in Appendix B, along with a detailed analysis of the
Hanabi results in Appendix C.

7     D ISCUSSIONS
7.1   C OMPATIBILITY OF ICP WITH OTHER T RAINING M ETHODS

In the ICP framework, action policy allows for the use of various algorithms for training. For
instance, the action policy can be trained using value-based methods like VDN (Sunehag et al.,
2018) or policy-based methods such as MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017). This compatibility ensures
that ICP can be tailored to various problem settings and agent dynamics. One could choose the most
suitable algorithm depending on the specific characteristics of the environment and the agents.
The communication strategy within the ICP framework is also versatile. It can be implemented
using a variety of direct channel communication algorithms that support discrete channels. These
include well-established methods like DIAL (Foerster et al., 2016) and RGMComm (Chen et al.,
2024), which are designed to optimize communication under different constraints and requirements.
The flexibility in choosing both the action policy and the communication algorithm highlights the
comparability and broad applicability of the ICP framework, making it a general approach for multi-
agent reinforcement learning scenarios.

7.2   P OTENTIAL OF F URTHER U TILIZING THE E NVIRONMENT I NFORMATION

As described in Section 4, scouting actions carry two types of information. The ICP framework
utilizes the information reflected through the choice of the scouting action (choice information) to
establish an implicit communication channel. However, even when we leverage this information, the
information reflected through the environment (environment information) remains useful. Although
in most cases the constructed implicit channel transmits more stable and useful information, in some
situations the environment information is also significant. For example, in the Revealing Goals
environment, a revealing action intended to transmit embedded information might also reveal other
agents’ goals, which helps agents to make better decisions.
To verify the impact of this environmental information on performance, we randomly shuffle 6
different embeddings on the ICN-RGMComm-hat-mapping policy saved from the previous Hanabi
experiment. We then fine-tune the action policy while keeping the information strategy fixed. The
results are shown in Figure 4 in the appendix, where, under a fixed information strategy, some
randomly shuffled embeddings enjoy improved performance. This suggests that one could further
utilize the environment information for more effective communication in future works.

8     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
The Implicit Channel Protocol (ICP) introduced in this paper is an advancement in implicit commu-
nication through multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). By mapping information to scouting
actions to construct implicit channels and optimizing both action and communication strategies, ICP
facilitates communication protocols to be established even without explicit channels. The experi-
mental results validate the protocol’s effectiveness across various MARL scenarios and demonstrate
its capacity to significantly improve both coordination among agents and performance in the tasks.
A possible direction for future work is extending ICP to environments that lack inherent scouting
actions. In such settings, identifying appropriate actions to serve as information carriers becomes
challenging, as these actions must both convey information effectively and interact with the environ-
ment beneficially. Future research could focus on developing algorithms that dynamically identify
or design such actions, balancing effective communication with minimal impact on the environment.
These advancements would enhance the applicability of ICP across a wider range of scenarios, mak-
ing it a more versatile tool in multi-agent communication.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The code and our designed environments are freely available in the supplementary material. The de-
tails of the implementation can be found in Appendix A. The hyper-parameters used in experiments
are also mentioned in Section 6.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Han Wang and Baoxiang Wang are partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (62106213, 72394361), an extended support project from the Shenzhen Science and Tech-
nology Program, Longgang District Key Laboratory of Intelligent Digital Economy Security, and
ByteDance.

R EFERENCES
Chris L Baker, Julian Jara-Ettinger, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Rational quantitative
  attribution of beliefs, desires and percepts in human mentalizing. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(4):
  0064, 2017.
Michael Baker, Tia Hansen, Richard Joiner, and David Traum. The role of grounding in collaborative
 learning tasks. Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches, 31:63, 1999.
Nolan Bard, Jakob N Foerster, Sarath Chandar, Neil Burch, Marc Lanctot, H Francis Song, Emilio
  Parisotto, Vincent Dumoulin, Subhodeep Moitra, Edward Hughes, et al. The hanabi challenge: A
  new frontier for ai research. Artificial Intelligence, 280:103216, 2020.
Daniel S Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity of
  decentralized control of markov decision processes. Mathematics of operations research, 27(4):
  819–840, 2002.
Ezra Brown and James Tanton. A dozen hat problems. Math Horizons, 16(4):22–25, 2009.
Jaime Bushi. Optimal strategies for hat games. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
   2012.
Lucian Busoniu, Robert Babuska, and Bart De Schutter. A comprehensive survey of multiagent rein-
  forcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications
  and Reviews), 38(2):156–172, 2008.
Steve Butler, Mohammad T Hajiaghayi, Robert D Kleinberg, and Tom Leighton. Hat guessing
  games. SIAM review, 51(2):399–413, 2009.
Yongcan Cao, Wenwu Yu, Wei Ren, and Guanrong Chen. An overview of recent progress in the
  study of distributed multi-agent coordination. IEEE Transactions on Industrial informatics, 9(1):
  427–438, 2012.
Jingdi Chen, Tian Lan, and Carlee Joe-Wong. Rgmcomm: Return gap minimization via discrete
   communications in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
   on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation
  of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. In NIPS 2014 Workshop on Deep
  Learning, December 2014, 2014.
Allan Dafoe, Edward Hughes, Yoram Bachrach, Tantum Collins, Kevin R McKee, Joel Z
  Leibo, Kate Larson, and Thore Graepel. Open problems in cooperative ai. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2012.08630, 2020.
Abhishek Das, Théophile Gervet, Joshua Romoff, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Mike Rabbat, and
  Joelle Pineau. Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication. In International Conference on
  machine learning, pp. 1538–1546. PMLR, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Starkey Duncan Jr. Nonverbal communication. Psychological bulletin, 72(2):118, 1969.
Uriel Feige. You can leave your hat on (if you guess its color). Technical report, Technical Report
  MCS04-03, Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, The . . . , 2004.
Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando De Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning
  to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Benjamin Freed, Rohan James, Guillaume Sartoretti, and Howie Choset. Sparse discrete communi-
  cation learning for multi-agent cooperation through backpropagation. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
  tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 7993–7998. IEEE, 2020a.
Benjamin Freed, Guillaume Sartoretti, Jiaheng Hu, and Howie Choset. Communication learning via
  backpropagation in discrete channels with unknown noise. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
  on artificial intelligence, 2020b.
Andrew Fuchs, Michael Walton, Theresa Chadwick, and Doug Lange. Theory of mind for deep
  reinforcement learning in hanabi. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09328, 2021.
Niko A Grupen, Daniel D Lee, and Bart Selman. Multi-agent curricula and emergent implicit signal-
  ing. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
  Systems, pp. 553–561, 2022.
Nikunj Gupta, G Srinivasaraghavan, Swarup Mohalik, Nishant Kumar, and Matthew E Taylor. Ham-
  mer: Multi-level coordination of reinforcement learning agents via learned messaging. Neural
  Computing and Applications, pp. 1–16, 2023.
John C Harsanyi. Games with incomplete information played by “bayesian” players, i–iii part i. the
  basic model. Management science, 14(3):159–182, 1967.
Matthew Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep recurrent q-learning for partially observable mdps. In
 2015 aaai fall symposium series, 2015.
Julian Havil. Impossible?: Surprising Solutions to Counterintuitive Conundrums. Princeton Uni-
  versity Press, 2011.
Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. Emergence of language with multi-agent games: Learning to com-
  municate with sequences of symbols. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.
Fritz Heider and Marianne Simmel. An experimental study of apparent behavior. The American
  journal of psychology, 57(2):243–259, 1944.
Hengyuan Hu and Jakob N Foerster. Simplified action decoder for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. Learning attentional communication for multi-agent cooperation.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jiechuan Jiang, Chen Dun, Tiejun Huang, and Zongqing Lu. Graph convolutional reinforcement
   learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Nicholas Kantack. Reinforcement learning on human decision models for uniquely collaborative ai
  teammates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09800, 2021.
Woojun Kim, Myungsik Cho, and Youngchul Sung. Message-dropout: An efficient training method
 for multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
 intelligence, 2019.
Woojun Kim, Jongeui Park, and Youngchul Sung. Communication in multi-agent reinforcement
 learning: Intention sharing. In International conference on learning representations, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Richard G Klein. The human career: Human biological and cultural origins. University of Chicago
  Press, 2009.
Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Xiangyu Kong, Bo Xin, Fangchen Liu, and Yizhou Wang. Revisiting the master-slave architecture
  in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07305, 2017.
Landon Kraemer and Bikramjit Banerjee. Multi-agent reinforcement learning as a rehearsal for
  decentralized planning. Neurocomputing, 190:82–94, 2016.
Adam Lerer, Hengyuan Hu, Jakob Foerster, and Noam Brown. Improving policies via search in
  cooperative partially observable games. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial in-
  telligence, 2020.
Dapeng Li, Zhiwei Xu, Bin Zhang, Guangchong Zhou, Zeren Zhang, and Guoliang Fan. From
  explicit communication to tacit cooperation: A novel paradigm for cooperative marl. In Proceed-
  ings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp.
  2360–2362, 2024.
Ling Li, Alcherio Martinoli, and Yaser S Abu-Mostafa. Emergent specialization in swarm sys-
  tems. In Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning—IDEAL 2002: Third Interna-
  tional Conference Manchester, UK, August 12–14, 2002 Proceedings 3, pp. 261–266. Springer,
  2002.
Sheng Li, Jayesh K Gupta, Peter Morales, Ross Allen, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Deep implicit
  coordination graphs for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 20th Interna-
  tional Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 764–772, 2021.
Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-
  agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Dung Nguyen, Svetha Venkatesh, Phuoc Nguyen, and Truyen Tran. Theory of mind with guilt
  aversion facilitates cooperative reinforcement learning. In Asian conference on machine learning,
  pp. 33–48. PMLR, 2020.
Frans A Oliehoek, Matthijs TJ Spaan, and Nikos Vlassis. Optimal and approximate q-value func-
  tions for decentralized pomdps. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 32:289–353, 2008.
Liviu Panait and Sean Luke. Cooperative multi-agent learning: The state of the art. Autonomous
  agents and multi-agent systems, 11:387–434, 2005.
Allan Pease. Body language: How to read others’ thoughts by their gestures. Sheldon press, 1984.
Peng Peng, Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang, Quan Yuan, Zhenkun Tang, Haitao Long, and Jun Wang.
  Multiagent bidirectionally-coordinated nets: Emergence of human-level coordination in learning
  to play starcraft combat games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10069, 2017.
Emanuele Pesce and Giovanni Montana. Improving coordination in small-scale multi-agent deep re-
  inforcement learning through memory-driven communication. Machine Learning, 109(9):1727–
  1747, 2020.
David Premack and Guy Woodruff. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and
  brain sciences, 1(4):515–526, 1978.
Chao Qu, Hui Li, Chang Liu, Junwu Xiong, james zhang, Wei Chu, Weiqiang Wang, Yuan Qi, and
  Le Song. Intention propagation for multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=7apQQsbahFz.
Neil Rabinowitz, Frank Perbet, Francis Song, Chiyuan Zhang, SM Ali Eslami, and Matthew
  Botvinick. Machine theory of mind. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4218–
  4227. PMLR, 2018.

                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Maayan Roth, Reid Simmons, and Manuela Veloso. What to communicate? execution-time decision
 in multi-agent pomdps. In Distributed autonomous robotic systems 7, pp. 177–186. Springer,
 2006.
Samuel Shaw, Emerson Wenzel, Alexis Walker, and Guillaume Sartoretti. Formic: Foraging via
  multiagent rl with implicit communication. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):4877–
  4884, 2022.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Rob Fergus, et al. Learning multiagent communication with backpropaga-
  tion. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinicius Zambaldi, Max
  Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, et al. Value-decomposition
  networks for cooperative multi-agent learning based on team reward. In Proceedings of the 17th
  International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 2085–2087, 2018.
Kai Tian, Athanasios Tzigieras, Chongfeng Wei, Yee Mun Lee, Christopher Holmes, Matteo
  Leonetti, Natasha Merat, Richard Romano, and Gustav Markkula. Deceleration parameters as
  implicit communication signals for pedestrians’ crossing decisions and estimations of automated
  vehicle behaviour. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 190:107173, 2023.
Zheng Tian, Shihao Zou, Ian Davies, Tim Warr, Lisheng Wu, Haitham Bou Ammar, and Jun Wang.
  Learning to communicate implicitly by actions. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-
  ficial Intelligence, 2020.
Michael Tomasello and Amrisha Vaish. Origins of human cooperation and morality. Annual review
 of psychology, 64(1):231–255, 2013.
Mycal Tucker, Roger Levy, Julie A Shah, and Noga Zaslavsky. Trading off utility, informativeness,
 and complexity in emergent communication. Advances in neural information processing systems,
 35:22214–22228, 2022.
Karl Tuyls and Gerhard Weiss. Multiagent learning: Basics, challenges, and prospects. Ai Magazine,
  33(3):41–41, 2012.
Sun Tzu. The art of war. In Strategic Studies, pp. 63–91. Routledge, 2008.
Rundong Wang, Xu He, Runsheng Yu, Wei Qiu, Bo An, and Zinovi Rabinovich. Learning efficient
  multi-agent communication: An information bottleneck approach. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 9908–9918. PMLR, 2020.
Yuanfei Wang, Jing Xu, Yizhou Wang, et al. Tom2c: Target-oriented multi-agent communication
  and cooperation with theory of mind. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Peter Winkler. Games people don’t play. Puzzler’s Tribute: a Feast for the Mind, pp. 301–313,
  2002.
Zhuoya Zhao, Feifei Zhao, Yuxuan Zhao, Yi Zeng, and Yinqian Sun. A brain-inspired theory of
  mind spiking neural network improves multi-agent cooperation and competition. Patterns, 4(8),
  2023.
Changxi Zhu, Mehdi Dastani, and Shihan Wang. A survey of multi-agent reinforcement learning
  with communication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08975, 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T RAINING D ETAILS

A.1   ICP IMPLEMENTATION WITH DIAL AND VDN

In our implementation, we employ a 2-head input and 2-head output Implicit Channel Net (ICN)
to parameterize all Q functions. Specifically, at each time step t, for agent i, observation-action
pairs (ot,i , ut−1 ) are input to one Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
layer. Additionally, the last message vectors from other agents (m⃗k,l , where k = max(j | m⃗j,l ∈
M⃗ )) for l ∈ (1, . . . , N ) are stacked together along with each message sender’s ID, then input to
another MLP and ReLU layer. The outputs of these two layers are summed and input to a Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) network (Chung et al., 2014). This process approximately achieves the Q
function input with action-observation history τ and other agents’ messages m−i by utilizing hidden
states and inputs at each time step.
Subsequently, the output of the GRU is directed to two distinct heads: an action head and a message
head. The action head generates logits for actions, with an output dimension of |U − U s | + 1, while
the message head is specialized to handle the agent’s communication behavior, producing logits for
messages. Specifically, the output dimension of the message head is set to |U s | + 1, where the
additional dimension represents the NOOP (no operation) action. This design ensures that the agent
refrains from sending a message when the action sampled from the action logits does not correspond
to send info. To enforce this behavior, a mask is applied to the output of the message head. When
the action sampled from the action logits is send info, the mask restricts Gumbel-Softmax sampling
to select the NOOP action. If the agent decides to send a message, the sampled one-hot vector of
messages m ⃗ directly maps to the j-th information action uinfo , where j = argmaxl∈(1,...,|U s |) m
                                                                                                   ⃗ l.
During centralized training sessions, action sampling follows an ϵ-greedy policy to ensure explo-
ration, while we maintain the gradient of the one-hot vector of messages m
                                                                         ⃗ to ensure gradients pass
through the communication process. However, since gradient information becomes inaccurate for
updated policies, we can only use sampled episodes once, making our method on-policy. In de-
centralized execution sessions, we simply utilize the shared parameter network to manage greedy
actions and one-hot vector messages sampled from Gumbel-Softmax.

A.2   ICP IMPLEMENTATION WITH RGMC OMM AND VDN

In the pre-training phase of this approach, we used RGMComm, which utilized Regularized Infor-
mation Maximization loss (Chen et al., 2024) to generate discrete messages. This method represents
the latest state-of-the-art explicit communication algorithm in multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL).
RGMComm itself is based on the MADDPG (Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient)
framework (Lowe et al., 2017). Initially, a full observability centralized actor-critic model (Konda
& Tsitsiklis, 1999) is trained to develop a policy with access to global information. This centralized
policy serves as a reference to guide the communication strategy for each agent. During this stage,
the agents use a centralized critic with a complete view of the environment to assess the action-value
functions and optimize the communication strategy. After training this full-observability policy,
RGMComm samples different information sets based on local observations. It then clusters these
sampled information sets (Harsanyi, 1967) to assign specific messages to each cluster. By doing so,
RGMComm derives a discrete communication protocol tailored to each agent’s local observations,
optimizing their joint policy under partial observability.
In our implementation, instead of using MADDPG, we employed an RDQN (Recurrent Deep Q-
Network) (Hausknecht & Stone, 2015) to train the policy with full observability. For example, in
environments like Hanabi, the difference between the full observation (global view) and the local
observation is minimal, with only additional knowledge of the agent’s own hand being considered.
Using this full-observation policy, we performed clustering on the information sets, similarly to the
RGMComm approach, to obtain the message strategy.
Following the pre-training phase, we proceed to the fine-tuning phase. This phase involves using
VDN (Value Decomposition Network) to train the action policy. During this process, the communi-
cation strategy is embedded into the scouting action space and is fine-tuned to adapt to the environ-


                                                  15
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Algorithm 1: ICP implementation with DIAL and VDN
   Input: environment env, max-train-step, max-episode-length, target-update-rate, γ, exploration constant ϵ, learning rate α, selection of
            information action space Uinfo
   Output: Trained model parameters
 1 Initialize shared RNN network weights (θ1 , θ2 ) for each agent i and centralized Mapping Mechanism P, target net weights
     (θ1′ , θ2′ ) ← (θ1 , θ2 );
 2 for Train step N = 1, 2, . . . , max-train-step do
 3        Reset environment, o0 = env.reset();
 4        Reset buffer B;
 5        Initialize empty one-hot messages m0 and target empty one-hot messages m′0 , 2 RNNs’ hidden states (h1 , h2 ) and 2 target
            RNNs’ hidden states (h′1 , h′2 );
 6        for time step t = 1, 2, . . . , max-episode-length do
 7               Initialize empty one-hot messages mt ;
 8               for each agent i do
 9                     Sample message and update hidden state: msample , h2 = GumbelSoftmax(φθ2 (ot,i , mt−1,−i , h2 ));
10                     Sample a random action urandom ∈ Unon-info ;
11                     Compute greedy action and update hidden state: ugreedy , h1 = arg maxu (πθ1 (ot,i , mt−1,−i , h1 ));
12                     ϵ-greedy sample action ut,i ← ϵ · urandom + (1 − ϵ) · ugreedy ;
13                     Get action ut,i ’s q: qt,i = Qθ1 (ut,i | ot,i , mt−1,−i , h1 );
14                     if ut,i = | Unon-info − 1 | (send info) then       T
15                           Update action ut,i ← uinf o = P(msample , i∈N τt,i );
16                           Update message mt,i = msample ;
17                 Sample target message and update hidden state: m′sample , h′2 = GumbelSoftmax(φθ′ (ot,i , m′t−1,−i , h′2 ));
                                                                                                          2
                                                                              ′
18                 Compute target greedy action’s q and update hidden state: qt,i , h′1 = maxu (πθ′ (ot,i , m′t−1,−i , h′1 ));
                                                                                                      1
19                 if arg maxu (πθ′ (ot,i , m′t−1,−i , h′1 )) = | Unon-info − 1 | (send info) then
                                   1
20                       Update message m′t,i = m′sample ;

21            Step environment, ot+1 , rt = env.step(ut );
22            Store (qt , qt′ , rt ) into buffer B;
                                                                           P ′         P
23       Use samples in buffer to compute sum-q’s TD-error: δt = rt + γ · i (qt+1,i ) − i (qt,i );
                                                                        2
24       Update network weights θ1 , θ2 using Adam Optimizer with loss δt,i ;
25       if Train step N mod target-update-rate == 0 then
26             Update target network weights (θ1′ , θ2′ ) ← (θ1 , θ2 );


     ment. By freezing the RGMComm-generated communication strategy during the initial stages of
     fine-tuning, we ensure stability and later adjust the embedding to better align with the action policy.

     A.3    I MPLEMENTATION OF DIAL-C HEAT AND ICN-DIAL-DM

     DIAL with a Direct Communication Channel (DIAL-Cheat): In this approach, we added a discrete
     direct channel to the original environment, with the message size matching the size of the scouting
     action space. This channel allows agents to broadcast information while simultaneously taking
     actions.
     ICP Implemented with the Delayed Map Approach (ICN-DIAL-DM): For this method, we first
     removed scouting actions from the environment and introduced a discrete direct channel (with the
     same message size as the scouting action space). Using this modified environment, we pre-trained
     the agents with DIAL to learn the information strategy. The learned information strategy was then
     transferred back to the original environment for fine-tuning, where both the information strategy and
     action policy were optimized.


     B     H UMAN C ONVENTION IN H ANABI

     Hanabi serves as a compelling platform for studying cooperation and ad-hoc teamwork, particularly
     within the MARL community, while also being an engaging game in its own right. Beyond its
     academic appeal, many players have developed highly sophisticated strategies, as detailed in the
     referenced H-Group conventions 1 . These conventions outline a framework that enables players to
     achieve high scores by adhering to agreed-upon strategies.
        1
          For more detailed information on these strategies, please refer to the H-Group’s conventions and learning
     path at https://hanabi.github.io/.


                                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: By shuffling the embedding of information into scouting actions, even if the information
strategy stays the same, environment information will also change. After fine-tuning, the perfor-
mance of implementation with the same information strategy but different embedding varies.


Interestingly, some of these strategies embed elements of ToM reasoning into the conventions them-
selves. For example, techniques like Delayed Play Clues explicitly define the information that cer-
tain actions are intended to convey when teammates perform specific moves. Even the Basic and
Advanced Strategies, such as misleading bluffs, leverage second-order ToM reasoning to facilitate
more effective collaboration.
In a manner similar to ICP, the H-Group conventions construct a stable implicit communication
channel by explicitly codifying the ToM reasoning into the actions. When all players follow these
conventions, actions serve as reliable carriers of information, ensuring a consistent and effective
communication channel within the game.
Compared with H-Group conventions, our ICP framework differs in that the communication strat-
egy itself is learned as part of the training process, rather than being predefined. The communication
through informative actions becomes akin to following a learned convention where agents develop
their own patterns for encoding and transmitting information during the training phase. This allows
agents to use scouting or informative actions as explicit communication mechanisms, while regu-
lar actions are selected through an online decision-making policy during gameplay. Notably, our
method achieves a score of approximately 24.91 in the Hanabi game, which significantly surpasses
the average human score of around 17 (Kantack, 2021). Thus, ICP offers a dynamic communica-
tion framework where the convention of communication emerges from the agents’ learning process,
enabling more flexible and adaptive strategies depending on the environment and task at hand.

C    A NALYSIS OF H ANABI RESULTS
In Figure 3(b), we present a comparison between our proposed method and SAD, focusing on dif-
ferences in average scores. While the difference in average score appears minimal in the figure,
a detailed analysis provided below reveals that our method achieves a substantial improvement in
overall performance.
According to the results reported in the original SAD paper, SAD achieved an average score of
23.81/25 with a win rate of 41.45%. In contrast, our proposed method achieved an average score of
24.91/25 with a win rate of 91%. This represents a more than twofold increase in the win rate. The
relatively small difference in average scores, despite the significant improvement in win rates, can
be attributed to the score ceiling of 25 in Hanabi.
Hanabi imposes inherent constraints on scoring due to its game structure. Certain starting hands,
such as those with multiple high-value cards (e.g., 4s and 5s), can make achieving the maximum
score of 25 impossible. Considering these limitations, achieving a win rate of 91%—and scores close
to 24 in the remaining 9% of games—demonstrates that our method performs near the theoretical
maximum.


                                                 17
