Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ISCOVERING I NFLUENTIAL N EURON PATH
IN V ISION T RANSFORMERS

 Yifan Wang1 , Yifei Liu1 , Yingdong Shi1 , Changming Li1 ,
 Anqi Pang2 , Sibei Yang1 , Jingyi Yu1 , Kan Ren∗ 1
 1
   ShanghaiTech University, 2 Tencent PCG
 {wangyf7,renkan}@shanghaitech.edu.cn



                                              A BSTRACT
            Vision Transformer models exhibit immense power yet remain opaque to human
            understanding, posing challenges and risks for practical applications. While prior
            research has attempted to demystify these models through input attribution and
            neuron role analysis, there’s been a notable gap in considering layer-level infor-
            mation and the holistic path of information flow across layers. In this paper, we
            investigate the significance of influential neuron paths within vision Transformers,
            which is a path of neurons from the model input to output that impacts the model
            inference most significantly. We first propose a joint influence measure to assess
            the contribution of a set of neurons to the model outcome. And we further provide
            a layer-progressive neuron locating approach that efficiently selects the most in-
            fluential neuron at each layer trying to discover the crucial neuron path from input
            to output within the target model. Our experiments demonstrate the superiority of
            our method finding the most influential neuron path along which the information
            flows, over the existing baseline solutions. Additionally, the neuron paths have il-
            lustrated that vision Transformers exhibit some specific inner working mechanism
            for processing the visual information within the same image category. We further
            analyze the key effects of these neurons on the image classification task, show-
            casing that the found neuron paths have already preserved the model capability
            on downstream tasks, which may also shed some lights on real-world applica-
            tions like model pruning. The project website including implementation code is
            available at https://foundation-model-research.github.io/NeuronPath/.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) models in the vision domain, such as supervised Vision Trans-
formers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) (ViT) or self-supervised pretrained models (He et al., 2022; Oquab
et al., 2023), have showcased remarkable performance in various real-world tasks like image classi-
fication (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and image synthesis (Peebles & Xie, 2023). However, the inner
workings of these vision Transformer models remain elusive, despite their impressive achievements.
Understanding the internal mechanisms of vision models is crucial for both research and practical
applications. When confronted with the model decision outputs, one may raise some questions that,
how is the vision Transformer model processing the input information by layer, and which part of
the model is significant to derive the final outcome? Unraveling the synergy within these models is
essential for comprehending machine learning systems. The current lack of complete understanding
poses challenges and risks when deploying these models in real-world scenarios.
Literature has explored mechanism discovery and explainability on vision models. Previous works
about the explainability of vision models mostly focused on the visualization of inner patterns of
models (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Zhou et al., 2016), which is straightforward in demonstrating the
attention of each module in the model. However, visualization based methods are lack of theoretical
support and highly dependent on human subjective understanding, which can be ambiguous. Other
preliminary works focus on input attribution (Chattopadhay et al., 2018; Koh & Liang, 2017; Li
et al., 2016; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017), trying to distinguish the influential
    ∗
        Correspondence to Kan Ren.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Transformer Encoder                      Feed-Forward Network across different layers
               Class probabilties
                                                  Low-level information                High-level information
      L×
                                    Input image
            Feed-Forward Network                                                                                       Class
                                                                                                                        Quail
                                                                                                                      Pineapple
                                                                                                                        Drake
             Multi-Head Attention                                                                                        ···


             Embedded Patches
                                                                              …
                                                   FFN1          FFN 2                      FFN L−1     FFN L
                                                                                                                    Neuron Path

      Input image
                                                  Unselected Neuron       Selected Neuron             Neuron Path


Figure 1: The illustration of the main concept of our work, focusing on the feed-forward network
(FFN) component within a standard ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) encoder. In the left part, a typical
ViT encoder is depicted, consisting of totally L Transformer layers. The right part illustrates the
neuron path discovered by our method, which identifies a path comprising of the neurons within the
FFN module across the model layers. Each FFN in the encoder is denoted as FFNl , l ∈ [1, L].
region of the input. However, input explanation heavily relies on input images and cannot actually
reveal the interior mechanism of the target model. Nowadays, discovering and explaining the im-
portant neuron in one trained model has drawn more and more attention. The related works either
explain the patterns obtained at different network neurons via visualization (Foote et al., 2023; Ghi-
asi et al., 2022; Karpathy et al., 2015; Vig, 2019; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014), or study the effects of
individual neurons (You et al., 2025; Dai et al., 2022; Dalvi et al., 2019; Durrani et al., 2020; Huang
et al., 2023). Nevertheless, most of these methods overlook the correlation between the neurons in
different layers and have not considered the complex joint influence of various neurons.
To recognize and understand the underlying mechanisms of multiple neurons across layers in state-
of-the-art vision models, new explanation methods are needed. Inspired by the concept of visual
pathway in neuroscience (Gupta et al., 2020), our work deliberately concentrates on uncovering
the influential neuron path within the vision Transformer models, which is a sequence of neurons
within each layer tracing from input to model output, to elucidate their significance and role in
model inference. Details of neuron path are shown in Figure 1. To evaluate the importance of a
set of neurons, we initially define a comprehensive joint influence measure for the target model.
Using this measure as a guide, we demonstrate our approach using the image classification task
(Deng et al., 2009; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; He et al., 2022), illustrating how we identify the most
influential neuron path that drive the model inference through a layer-progressive neuron locating
algorithm.
We have conducted several quantitative and qualitative experiments on the found neuron path, il-
lustrating the significant role it plays and the advantage of our solution discovering and explaining
the critical part of vision Transformer models. The initial discovery is about the effectiveness of
our proposed method and the critical impact that neuron path exerts to the model inference. What
follows is that common influential neuron paths exist in the target model for images within the same
category, and categories with similar semantic information also exhibit relatively high similarity
in their neuron paths. Furthermore, the discovered neuron paths offer potential insights for model
pruning and specialization in Vision Transformer models.
In summary, the contribution of our work is as follows. (i) We have proposed a novel method to
reveal the crucial information transmission flow within vision Transformer model, based on locating
and analyzing internal neurons as neuron path. (ii) We have performed a series of experiments, not
only demonstrating the critical influence on the model inference brought by the discovered neuron
paths, but also revealing the intrinsic potential mechanism of vision Transformer models on process-
ing semantic information. (iii) We apply the identified neurons to guide model pruning, showing that
vision Transformers exhibit redundancy and that the essential components are sparse.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1    V ISION T RANSFORMER M ODELS
In computer vision, various vision Transformer models (Caron et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021;
Oquab et al., 2023; Radford et al., 2021) have showcased superior performance in real-world tasks


                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


such as image classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Transformer-based encoders typically consist
of multiple structural identical layers, each comprising a self-attention module and a feed-forward
network (FFN). Typically, vision Transformer operates by dividing input images into fixed-size
patches, treating them akin to tokens in natural language processing (NLP) (Vaswani et al., 2017),
incorporating of positional encodings, a classification token, and processing them through self-
attention mechanisms with subsequent FFNs. While vision Transformers have achieved excellent
performance , the underlying mechanisms that contribute to their effectiveness remain opaque. Sev-
eral recent works have attempted to unravel the inner workings of vision Transformer by attributing
individual neurons to different concepts using language models (Guertler et al., 2023; Hernandez
et al., 2021) or multimodal model (Oikarinen & Weng, 2023) , visualizations (Chefer et al., 2021;
Ghiasi et al., 2022) or by observing inner behaviors or properties (Naseer et al., 2021; Paul & Chen,
2022; Zimmermann et al., 2024). However, the complexity of vision Transformer’s architecture and
the interactions between its blocks pose challenges in fully comprehending its capabilities. There-
fore, our work seeks to explore the inner working of vision Transformer by investigating the role of
neuron paths, capturing essential patterns of information flow within the model.

2.2   E XPLAINABILITY M ETHODS IN VISION M ODELS

Visualization based Methods. Visualization-based methods are pivotal in interpreting deep neural
networks used in vision tasks. These techniques primarily include methods like activation maximiza-
tion (Erhan et al., 2009), saliency maps (Selvaraju et al., 2017), and class activation maps (CAMs)
(Zhou et al., 2016). Activation maximization involves optimizing input images to maximize the
activation of specific neurons, thereby providing insights into what features activate particular neu-
rons. Saliency maps compute gradients of the output with respect to the input image to highlight
regions contributing most to the network’s prediction. CAMs uses the weighted sum of feature maps
to visualize class-specific regions in the input image. Despite their usefulness, these methods face
limitations. They can be computationally intensive and may produce unrealistic images that do not
correspond to natural inputs (Nguyen et al., 2016). Further, they often suffer from noise and lack
spatial localization, potentially leading to misleading interpretations (Smilkov et al., 2017). And
these methods rely on specific network architectures and may not generalize well across different
model types or tasks (Selvaraju et al., 2017). Visualization based methods represent a distinct per-
spective on explainability other than ours. They are more inclined to intuitively display the concerns
of the visual model and succinctly represent the learning results of the model, whereas our focus
is on the intrinsic mechanism of the model and an in-depth examination of the model’s operational
mechanism from input to output.
Neuron based Methods. The emergence of powerful deep learning models has stimulated interest
in the study of model explainability. The concept of a neuron in machine learning, as discussed in
various works (Bau et al., 2017; Dhamdhere et al., 2019; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023), encompasses
hidden units, hidden layers, and individual latent variables. These elements are often considered
fundamental computational components that process input information. Among the explainability
approaches, neuron-based methods, a more intricate form of analysis (Fan et al., 2024), are typically
divided into gradient-based and non-gradient based methods. Non-gradient based methods generally
contain three approaches: neuron visualization (Foote et al., 2023; Karpathy et al., 2015; Li et al.,
2016; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014), concept-based methods (Bau et al., 2017; Hernandez et al., 2021;
Kim et al., 2018; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023; Panousis & Chatzis, 2024) and statistic-based methods
(Ghorbani & Zou, 2020; Kwon & Zou, 2022; Shan et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021). However, these
methods either rely on a data set of a close set of input-concept pairs (Bau et al., 2017), limiting
their generalization ability to unseen concepts, or externally provided powerful models (Oikarinen
& Weng, 2023; Panousis & Chatzis, 2024), such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), rather than intrinsic
model properties. Further, some of their optimization goals focus on model output metrics, failing
to fully elucidate the circulation of model knowledge and concepts. Gradient-based methods com-
pute the attribution from output to input or target neurons (Chattopadhay et al., 2018; Dai et al.,
2022; Dhamdhere et al., 2019; Selvaraju et al., 2017) via gradient computation or integrated gradi-
ent (Sundararajan et al., 2017). Though providing quantitative results for neuron explainability, they
tend to treat all neurons equally and struggle with comparing neurons across different layers with
the gradient flow numerically equitably, despite variations in depth. To address this issue, (Lu et al.,
2020; 2021) try to discover a path of neurons rather than a cluster. However, all these methods fail to
consider the joint influence of neurons across layers. It will not only result in biased outcomes due to


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the domination of a few abnormally prominent neurons, but it will also fail to consider the coherence
of information transmission, which makes it challenging to truly explore the intrinsic mechanism of
the model. The objective of this paper is to propose a new method that addresses this issue.
In response to the limitations of existing methods, particularly those gradient-based methods focus-
ing on individual neurons or input features, we introduce a novel approach for interpreting vision
Transformer models (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Our method shifts the focus towards the collective
contribution of selected neurons across different layers, offering a more comprehensive understand-
ing of model behavior. Our method enables us to uncover influential pathways within the model,
enhancing its explainability and providing valuable insights into its decision-making process.

3     N EURON PATH

As demonstrated above, vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) exhibit complex structures
and designs that present challenges for explainability. Research on vision Transformers predomi-
nantly focuses on visualization techniques related to attention maps (Caron et al., 2021; Oquab et al.,
2023), with limited exploration of their neuronal anatomy. While in recent studies, efforts have been
made to associate individual neurons with various concepts using language or multimodal models
(Guertler et al., 2023; Hernandez et al., 2021; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023) and visualization tech-
niques (Chefer et al., 2021; Ghiasi et al., 2022), the understanding of vision Transformer’s internal
neuronal organization remains relatively unexplored. Some related studies (Dai et al., 2022; Geva
et al., 2021; Mitchell et al., 2021) have suggested that the FFN component of Transformer models
can function as a memory mechanism due to its structural similarity to the attention mechanism and
they encode human-interpretable, high-level concepts, which motivated this work to focus on these
neurons in our experiments. Based on this insight, it is reasonable to hypothesize that knowledge or
information related to visual patterns in vision Transformers may also be stored within the FFN. As
stated before about the definitions of a neuron (Bau et al., 2017; Dhamdhere et al., 2019; Oikarinen
& Weng, 2023), we focus on a specific type of neuron within the vision Transformer which is the
activation of the output from the first linear layer in the FFN module of each Transformer block.

3.1   P RELIMINARY S TUDY

We first conduct a preliminary study on neuron im-                            Neuron Distribution for ViT-B-16
portance analysis for vision Transformer models to                                                                   90%
                                                                                                                     80%
                                                                                                                     70%
                                                         Percentage


illustrate the motivation of our method. The exist-                                                                  60%
ing works studying neuron activities of vision model                                                                 50%
                                                                                                                     40%
inference (Dhamdhere et al., 2019; Sundararajan                                                                      30%
                                                                                                                     20%
et al., 2017) mainly focus on convolutional neural                                                                   10%
networks (CNNs), trying to analyze convolution fil-                                                                  0%
                                                                      1   2     3   4   5   6 7     8   9 10 11 12
ter’s sensitivity to the input. To assess the impor-                                        Layer
tance of neurons themselves within pretrained mod-                            Neuron Distribution for MAE-B-16
els, the concept of knowledge attribution (Dai et al.,                                                               90%
                                                                                                                     80%
2022) offers valuable insights on finding the individ-                                                               70%
                                                                                                                     60%
                                                         Percentage


ual neurons storing model knowledge such as “capi-                                                                   50%
tal of country” in Transformer-based language mod-                                                                   40%
                                                                                                                     30%
els like BERT (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019). Inspired                                                                   20%
                                                                                                                     10%
by this method, we analyze the effects of individual                                                                 0%
neurons in vision Transformer model contribution to                   1   2     3   4   5   6 7     8   9 10 11 12
                                                                                            Layer
the model prediction, with most influential neurons
marked as “knowledge neurons”. The details about     Figure 2: The distribution of knowledge neu-
the implementation of knowledge attribution can be   rons in two different pretrained vision Trans-
found in Appendix B. Note that, it focuses solely on former models. It can be noticed that com-
individual knowledge neurons, overlooking the joint  paring ViT-B-16 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)
effects of the common neurons.                       and MAE-B-16 (He et al., 2022), their neu-
                                                     ron attribution show completely opposite dis-
By applying the method to two types of vision Trans- tributions across layers.
former models using different pretrain paradigms,
supervised ViT (ViT-B-16) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)
and self-supervised Masked AutoEncoder (MAE-B-16) (He et al., 2022), we have derived an unex-


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


pected discovery, as illustrated in Figure 2. Despite both models being pretrained and finetuned
on the same dataset (ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)) with almost identical model structures, i.e., 12
Transformer layers with the same hidden size, and utilizing the same input process, i.e., 16-size
patching on the input, we observe that the distributions of individual knowledge neurons across
the two models are almost inverted. Moreover, numerous studies have demonstrated that, in vision
models, information is progressively aggregated from low-level visual patterns to high-level visual
concepts as the network depth increases (Bau et al., 2017; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014). This implies that,
to accurately capture high-level concepts in an image, each layer should include at least one sig-
nificant neuron to facilitate the flow of information. However, current attribution methods may fall
short in fully capturing this requirement. Consequently, there is a pressing need for a new method
that can provide deeper insights into the transmission of information by neurons within the model.
It is true that the attribution of individual neurons using integrated gradients, as shown in Figure 2,
yields clusters of neurons that are most sensitive to image information in the visual model, but this
does not capture the process of how visual information is transmitted and processed through neural
pathways. Just as that in the human visual system, nerve cells close to the retina and visual cortex
must be the most sensitive, but the visual neural pathways between the two are equally important
and worthy of study. Thus, a joint measurement of neuron path within the model is demanding.

3.2   J OINT ATTRIBUTION S CORE

To locate the most influential neurons, we first propose a joint influence measurement of a set of dif-
ferent neurons. Motivated by the concept of information flow (Lu et al., 2021), we introduce a novel
integrated gradient-based method to compute the joint attribution of all selected neurons, across dif-
ferent layers in vision Transformer models. Consider a vision Transformer model F consisting of
L layers. Given an input-label pair < x, y >, where x ∈ Rd and y is the related label, we begin by
denoting the output result utilizing the neurons within the first N layers as
              Fx (ŵi11 , ŵi22 , ..., ŵiNN ) = p(y|x, wi11 = ŵi11 , wi22 = ŵi22 , ..., wiNN = ŵiNN ) ,   (1)
where wil represents the i-th intermediate neuron in the FFN module of the l-th layer ,with 1 ≤
l ≤ N ≤ L and ŵil is the assigned value of wil . To calculate the contribution to the model output
of the selected neurons jointly, we incrementally sum the values of {wi11 , wi22 , ..., wiLL } from 0 to
their original values {w1i1 , w2i2 , ..., wL
                                           iL } using a control factor α ∈ (0, 1). This process yields L
differentiations with respect to each neuron in the neuron path. By aggregating these differentiations
and integrating with respect to α, we obtain a score that represents the joint attribution of the neuron
in the model. Formally, the definition of this joint attribution score is given as follow.
Definition 1 (Joint Attribution Score) Given a model F : Rd → R containing L layers, whose
output with input x is defined as Fx , with a set of neuron {wi11 , wi22 , ..., wiNN }, N ≤ L, a Joint
Attribution Score is defined as
                                         N             N
                                                          ∂Fx (αw1i1 , αw2i2 , ..., αwN
                                                 Z 1 X
                                                                                      iN )
                                        X
                  1    2         N            n
           JAS(wi1 , wi2 , ..., wiN ) =     w in                         l
                                                                                           dα .    (2)
                                        n=1       α=0 l=1              ∂wil

For the convenience of computation, we use the Riemann approximation to estimate the continuous
integral as follows,
                                           N       m N  k 1 k 2              k N
                1     2          N      1 X j X X ∂Fx ( m wi1 , m wi2 , ..., m w iN )
           JAS(wi1 , wi2 , ..., wiN ) =
           g                                  w ij                                    ,                       (3)
                                        m j=1                   ∂will
                                                          k=1 l=1

where m is the sampling step.
In Eq. (2), we extend and calculate integrated gradient, the cumulative gradient of the mea-
sure of interest (classification output) Fx to the path of the target component (the neuron set
{wi11 , wi22 , ..., wiNN }) ranging from zero effect (α = 0) to full effect (α = 1), given the model
input x. This assesses the full contribution of the target neuron set.
With Definition 1 stated above, we propose a novel neuron-based model analysis method Neuron
Path, trying to find a path consisting at least one important neuron at each layer tracing from input
to model output to elucidate their significance and role in model inference. The formal definition is
as below.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 2 (Neuron Path) Given a model F : Rd → R containing L layers, with an input x, and
a user-defined criterion S(·), a neuron path Px is defined as follow.
                                       Px = {w1 , w2 , ..., wL }                                    (4)
that maximizes the S(Px ), where wl , l ∈ {1, 2, ..., L} stands for the selected neuron within layer l.

S(·) utilizes a user-defined score to evaluate the behavior of the network with respect to the input
of interest x. When the score function is defined as the maximum activation, the path Px comprises
the neurons with the highest activation in each layer, as detailed in Appendix C.2. When Pattern
Influence (Lu et al., 2021) is applied, we obtain the path Px that maximizes the corresponding
influence score, as detailed in Appendix C.3. For our method, we use the JAS in Eq. (2).

3.3    L OCATING I NFLUENTIAL N EURON PATH

To identify the neuron path within the target model F that maximizes the JAS in Definition 1, we
employ a layer-progressive neuron locating algorithm, to iteratively select neurons layer by layer,
gradually constructing the path that maximizes JAS. Utilizing the definition of the JAS provided
above, we formulate the algorithm as follows. For a vision Transformer model comprising L layers,
we enumerate each layer and add neurons to the path to maximize JAS at the current depth. The
detailed procedure of our algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 1. Time complexity analysis can be
found in Appendix A.

Algorithm 1 Layer-progressive Neuron Locating Algorithm
    Input: Model F with L layers, input sample x
    Output: neuron path P
    Initialization: P = ∅, l = 1
    while l ≤ L do
      W is the set of neurons in layer l of F ; Score = 0, p = None
      for w ∈ W do
         if Score < JAS(P,
                     g      w) then
            Score = JAS(P,
                     g      w); p = w
      P = P ∪ {p}; l = l + 1

Comparing with existing methods that focus on individual neurons or input features (Dai et al.,
2022; Dalvi et al., 2019; Durrani et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2023; Sundararajan et al., 2017), our ap-
proach considers the collective contribution of selected neurons across different layers in the model.
By computing and maximizing the joint attribution scores, we aim to identify the most influen-
tial neuron path for the given input, which processes and conveys the most crucial information as
flow through the model layers. Some related works (Lu et al., 2020; 2021) on Transformer-based
language models also investigate neuron pathways, but they overlook the collective influence of neu-
rons across layers, resulting in suboptimal outcomes, as illustrated in the experiment. In contrast,
our approach offers several advantages. By considering the collective contribution of neurons across
layers and employing a layer-progressive neuron locating algorithm, we can effectively identify neu-
ron paths that maximize the crucial information flow. Furthermore, our method provides a holistic
view of the model’s information transmission during inference, offering valuable insights into its
inner workings.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present both quantitative and qualitative experiments to analyze the proposed
method from multiple perspectives. In Section 4.2, we validate the neuron paths discovered by our
approach by comparing them with baseline methods through quantitative analysis and intervention
experiments. In Section 4.3, we provide in-depth statistics on the discovered neuron paths and
reveal their clustering patterns with respect to image classes. Finally, in Section 4.4, we perform
network pruning on other neurons while preserving the identified neuron paths, offering insightful
observations on classification performance and highlighting potential applications of our method.
The code will be released upon the acceptance of this paper.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Our experiments are conducted on ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and MAE (He et al., 2022), two
widely used vision Transformer models but with different pretraining methods. For our following
experiments, we will mainly utilize 3 ViT settings and 1 MAE setting: ViT-B-16, ViT-B-32, ViT-
L-32 and MAE-B-16 as the target models. Details of these models are in Appendix C.1.
These models are all trained for the image classification task, they are all pretrained on ImageNet21k
and finetuned on ImageNet1k (Deng et al., 2009), whose validation set shall be the probing dataset
for the experiments below. As for the calculation of JAS, we set the sampling step m = 20 in Eq. (3)
for the following experiments.

4.2   Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON

In this section, we evaluate different neuron explainability methods and perform a neuron interven-
tion experiments according to the results of different methods. We start by presenting the different
methods of comparison, the first one is commonly utilized in literature (Dhamdhere et al., 2019; Dai
et al., 2022) and the second one is presented in previous work (Lu et al., 2021). Details of the first
two baseline methods implementation can be found in Appendix C.2 and C.3.

• Activation represents the method that locates the neuron with the largest activation at each layer.
• Influence Pattern follows the setup of the previous work (Lu et al., 2021), which utilizes the input
  to build path integral and find the neuron with largest integrated gradient layer by layer.
• Neuron Path (ours) stands for the neurons sampled by the neuron localization method we have
  proposed above in Section 3.3.

Experimental settings. We assess the significance of neurons identified by different methods to
evaluate the effectiveness of the compared approaches. The first experiment measures the joint
influence of the neurons given different inputs to the model, as defined by the Joint Attribution
Score (JAS) in Section 3.2.
Additionally, we will conduct a more in-depth comparison of the three methods through manipula-
tion experiments by intervening in the identified neurons. These experiments involve two operations
on the selected neurons: removal (zeroing out) and enhancement (doubling) on the values of the
selected neurons. For each image input, neurons in the target model are identified using the three
approaches, and manipulation experiments are conducted. By analyzing the changes in model out-
puts after these operations, we can observe in finer detail the impact of these neurons on the model’s
classification ability. Two metrics, Removal Accuracy Deviation and Enhancement Accuracy De-
viation, are used to quantify the experimental results of the operations. These metrics measure the
change in model accuracy after the corresponding operation. Further details about these metrics
are provided in Appendix C.5. Moreover, we statistically analyze the deviations of the predicted
probability regarding the ground-truth image class after performing the two operations. Additional
details regarding the probability deviation metrics can be found in Appendix C.4. The quantitative
results are presented in Table 1, and the statistical analyses are presented in Figure 3.

                                                                              Target Models
                     Metrics                   Methods
                                                                ViT-B-16   ViT-B-32   ViT-L-32   MAE-B-16
                                                Activation      -0.0034     0.0288    -0.0065     0.0013
             Joint Attribution Score ↑      Influence Pattern   0.0412      0.0841    0.1227      0.0030
                                           Neuron Path (ours)   0.4078      0.6610    1.0086      0.0095
                                                Activation       0.07%     -0.15%      0.16%      -2.80%
          Removal Accuracy Deviation ↓      Influence Pattern   -0.50%     -1.24%     -1.41%     -15.67%
                                           Neuron Path (ours)   -2.40%     -3.81%     -5.28%     -26.50%
                                                Activation      -0.33%     -0.45%     -0.86%      -1.00%
        Enhancement Accuracy Deviation ↑    Influence Pattern   0.46%      0.83%      1.12%       4.15%
                                           Neuron Path (ours)   2.04%      3.06%      5.02%       7.28%


Table 1: Three different metrics were used to measure the neurons obtained using three different
methods. ↑ (↓) means that the higher (lower), the better. The best results are in bold font.



                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                       ViT-B_16                                      ViT-B_32                                      ViT-L_32                                      MAE-B-16


      Probability Deviation after Doubling Probability Deviation after Zeroing Out
                                                                                     40%                                           40%                                           40%                                           100%
                                                                                                               Activation                                    Activation                                    Activation                                     Activation
                                                                                                               Influence Pattern                             Influence Pattern                             Influence Pattern                              Influence Pattern
                                                                                                               Ours                                          Ours                                          Ours                                           Ours
                                                                                     20%                       Reference Line      20%                       Reference Line      20%                       Reference Line       50%                       Reference Line


                                                                                      0%                                            0%                                            0%                                             0%

                                                                                     -20%                                          -20%                                          -20%                                          -50%

                                                                                     -40%                                          -40%                                          -40%                                          -100%
                                                                                            Activation Influence Ours                     Activation Influence Ours                     Activation Influence Ours                      Activation Influence Ours
                                                                                                       Pattern                                       Pattern                                       Pattern                                        Pattern
                                                                                100%                                               100%                                          100%                                          900%
                                                                                                 Activation                                    Activation                                    Activation                                     Activation
                                                                                                 Influence Pattern                             Influence Pattern                             Influence Pattern                              Influence Pattern
                                                                                     80%         Ours                              80%         Ours                              80%         Ours                              700%         Ours
                                                                                                 Reference Line                                Reference Line                                Reference Line                                 Reference Line
                                                                                     60%                                           60%                                           60%                                           500%
                                                                                     40%                                           40%                                           40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               300%
                                                                                     20%                                           20%                                           20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100%
                                                                                      0%                                            0%                                            0%
                                                                                            Activation Influence Ours                     Activation Influence Ours                     Activation Influence Ours                      Activation Influence Ours
                                                                                                       Pattern                                       Pattern                                       Pattern                                        Pattern

Figure 3: The relative deviation in the model’s predicted probability of the ground-truth label when
the value of neurons selected by different methods is either removed (zeroed out) or enhanced (dou-
bled).

Finding 1: The Neuron Path method more effectively identifies the influential neurons within
the model. In Table 1, our proposed Neuron Path method demonstrates a superior ability to identify
neurons that have a more significant impact on model outputs, as indicated by larger JAS values.
This is expected, as our method directly maximizes the joint contribution of the selected neurons.
We further quantify the impacts of the neurons discovered by the Neuron Path method and other
compared methods by measuring the deviation in model accuracy of classification when manipulat-
ing the value of neurons identified by different methods. As shown in the lower part of Table 1, the
removal and enhancement of neurons identified by our Neuron Path method result in significantly
larger drops and improvements in model performance, illustrating the effectiveness.
Finding 2: The discovered neuron paths play a vital role in model inference . Above results im-
ply that the intrinsic neurons of the model significantly affects prediction performance. In order to
explore in depth how the model’s output probability is affected by the internal neurons, we count the
relative deviation in prediction probability caused by manipulating the values of the discovered neu-
rons. As illustrated in Figure 3, our method results in significantly larger positive contributions when
enhancing neuron values, and more substantial negative effects when removing neurons comparing
to other two methods. It indicates that neurons selected by our methods can significantly affect the
model prediction, which demonstrates the crucial role these neurons play in model inference.

4.3                                    C LASS - LEVEL A NALYSIS

In this subsection, we aim to understand the internal workings of vision model predictions and
determine if neuron paths reflect the intrinsic mechanisms of the model architecture that critically
contribute to predictions. To this end, we analyze the common characteristics of neuron paths at
the class level. Interestingly, this analysis reveals clustering properties within the same class and
semantic relationships across different classes.
Intra-class analysis on neuron paths. We aggregated the neuron paths for images of the same
category and compiled statistics on the frequency of each neuron selected by our proposed method.
Figure 4 shows the frequency distribution of each neuron (vertical axis) across different layers (hor-
izontal axis) in the discovered neuron paths for four different classes. The width of the violin plot
indicates the frequency with which a neuron is selected. The most frequently used neuron at each
layer is connected with a dotted line. Due to the restriction that a category only contains limited
number of images, the length of the violin plot is shortened if the the ends of neuron index are not
sampled. See Appendix D.1 for more details and results.
Finding 3: Some certain neurons contribute more at each layer to specific classes. From Fig-
ure 4, it is evident that at most layers, certain neurons are selected with significantly higher frequency


                                                                                                                                                                            8
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Class: albatross                             Class: Weimaraner                              Class: Border collie                             Class: Eskimo dog

Neuron Index


                                            Neuron Index


                                                                                             Neuron Index


                                                                                                                                              Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                        Layer                                            Layer                                            Layer

               Figure 4: The frequency of each neuron at each layer occurred in the discovered neuron paths.
    in neuron paths corresponding to images of the same class. These highly selective neurons exhibit
    clear clustering properties. This phenomenon reveals the intrinsic functioning of each layer in the
    vision model (ViT-B-16 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) in this experiment) in responding to inputs from
    specific classes.
    Inter-class analysis on neuron paths. We extend our analysis to the inter-class level by examining
    the above stated neuron frequency distribution, which reflects neuron utilization in the neuron paths,
    to gain insights into the intrinsic working mechanisms of the vision model. We gather neuron uti-
    lization data — specifically, the frequency statistics of each neuron in the discovered paths — and
    construct a neuron utilization matrix Mc ∈ RL×n , where L is the number of layers and n is the
    number of neurons per layer, for each class c ∈ C. We then calculate the cosine similarity between
    Mc1 and Mc2 for two different classes c1 , c2 ∈ C. More details are in Appendix D.2.
    Finding 4: Neuron paths reveals semantic similarity. The matrix Mc reflects the neuron uti-
    lization of the neuron paths for image class c, highlighting the model’s internal working properties
    for that class. As illustrated in Figure 5, semantically similar image classes exhibit similar neuron
    utilization patterns. This indicates that the discovered neuron paths tend to carry the semantic infor-
    mation corresponding to the category, suggesting that the vision model utilizes specific functional
    components in response to inputs from particular classes. It further implies that other than directly
    using visualization tools (Erhan et al., 2009; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2016) to subjec-
    tively illustrate the focus of model’s each part, our method tends to localize the concept neurons
    straightaway. More examples can be found in Appendix D.3.

                           Sim: 0.594              Sim: 0.372                            Reference                               Sim: 0.194                     Sim: 0.144


                                                                                                                 Bottom
                                                                     Top Similarity                             Similarity


                         Nile crocodile      alligator lizard                         Komodo lizard                            Kakatoe galerita                mileometer
                           Sim: 0.501              Sim: 0.448                                                                    Sim: 0.205                    Sim: 0.209


                                                                                                                  Bottom
                                                                     Top Similarity                              Similarity


                            hornbill                       drake                           quail                               smoothing iron                  St Bernard
                           Sim: 0.623              Sim:0.558                                                                     Sim: 0.178                    Sim: 0.188

                                                                                                                 Bottom
                                                                     Top Similarity                             Similarity


                         Norwich terrier    Irish wolfhound                           Yorkshire terrier                        American robin                   fireguard


    Figure 5: Examples of category similarity analysis. Using ViT-B-16 as target model, we randomly
    select three categories and calculate the similarity with others using the neuron utilization matrices
    and sample the top 5% and bottom 5% similar items. Through visualization we can see that cate-
    gories with high (low) neuron path similarity tend to be also high (low) in semantic similarity.
     4.4          M ULTI - NEURON M ODEL P RUNING

    In this section, we explore potential applications of our neuron path method in model compression.
    Drawing inspiration from the Mixture-of-Depths approach (Raposo et al., 2024), we hypothesize that
    neurons in Vision Transformer models may exhibit redundancy. We propose that by retaining only


                                                                                            9
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 the most significant neuron paths, the model can sustain comparable performance, even when other
 neurons are randomly masked. To test this, we designed the following experiment. For a selected
 model, we retain the top t ∈ {1, 5, 10, 30, 50} most influential neurons per layer within the neuron
 paths discovered by our Neuron Path method. Following the statistical procedure outlined in Section
 4.3, we identified neuron paths for each category using the 80% of the image data, and transfer the
 results and conduct the pruning experiment on the rest 20% image data, establishing a generalization
 setting. During the pruning phase, we randomly zero out p ∈ {10%, 30%, 50%, 100%} of the neu-
 rons, excluding the selected ones, to measure the effect on classification accuracy. The experimental
 results are presented in Figure 6, with experiment details and comparisons in Appendix E.
 Finding 5: Neurons within Vision Transformer models are largely redundant, with only a
 sparse subset significantly impacting model performance. Our results in Figure 6 indicate that
 by retaining the critical neurons identified through our method, the model’s performance remains
 robust, even when a significant percentage of other neurons are zeroed out. This implies that aside
 from a few key neurons, most neurons are either redundant or may even negatively affect the model’s
 performance. Moreover, the results show that the number of important neurons is limited; the top
 five neurons deliver the best performance during pruning, while increasing the number of retained
 neurons leads to a decline in performance. This experiment also demonstrates the strong general-
 ization ability of our approach. Also combining the results of important neuron value intervention
 in Section 4.2, we can conclude that our method can locate the most influential neurons conveying
 critical information flows across layers within the model.
                               Pruning 10% other neurons.                Pruning 30% other neurons.                 Pruning 50% other neurons.                Pruning 100% other neurons.
                        70%                                       70%                                        70%                                       70%
                                                       baseline                                  baseline                                   baseline                                  baseline
ViT-b16 mean accuracy


                        69%                                       69%                                        69%                                       69%
                        68%                                       68%                                        68%                                       68%
                        67%                                       67%                                        67%                                       67%
                        66%                                       66%                                        66%                                       66%
                        65%                                       65%                                        65%                                       65%
                              top1 top5 top10 top30 top50               top1 top5 top10 top30 top50                top1 top5 top10 top30 top50               top1 top5 top10 top30 top50
                                      Retain neurons                            Retain neurons                             Retain neurons                            Retain neurons

                        54%                            baseline   54%                            baseline    54%                            baseline   54%                            baseline
ViT-b32 mean accuracy


                        52%                                       52%                                        52%                                       52%
                        50%                                       50%                                        50%                                       50%
                        48%                                       48%                                        48%                                       48%
                        46%                                       46%                                        46%                                       46%
                              top1 top5 top10 top30 top50               top1 top5 top10 top30 top50                top1 top5 top10 top30 top50               top1 top5 top10 top30 top50
                                      Retain neurons                            Retain neurons                             Retain neurons                            Retain neurons


 Figure 6: Model performance after different proportions of neuron pruning using ViT-B-16 and ViT-
 B-32. The dotted line represent the original performance of the used model, the y-axis represent the
 mean accuracy of the edited model and the x-axis represent the number of neuron in each layer we
 preserved. Baseline means the performance of the original model.

  5                           C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS

 In this study, we aim to unveil the intrinsic working mechanisms of vision Transformer models by
 locating and analyzing the crucial neurons at each layer that have the most significant impact on
 model inference. We introduce a novel approach called Neuron Path, guided by a newly proposed
 joint neuron attribution measure, to progressively identify the neurons that play key roles in informa-
 tion processing and transmission through model layers. Our series of analytical experiments reveal
 not only the importance of the discovered neuron paths in model inference but also illustrate some
 valuable insights into the internal workings of vision Transformers. Our work contributes to a more
 nuanced understanding of how these models manage visual information, expecting to advance the
 field of model explainability and facilitate future research on safely deploying vision models.
 However, our method has certain limitations, which point to directions for future work. First, ex-
 panding the analysis beyond neurons in the FFN components to encompass the entire Transformer
 block could provide deeper insights into Vision Transformers. Second, exploring more downstream
 tasks like extending our approach from discriminative tasks to the segmentation and generative
 paradigm of vision models offers a promising avenue for future research.


                                                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
62406193). The authors are also grateful for the support from Shanghai Frontiers Science Cen-
ter of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence, MoE Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Human-
Machine Collaboration, and HPC Platform of ShanghaiTech University.

R EFERENCES
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6541–6549, 2017.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Aditya Chattopadhay, Anirban Sarkar, Prantik Howlader, and Vineeth N Balasubramanian. Grad-
  cam++: Generalized gradient-based visual explanations for deep convolutional networks. In 2018
  IEEE winter conference on applications of computer vision (WACV), pp. 839–847. IEEE, 2018.
Arnav Chavan, Zhiqiang Shen, Zhuang Liu, Zechun Liu, Kwang-Ting Cheng, and Eric P Xing. Vi-
  sion transformer slimming: Multi-dimension searching in continuous optimization space. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4931–
  4941, 2022.
Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Transformer interpretability beyond attention visualization.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  782–791, 2021.
Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons
  in pretrained transformers. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 8493–8502, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.581. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.acl-long.581.
Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, Hassan Sajjad, Yonatan Belinkov, Anthony Bau, and James Glass.
  What is one grain of sand in the desert? analyzing individual neurons in deep nlp models. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 6309–6317, 2019.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Kedar Dhamdhere, Mukund Sundararajan, and Qiqi Yan. How important is a neuron. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=SylKoo0cKm.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recogni-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
Nadir Durrani, Hassan Sajjad, Fahim Dalvi, and Yonatan Belinkov. Analyzing individual neu-
  rons in pre-trained language models. In Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
  ing (EMNLP), pp. 4865–4880, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.395. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  emnlp-main.395.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dumitru Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Visualizing the hidden layers
  of deep networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2009.

Yimin Fan, Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, and Hassan Sajjad. Evaluating neuron interpretation meth-
  ods of nlp models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Alex Foote, Neel Nanda, Esben Kran, Ioannis Konstas, Shay Cohen, and Fazl Barez. Neuron to
  graph: Interpreting language model neurons at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19911, 2023.

Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers
 are key-value memories. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott
 Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
 guage Processing, pp. 5484–5495, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.446. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.446.

Amin Ghiasi, Hamid Kazemi, Eitan Borgnia, Steven Reich, Manli Shu, Micah Goldblum, An-
 drew Gordon Wilson, and Tom Goldstein. What do vision transformers learn? a visual explo-
 ration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06727, 2022.

Amirata Ghorbani and James Y Zou. Neuron shapley: Discovering the responsible neurons. Ad-
 vances in neural information processing systems, 33:5922–5932, 2020.

Leon Guertler, M Ganesh Kumar, Anh Tuan Luu, and Cheston Tan. Tellme what you see: Using
  llms to explain neurons in vision models. 2023.

Mohit Gupta, Ashley C Ireland, and Bruno Bordoni. Neuroanatomy, visual pathway. 2020.

Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.

Evan Hernandez, Sarah Schwettmann, David Bau, Teona Bagashvili, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob
  Andreas. Natural language descriptions of deep visual features. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.

Jing Huang, Atticus Geiger, Karel D’Oosterlinck, Zhengxuan Wu, and Christopher Potts. Rigor-
   ously assessing natural language explanations of neurons. In Yonatan Belinkov, Sophie Hao,
   Jaap Jumelet, Najoung Kim, Arya McCarthy, and Hosein Mohebbi (eds.), Proceedings of the 6th
   BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 317–331,
   Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
   blackboxnlp-1.24. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.blackboxnlp-1.24.

Andrej Karpathy, Justin Johnson, and Li Fei-Fei. Visualizing and understanding recurrent networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02078, 2015.

Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton and Lee Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp. 4171–
  4186, 2019.

Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
  Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
  (tcav). In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2668–2677. PMLR, 2018.

Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.

Yongchan Kwon and James Y Zou. Weightedshap: analyzing and improving shapley based feature
  attributions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:34363–34376, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky. Visualizing and understanding neural models
  in NLP. In Kevin Knight, Ani Nenkova, and Owen Rambow (eds.), Proceedings of the 2016
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 681–691, San Diego, California, June 2016. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N16-1082. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/N16-1082.
Kaiji Lu, Piotr Mardziel, Klas Leino, Matt Fredrikson, and Anupam Datta. Influence paths for
  characterizing subject-verb number agreement in LSTM language models. In Dan Jurafsky,
  Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4748–4757, Online, July 2020. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.430. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.430.
Kaiji Lu, Zifan Wang, Piotr Mardziel, and Anupam Datta. Influence patterns for explaining infor-
  mation flow in bert. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4461–4474, 2021.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Fast model
  editing at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Muhammad Muzammal Naseer, Kanchana Ranasinghe, Salman H Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fahad
 Shahbaz Khan, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Intriguing properties of vision transformers. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23296–23308, 2021.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Steerable search for interpretable machine learning.
  Nature Communications, 7:12216, 2016.
Tuomas Oikarinen and Tsui-Wei Weng. CLIP-dissect: Automatic description of neuron representa-
  tions in deep vision networks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=iPWiwWHc1V.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy V Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel HAZIZA, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learn-
 ing robust visual features without supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
 2023.
Konstantinos Panousis and Sotirios Chatzis. Discover: Making vision networks interpretable via
  competition and dissection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Sayak Paul and Pin-Yu Chen. Vision transformers are robust learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 2071–2081, 2022.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
David Raposo, Sam Ritter, Blake Richards, Timothy Lillicrap, Peter Conway Humphreys, and
  Adam Santoro. Mixture-of-depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based lan-
  guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02258, 2024.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.
Caihua Shan, Yifei Shen, Yao Zhang, Xiang Li, and Dongsheng Li. Reinforcement learning en-
  hanced explainer for graph neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:22523–22533, 2021.

                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Daniel Smilkov, Sam Greydanus, Jonathon J. Shlens, et al. Smoothgrad: Removing noise by adding
  noise. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jesse Vig. A multiscale visualization of attention in the transformer model. In Marta R. Costa-
  jussà and Enrique Alfonseca (eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pp. 37–42, Florence, Italy, July
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-3007. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P19-3007.
Chenyu You, Haocheng Dai, Yifei Min, Jasjeet S Sekhon, Sarang Joshi, and James S Duncan. The
  silent majority: Demystifying memorization effect in the presence of spurious correlations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2501.00961, 2025.
Hao Yuan, Haiyang Yu, Jie Wang, Kang Li, and Shuiwang Ji. On explainability of graph neural
  networks via subgraph explorations. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 12241–
  12252. PMLR, 2021.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Learning deep
  features for discriminative localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2921–2929, 2016.
Roland S Zimmermann, Thomas Klein, and Wieland Brendel. Scale alone does not improve mech-
  anistic interpretability in vision models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    L AYER - PROGRESSIVE N EURON L OCATING A LGORITHM A NALYSIS
Here is the estimation of the computing complexity of our proposed searching algorithm. We firstly
define some notations of the model:

       • L: Number of model layers
       • n: Number of neuron in each layer
       • m: Sampling step
       • d: Feature dimension
       • T : Transformer token number

In each layer, we will firstly iterate each neuron, whose complexity is O(n), then for the calculation
of JAS as Definition 1, the complexity of forward pass is O(T · d2 ). And for backward propagation,
the complexity is also O(T · d2 ). Since we have m sampling steps and n neurons, the whole
complexity is O(m·n·T ·d2 ), and for the addition operation, the complexity is O(m·n). Therefore,
for one layer, the computing complexity is
                    O(N ) + O(m · n · T · d2 ) + O(m · n) ≈ O(m · n · T · d2 ).
And for L layers, the whole complexity is
                                       O(L · m · n · T · d2 ).
In the implementation, we can parallelly compute the integrated gradient, the detail of hardware and
run time is shown in Appendix C.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     P RELIMINARY E XPERIMENT M ETHOD

Given a pretrained model F with sample input x, we can calculate the attribution score for the
i-th neuron in the l-th layer wil , which is called Knowledge Attribution (Dai et al., 2022), by the
following formula
                                                    Z 1
                                                         ∂Fx (αwli )
                                   Attr(wil ) = wli                  dα                          (5)
                                                     α=0   ∂wil

where wli is the original value of the i-th neuron in layer l. For the sake of easy calculation, we use
the Riemann approximation instead
                                                  l Xm        k l
                                  g il ) = wi           ∂Fx ( m  wi )
                                  Attr(w                       l
                                                                      ,                            (6)
                                           m              ∂wi
                                                    k=1

where m stands for the sampling step, and for this experiment, we set m = 20. For each sample
input, we can compute the attribution of each neuron and select the 5 neurons with the largest
attribution as the significant neurons for that sample.


C     Q UANTITATIVE E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

All the experiments are run on NVIDIA A40 GPUs with batch size equals to 10 and sampling step
m equals to 20, using ImageNet1k validation set. The estimated time for an experiment is about
10-20 hours based on the size of target model.

C.1   TARGET M ODEL S ETTING D ETAILS

ViT-B-16 stand for containing 12 Transformer blocks with patch size equals to 16; ViT-B-32 stand
for containing 12 Transformer blocks with patch size equals to 32; ViT-L-32 stand for containing 24
Transformer blocks with patch size equals to 32 and MAE-B-16 stand for containing 12 Transformer
blocks with patch size equals to 16. For ViT-B-16, ViT-B-32, MAE-B-16, their hidden sizes are all
768 and FFN inner sizes are all 3072, which stands for 3072 different neurons per layer; and for ViT-
L-32, its hidden size is 1024 and FFN inner size is 4096, which stands for 4096 different neurons
per layer.

C.2   ACTIVATION

The activation method represents a path sampling technique that locates the neuron with the largest
original activation value in each layer. The key idea is to trace the most activated neurons across
layers, assuming that the most significant information flow is through these highly activated neurons.
To find the Neuron Path Px = {w1 , w2 , ..., wL } in Definition 2, for an input sample x, we first
initialize the path Px as an empty set and then start a layer-wise neuron selection. For each layer l
from FFN of vision Transformer model, we compute the original values for all neurons in the layer,
which is denoted as
                                   Al = {wli }, i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} ,                            (7)

where wli is the original value of the i-th neuron in layer l and n is the number of neurons per layer.
To identify the neuron in each layer, we pick the neuron with the largest activation, and add this to
the path and finally we obtain

                         Px = {wl |wl = arg max(Al )}, l ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L} .                     (8)
                                                 w

After iterating through all layers, the path contains the most activated neurons from each layer,
representing the route with the highest neuron activation. The resulting path highlights the neurons
with the highest activation at each layer, suggesting a direct route of significant information flow
through the network.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3   I NFLUENCE PATTERN

The Influence Pattern method, based on (Lu et al., 2021), utilizes the input to build path integrals
and identifies the neuron with the largest integrated gradient in each layer. This method focuses on
the influence of input features on neuron activations, tracing the path that maximizes the integrated
gradient layer by layer. Their core algorithm is greedy search with key metric is Pattern Influence.
With a target model F with L layers, we present

                                            L
                                         Z 1Y
                                                    ∂wl (x′ + α(x − x′ ))
                           I(x, Px ) =                                     dα                         (9)
                                           0 l=1   ∂wl−1 (x′ + α(x − x′ ))

where x′ is the all zero base input, wl (·) is the activation value of selected neuron of the l-th layer
with respect to the input, Px is the path containing the neurons across all the layers. With the
definition above we can now form the greedy search-based algorithm as follows.

Algorithm 2 Greedy Search-Based Influence Pattern Algorithm
  Input: Model F with L layers, input sample x
  Output: neuron path P
  Initialization: P = ∅, l = 1
  while l ≤ L do
    W is the set of neurons in layer l of F ; Score = 0, p = None
    for w ∈ W do
       if Score < Ĩ(x, P ∪ {w}) then
          Score = Ĩ(x, P ∪ {w}); p = w
    P = P ∪ {p}; l = l + 1


After iterating all the layers in model F , we will have a neuron path sampled based on Influence
Pattern.

C.4   P ROBABILITY D EVIATION

Suppose we have a model F : Rd → R, a neuron path Px = {w1 , w2 , ..., wL } where wl , l ∈
{1, 2, ..., L} stands for the selected neuron in layer l. Given a input pair < xi , yi >, we can have the
output probability as
            Pxi = Fxi (ŵ1 , ŵ2 , ..., ŵL ) = p(yi |xi , w1 = ŵ1 , w2 = ŵ2 , ..., wN = ŵL ) ,   (10)

We conduct manipulation experiments by manipulating the intermediate neurons within the neuron
path, resulting in manipulated intermediate neurons w̃l . The output probability with the manipulated
intermediate neurons and the input sample xi are then

                                      P̃xi = Fxi (w̃1 , w̃2 , . . . , w̃L )                          (11)

Then, the Probability Deviation with the input < xi , yi > pair ∆Pxi /Pxi is defined as a ratio

                                           ∆Pxi  P̃x − Pxi
                                                = i                                                  (12)
                                           Pxi      Px i

The average Probability Deviation of the dataset is defined as the average of the individual proba-
bility deviations

                                                             N
                                                        1 X ∆Pxi
                                        ∆Paverage =                                                  (13)
                                                        N i=1 Pxi


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The median Probability Deviation of the dataset is defined as the median of the individual probability
deviations

                                                        ∆Pxi
                               ∆P median = median            | ⟨xi , yi ⟩                        (14)
                                                        Px i

C.5   ACCURACY D EVIATION

Suppose we have a model F : Rd → R, a neuron path Px = {w1 , w2 , ..., wL } where wl , l ∈
{1, 2, ..., L} stands for the neuron in layer l. Given a dataset D represented by < xi , yi > pairs,
where xi denotes the input of the i-th sample and yi represents its target label. The accuracy,
denoted by Acc, is defined as

                                                  |D|
                                              1 X
                                     Acc =           I(ŷi = yi )                                (15)
                                             |D| i=1

where ŷi is defined as

                                         ŷi = argmax(Pxi )                                      (16)

In this context, Pxi represents the output probability of the model. After manipulating the interme-
diate neurons within the neuron path as demonstrated in Appendix C.4, the output probability with
the input sample xi become P̃xi , and ỹi changes to

                                         ỹi = argmax(P̃xi )                                     (17)

The accuracy also changes to

                                                  |D|
                                     g= 1
                                             X
                                     Acc         I(ỹi = yi )                                    (18)
                                         |D| i=1

Then, the Accuracy Deviation ∆Acc is defined as

                                               g − Acc
                                        ∆Acc = Acc                                               (19)


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D              M ORE E XAMPLES AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS ABOUT C LASS - LEVEL
               A NALYSIS
D.1              M ORE F REQUENCY P LOT V ISUALIZATIONS

In this section, we show more examples about the statistic visualization for four different models.
In figures some violin plot may be shorter than others, this is due to the fact that, constrained by the
limited number of image samples within a category, the length of the violin plot is shortened if the
neurons at the ends of index are never selected in the neuron paths.

                     Class: spiny lobster                                Class: tick                               Class: vulture
Neuron Index


                                                Neuron Index


                                                                                            Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                           Layer                                       Layer
                    Class: sulphur butterfly                             Class: hen                               Class: keeshond
Neuron Index


                                                Neuron Index


                                                                                            Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                           Layer                                       Layer
                        Class: fountain                                 Class: wreck                               Class: sarong
Neuron Index


                                                Neuron Index


                                                                                            Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                           Layer                                       Layer
                     Class: indigo bunting                           Class: Gila monster                           Class: bluetick
Neuron Index


                                                Neuron Index


                                                                                            Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                           Layer                                       Layer
                         Class: beagle                                Class: marimba                              Class: ballplayer
Neuron Index


                                                Neuron Index


                                                                                            Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                           Layer                                       Layer
                        Class: washer                                Class: Indian cobra                        Class: French bulldog
Neuron Index


                                                Neuron Index


                                                                                            Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                           Layer                                       Layer
                          Class: slug                                 Class: barracouta                             Class: mask
Neuron Index


                                                Neuron Index


                                                                                            Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                           Layer                                       Layer


                                     Figure 7: More Path Statistic Visualization for ViT-B-16


                                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Class: bonnet                                   Class: limpkin                                  Class: weasel

Neuron Index


                                               Neuron Index


                                                                                              Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                          Layer                                          Layer
                     Class: rock python                                 Class: lotion                                  Class: barrel
Neuron Index


                                               Neuron Index


                                                                                              Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                          Layer                                          Layer
                       Class: goldfish                                 Class: agama                                    Class: racer
Neuron Index


                                               Neuron Index


                                                                                              Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                          Layer                                          Layer
                     Class: neck brace                                  Class: daisy                                    Class: slug
Neuron Index


                                               Neuron Index


                                                                                              Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                          Layer                                          Layer
                      Class: dalmatian                               Class: barometer                                  Class: pretzel
Neuron Index


                                               Neuron Index


                                                                                              Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                          Layer                                          Layer
                     Class: African grey                          Class: American lobster                       Class: Old English sheepdog
Neuron Index


                                               Neuron Index


                                                                                              Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                          Layer                                          Layer
                       Class: pretzel                             Class: leatherback turtle                        Class: triumphal arch
Neuron Index


                                               Neuron Index


                                                                                              Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                          Layer                                          Layer


                                    Figure 8: More Path Statistic Visualization for ViT-B-32


                                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Class: cricket                                                  Class: fox squirrel                                                 Class: lionfish


Neuron Index


                                                                  Neuron Index


                                                                                                                                    Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324
                                     Layer                                                             Layer                                                             Layer
                              Class: paintbrush                                                 Class: submarine                                             Class: Old English sheepdog
Neuron Index


                                                                  Neuron Index


                                                                                                                                    Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324
                                     Layer                                                             Layer                                                             Layer
                              Class: green lizard                                               Class: Boston bull                                                 Class: ladybug
Neuron Index


                                                                  Neuron Index


                                                                                                                                    Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324
                                     Layer                                                             Layer                                                             Layer
                               Class: Arctic fox                                              Class: spider monkey                                                  Class: wallaby
Neuron Index


                                                                  Neuron Index


                                                                                                                                    Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324
                                     Layer                                                             Layer                                                             Layer
                             Class: digital watch                                                  Class: liner                                                    Class: damselfly
Neuron Index


                                                                  Neuron Index


                                                                                                                                    Neuron Index

               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324
                                     Layer                                                             Layer                                                             Layer
                                Class: spindle                                                   Class: Pekinese                                                    Class: briard
Neuron Index


                                                                  Neuron Index


                                                                                                                                    Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324
                                     Layer                                                             Layer                                                             Layer
                              Class: rock beauty                                                 Class: tree frog                                               Class: triumphal arch
Neuron Index


                                                                  Neuron Index


                                                                                                                                    Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021222324
                                     Layer                                                             Layer                                                             Layer


                                                 Figure 9: More Path Statistic Visualization for ViT-L-32


                                                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Class: Angora                                Class: disk brake                             Class: terrapin

Neuron Index


                                             Neuron Index


                                                                                           Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                        Layer                                         Layer
                      Class: sea snake                                Class: loupe                                Class: baseball
Neuron Index


                                             Neuron Index


                                                                                           Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                        Layer                                         Layer
                      Class: stingray                                 Class: cairn                               Class: hartebeest
Neuron Index


                                             Neuron Index


                                                                                           Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                        Layer                                         Layer
                      Class: necklace                               Class: ballplayer                          Class: Dandie Dinmont
Neuron Index


                                             Neuron Index


                                                                                           Neuron Index
               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                        Layer                                         Layer
                        Class: collie                             Class: dial telephone                           Class: bassoon
Neuron Index


                                             Neuron Index


                                                                                           Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                        Layer                                         Layer
                      Class: partridge                           Class: Japanese spaniel                       Class: Sussex spaniel
Neuron Index


                                             Neuron Index


                                                                                           Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                        Layer                                         Layer
                      Class: bee eater                                 Class: hog                                  Class: tricycle
Neuron Index


                                             Neuron Index


                                                                                           Neuron Index


               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                         Layer                                        Layer                                         Layer


                                 Figure 10: More Path Statistic Visualization for MAE-B-16


                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2   N EURON U TILIZATION M ATRIX

For a category c ∈ C, it will contain I different images, and in our setting, we use the Ima-
geNet1k(Deng et al., 2009) validation set, so I = 50, |C| = 1000. Each image will have its
Neuron Path Pi , so that we can have a matrix f ∈ RL×n to count the number of times each neuron
index occurs in each layer, where L represents the number of layers and n stands for the number of
neuron in each layer. By dividing the total number of neuron selections in each layer, we can define
a neuron utilization matrix corresponding to category c as
                                            Mc ∈ RL×n ,                                           (20)
and for every pairs of neuron utilization matrix Mci , fcj , we can calculate their cosine similarity s
through following approaches.
                                                Mci · Mcj
                                     si,j =                     ,                                  (21)
                                            ||Mci || × ||Mcj ||
since we will have |C|×|C| pairs, we can have a similarity matrix S ∈ R|C|×|C| , where Si,j represents
the cosine similarity between ci and cj , that is si,j


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3   M ORE S EMANTIC S IMILARITY V ISUALIZATION

         Sim: 0.559          Sim: 0.532                      Reference                     Sim: 0.212       Sim: 0.137

                                                                             Bottom
                                            Top Similarity                  Similarity



        Beach Wagon            Pelican                        Convertible                  St Bernard      Staffordshire
         Sim: 0.440          Sim: 0.448                                                    Sim: 0.155      Sim: 0.148

                                                                             Bottom
                                            Top Similarity                  Similarity


         Water Ouzel       Indigo Bunting                     Goldfinch                      Tabby           Tiger cat
         Sim: 0.456          Sim:0.387                                                    Sim: 0.156       Sim: 0.129

                                                                             Bottom
                                            Top Similarity                  Similarity


         Black Swan     Red-breasted Merganser                  Goose                    Microwave Oven      Milometer
         Sim: 0.584          Sim: 0.459                                                    Sim: 0.170       Sim: 0.132

                                                                             Bottom
                                            Top Similarity                  Similarity



             Hen               Pelican                          Ostrich                    St Bernard      Staffordshire
         Sim: 0.514          Sim: 0.499                                                   Sim: 0.158       Sim: 0.150

                                                                             Bottom
                                            Top Similarity                  Similarity


          Retriever            Chow                           Shih-Tzh                   American robin   Letter Opener
         Sim: 0.438          Sim:0.372                                                    Sim: 0.161       Sim: 0.127

                                                                             Bottom
                                            Top Similarity                  Similarity


          Bald eagle          Albatross                        Vulture                   Cocker Spaniel     Staffordshire
         Sim: 0.650          Sim: 0.591                                                   Sim: 0.190       Sim: 0.139

                                                                             Bottom
                                            Top Similarity                  Similarity



           Lemon              Spaghetti                      Granny Smith                    Bakery         Odometer
         Sim: 0.494         Sim: 0.460                                                    Sim: 0.194       Sim: 0.209

                                                                             Bottom
                                            Top Similarity                  Similarity


           Maillot             Cloak                          Hoopskirt                  Horizontal Bar   Cocker Spaniel


                       Figure 11: More examples of category similarity for ViT-B-16


                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Sim: 0.632            Sim: 0.617                          Reference                      Sim: 0.352    Sim: 0.272

                                                                                     Bottom
                                                Top Similarity                      Similarity



         Siamese Cat          Snow Leopard                         Egyptian Cat                   Bell Pepper     Conch
         Sim: 0.739            Sim: 0.547                                                         Sim: 0.303    Sim: 0.295

                                                                                      Bottom
                                                Top Similarity                       Similarity


          Chickadee           Oystercatcher                       Indigo bunting                   Fountain     Chain Saw
         Sim: 0.723            Sim:0.624                                                          Sim: 0.346    Sim: 0.307

                                                                                     Bottom
                                                Top Similarity                      Similarity


        Border Terrier       Golden Retriever                        Italian                        Oxcard      Scoreboard
         Sim: 0.515            Sim: 0.512                          Greyhound                      Sim: 0.299    Sim: 0.289

                                                                                     Bottom
                                                Top Similarity                      Similarity



             Lynx             Howler Monkey                          Meerkat                         Drop        Fountain
         Sim: 0.521            Sim: 0.511                                                         Sim: 0.286    Sim: 0.284

                                                                                      Bottom
                                                Top Similarity                       Similarity


            Cougar               Leopard                               Lion                          Wing          Maze
         Sim: 0.562            Sim:0.549                                                          Sim: 0.307    Sim: 0.255

                                                                                     Bottom
                                                Top Similarity                      Similarity


        Norfolk Terrier       Dandie Demont                         Kerry Blue                       Cliff       Fire Screen
         Sim: 0.636             Sim: 0.628                           Terrier                      Sim: 0.335    Sim: 0.319

                                                                                      Bottom
                                                 Top Similarity                      Similarity



          Convertible              Racer                           Moving Van                        Conch      Space Shuttle
          Sim: 0.722            Sim:0.577                                                         Sim: 0.323    Sim: 0.296

                                                                                      Bottom
                                                 Top Similarity                      Similarity


       Yorkshire Terrier           Borzoi                         Norwich Terrier                  Brambling    Space Shuttle



                          Figure 12: More examples of category similarity for ViT-B-32


                                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Sim: 0.365            Sim: 0.355                       Reference                    Sim: 0.175         Sim: 0.164

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity



          Redshank                 Hen                             Cock                      Tape Player    Yellow Lady’s Slipper
         Sim: 0.314            Sim: 0.306                                                    Sim: 0.144         Sim: 0.140

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


          Flamingo        Red-backed Sandpiper                    Ostrich                     Cardoon              Daisy
         Sim: 0.333            Sim:0.280                                                     Sim: 0.147         Sim: 0.137

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


          Chickadee           Indigo bunting                     Goldfinch                    Water jug          Refrigerator
         Sim: 0.583            Sim: 0.524                                                    Sim: 0.183         Sim: 0.156

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity



          Toy Terrier       Rhodesian Ridgeback                   Shih-Tzu                      Jean             Scuba Diver
         Sim: 0.408            Sim: 0.371                                                    Sim: 0.160         Sim: 0.159

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


            Basset              Pekinese                         Bluetick                    King Snake           Broccoli
         Sim: 0.409            Sim:0.389                                                     Sim: 0.168         Sim: 0.160

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


         white terrier    black-and-tan coonhound               Curly-coated                mashed potato           Bakery
         Sim: 0.484            Sim: 0.473                        Retriever                   Sim: 0.150         Sim: 0.125

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity



         Harvestman           Black Window                       Scorpion                   Motor Scooter         Lakeside
         Sim: 0.447            Sim: 0.422                                                   Sim: 0.198          Sim: 0.179

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


        Horned Viper          Diamondback                       Vine Snake                    Bathtub            Ski Mask


                         Figure 13: More examples of category similarity for ViT-L-32


                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Sim: 0.294           Sim: 0.257                        Reference                    Sim: 0.074    Sim: 0.074

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity



           bonnet               velvet                             Apron                      binoculars   paddlewheel
         Sim: 0.160           Sim:0.130                                                      Sim: 0.041    Sim: 0.037

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


         water bottle         soup bowl                         coffee mug                     banjo        sweatshirt
         Sim: 0.216           Sim: 0.167                                                     Sim: 0.054     Sim: 0.032

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


           cauliflower         broccoli                         head cabbage                    castle       refrigerator
          Sim: 0.157         Sim: 0.111                                                      Sim: 0.039    Sim: 0.033

                                                                                 Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                   Similarity


         mushroom           alligator lizard                      mashed                       banjo       fire screen
         Sim: 0.108           Sim:0.106                           potato                     Sim: 0.022    Sim: 0.022

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


          trimaran            boat paddle                       scuba diver                    oxcart       schipperke
         Sim: 0.120           Sim: 0.114                                                     Sim: 0.037     Sim: 0.035

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity



          cliff dwelling          cliff                            valley                       cannon      acorn squash
         Sim: 0.143           Sim: 0.130                                                     Sim: 0.053    Sim: 0.049

                                                                                 Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                   Similarity


          soup bowl           water bottle                       whiskey jug                 scoreboard    snowplow
         Sim: 0.095           Sim:0.093                                                      Sim: 0.028    Sim: 0.022

                                                                                Bottom
                                               Top Similarity                  Similarity


            jersey         Christmas stocking                    Windsor tie                   conch         brambling



                      Figure 14: More examples of category similarity for MAE-B-16


                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF MODEL PRUNING

E.1    T OP K NEURONS PRESERVING ALGORITHM

The calculation of accuracy change is using the same implementation of Appendix C.5. Instead of
keeping only the neurons with highest JAS along the neuron path, we will retain the neurons with the
TopK highest scores. The detailed procedure of our TopK neurons preserving algorithm is outlined
in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 Layer-progressive Neuron Locating Algorithm Maintaining TopK Neurons
    Input: Model F with L layers, input sample x, TopK= t
    Output: neuron path Pt
    Initialization: Pt = ∅, l = 1
    while l ≤ L do
      W is the set of neurons in layer l of F ; Score = ∅, p = None
      for w ∈ W do
         Score = TopKK=t (JAS(P
                             g t , w))
         p = arg(Score)
      Pt = Pt ∪ {p}; l = l + 1


E.2    P ROBING AND T EST S ET S PLITTING IN P RUNING E XPERIMENT

To evaluate the performance of the pruned models, we employ the ImageNet1k validation set (Deng
et al., 2009), which comprises 50 images per class. For each class, 80% (40 images per class) are
randomly selected to identify the TopK neurons in each layer. Specifically, for each of these 40
images, we apply the TopK neuron preserving algorithm described in Algorithm 3 to compute the
top neurons. The results are then aggregated across all 40 images, yielding a set of 40×t neurons per
class for each layer. By calculating the frequency of each neuron in this aggregated set, as detailed
in Section 4.3, we determine the most frequently activated neuron paths. The neurons that appear
most often are deemed the most critical for the respective class, and from this frequency distribution,
the TopK neurons with the highest occurrence are selected as the representative top neurons for each
layer. Subsequently, the pruning operation is executed using the remaining 20% of the dataset (10
images per class) as inputs. For these images, neurons not included in the selected TopK set are
zeroed out in each layer.
This validation approach ensures that the pruning operation is tailored to each class by retaining the
most relevant neurons based on their frequency in the validation subset. Evaluating the pruned model
on the remaining images allows us to assess the strategy’s effectiveness in preserving classification
accuracy while significantly reducing model complexity.

E.3    Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF PRUNING METHODS

We tried using ViT-Slim (Chavan et al., 2022) as our compression baseline, here are the results.

                                      Method        Accuracy ↑
                                     ViT-Slim          9.96%
                                    JAS-Prune          67.7%

Table 2: The model prediction accuracy after conducting pruning. ↑ means that the higher, the better.

For fairness, we restrict ViT-Slim to focus solely on FFNs, mirroring our approach. Notably, while
ViT-Slim emphasizes module weights, our method targets individual neurons. For dataset config-
uration, we employ the validation set split consistent with that described above in Appendix E.2.
Although ViT-Slim may be more efficient, its performance is constrained by training on a limited
dataset, a limitation partly attributable to its design.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Furthermore, we conduct ablation experiments on neuron path lengths to investigate their impact
on the pruning effect. We also perform additional comparisons by employing activation values as
neurons, using the same configuration as described in Section 4.2, wherein the TopK activation
values in each FFN block are selected as neurons. In parallel. Here, Depth corresponds to the
number of probing layers (i.e., the neuron path length), while Mask represents the percentage of
neurons deleted, excluding the selected neurons.

                                                     Accuracy ↑
                   Depth    Mask (%)
                                          Activation topK=5     JAS topK=5
                     6          100            0.517991           0.521252
                     9          100            0.518137           0.527151
                     12         100            0.531976           0.540702

Table 3: The model prediction accuracy after conducting pruning using different neurons and depth.
↑ means that the higher, the better.

The results demonstrate that our method outperforms the activation baseline, and that the depth of
the neuron path is a also significant.


                                               29
