Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G AUSSIAN B LOCK : B UILDING PART-AWARE C OMPO -
SITIONAL AND E DITABLE 3D S CENE BY P RIMITIVES
AND G AUSSIANS

 Shuyi Jiang1 , Qihao Zhao1 , Hossein Rahmani2 , De Wen Soh1 , Jun Liu2 , Na Zhao1∗
 1
   Singapore Univeristy of Technology and Design, 2 Lancaster University
 shuyi jiang@mymail.sutd.edu.sg,
 {qihao zhao, dewen soh, na zhao}@sutd.edu.sg,
 {h.rahmani, j.liu81}@lancaster.ac.uk



                                              A BSTRACT

            Recently, with the development of Neural Radiance Fields and Gaussian Splat-
            ting, 3D reconstruction techniques have achieved remarkably high fidelity. How-
            ever, the latent representations learned by these methods are highly entangled
            and lack interpretability. In this paper, we propose a novel part-aware com-
            positional reconstruction method, called GaussianBlock, that enables semanti-
            cally coherent and disentangled representations, allowing for precise and phys-
            ical editing akin to building blocks, while simultaneously maintaining high fi-
            delity. Our GaussianBlock introduces a hybrid representation that leverages the
            advantages of both primitives, known for their flexible actionability and editabil-
            ity, and 3D Gaussians, which excel in reconstruction quality. Specifically, we
            achieve semantically coherent primitives through a novel attention-guided center-
            ing loss derived from 2D semantic priors, complemented by a dynamic splitting
            and fusion strategy. Furthermore, we utilize 3D Gaussians that hybridize with
            primitives to refine structural details and enhance fidelity. Additionally, a bind-
            ing inheritance strategy is employed to strengthen and maintain the connection
            between the two. Our reconstructed scenes are evidenced to be disentangled,
            compositional, and compact across diverse benchmarks, enabling seamless, di-
            rect and precise editing while maintaining high quality. The code is available at
            https://github.com/Jiangshuyi0V0/GaussianBlock.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Recently, with the development of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Barron et al., 2021; Mildenhall
et al., 2021) and Gaussian Splatting (Jiang et al., 2023; Kerbl et al., 2023) approaches, multi-view
3D reconstruction techniques have substantially progressed, enabling the recovery of high-quality
3D assets from multi-view 2D images. Despite impressive progress, the underlying representations
learned by these methods are highly entangled and lack interpretability. This entanglement nature
not only discourages the understanding and analysis of the model, but also hinders precise editing
of the reconstructed assets, as it is difficult to accurately locate the required corresponding rep-
resentations and apply precise operations while ensuring other representations remain unaffected.
Although advanced 3D editing methods can serve as post-processing tools, e.g., one of the current
state-of-the-art methods, GaussianEditor (Chen et al., 2024), proposes semantic tracing to constrain
the modification region while keeping other parts unchanged, it remains challenging to achieve pre-
cise control as shown in Fig. 1. In contrast, compositional reconstruction - where disentangled 3D
components are reconstructed from 2D image inputs - allows for individual analysis, processing,
and modification, making it a particularly appealing approach. This compositional reconstruction is
essential for enhancing 3D perception and understanding (Yuan et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023), as well
as for improving robotic interaction and manipulation capabilities (Vezzani et al., 2017).
A number of prior works have attempted to achieve part-aware compositional reconstruction from
2D inputs; however, several common limitations still exist. 1) Textureless or limited fidelity. Early
    ∗
        Corresponding Author: na zhao@sutd.edu.sg


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: While most related works face at least one of the three common limitations, including
fidelity, editability, and semantically coherent part-aware disentanglement. Our method addresses
all three limitations simultaneously. The underline text and masks are semtanic tracing keywords
and results. Best viewed with color and marks.

classical works focus solely on extracting textureless part-aware shapes from images (Niu et al.,
2018; Wu et al., 2020; Paschalidou et al., 2020; Michalkiewicz et al., 2021; Paschalidou et al., 2021;
Petrov et al., 2023; Alaniz et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024). Although some recent works attempt to
jointly learn appearance through textured UV-maps (Monnier et al., 2023) or neural features (Yu
et al., 2024; Tertikas et al., 2023), the fidelity of the reconstructed scenes still lags significantly be-
hind current reconstruction methods utilizing Gaussian Splatting. 2) Semantic incoherence. One
line of compositional reconstruction works (Monnier et al., 2023; Alaniz et al., 2023; Yu et al.,
2024) opts to use superquadrics Paschalidou et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2022), a specific type of ge-
ometric primitives to build a 3D scene due to their high interpretability and flexible actionability,
which can be directly adapted into industrial software for intuitive physical editing. However, these
methods typically focus merely on fitting “geometrically-suited” primitives into 3D scenes, while
neglecting the semantic relationships and coherence between compositional parts. This often results
in undesirable semantic overlap and unreasonable segmentation among reconstructed primitives. 3)
Lack of controllable editablity. Another line of methods achieves compositional reconstruction
through generalizable image segmentation models like SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). These methods
utilize SAM to segment visual components in images and align the generated 2D masks with im-
plicit representations (e.g., NeRF) (Bai et al., 2023; Ying et al., 2024; Cen et al., 2023b; Tertikas
et al., 2023) or advanced explicit representations (e.g., Gaussians) (Ye et al., 2023; Cen et al., 2023a;
Dou et al., 2024; Ying et al., 2024). Although these approaches yield satisfactory decomposed re-
sults thanks to impressive segmentation techniques, the reconstructed scenes only support “holistic”
edits, such as translation and deletion, rather than allowing for controllable editablity. For instance,
while it is feasible to uniformly remove or translate Gaussians within the same mask, more complex
manipulations - such as waving arms or shaking heads, as shown in Fig. 1 - require each Gaussian
to undergo distinct transformations, a capability that these methods do not support.
These challenges prompt us to propose a novel reconstruction pipeline, named as GaussianBlock,
where the semantically coherent and disentangled representation can be precisely and physically
edited like building blocks, while simultaneously maintaining competitive high fidelity. Specifically,
leveraging the flexible actionability of superquadric primitives and the capacity of 3D Gaussians in
reconstructing high-quality scenes, we propose a hybrid representation that integrates superquadric
primitives and Gaussians, where superquadric serve as coarse but disentangled building blocks,
while Gaussians act as “skin” to refine the structure and ensure high fidelity.
Our GaussianBlock reconstructs semantically coherent primitives by introducing a novel Attention-
guided Centering (AC) loss to regularize the generated superquadrics. Specifically, by using 2D
differentiable prompts derived from superquadrics through dual-rasterization, the AC loss applies
a clustering algorithm to supervise the grouping of queries with the same semantics, encouraging
the superquadrics to disentangle accordingly. Additionally, our GaussianBlock enhances the com-
pactness and semantic coherence of superquadrics through the introduction of dynamic fusion and
splitting strategies. Specifically, a single superquadric that encompasses various distinguishable se-
mantics is considered for splitting, while multiple superquadrics that share the same semantics or
exhibit significant overlap are fused.
The hybrid representation in our GaussianBlock is established by attaching and connecting Gaus-
sians to the superquadrics. Specifically, inspired by GaussianAvater (Qian et al., 2024), we initialize
3D Gaussians at the triangles of each reconstructed superquadric and perform primitive-based lo-
calized transformations during rasterization to reinforce their connection. Additionally, a binding


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


inheritance strategy is employed to maintain this connection, assigning each Gaussian new identity
parameters that indicate the primitive and triangle to which it belongs. During optimization and den-
sity control, our GaussianBlock utilizes a regularization loss to encourage the Gaussians to remain
closely connected to their corresponding primitives while ensuring that these identity parameters are
inherited throughout the process. Based on these designs, as primitives are manipulated, each 3D
Gaussian can be deleted, translated, and rotated according to its associated binding vertex.
Thanks to these innovative designs, our method demonstrates state-of-the-art part-level decompo-
sition and controllable, precise editability, with competitive fidelity across various benchmarks, in-
cluding DTU (Jensen et al., 2014), Nerfstudio (Tancik et al., 2023), BlendedMVS (Yao et al., 2020),
Mip-360-Garden (Barron et al., 2021) and Tank&Temple-Truck (Knapitsch et al., 2017).
2   R ELATED W ORK
Compositional Reconstruction. Compositional reconstruction refers to reconstructing disentan-
gled 3D components from 2D image inputs, which can be individually analyzed, processed, and
modified. Early classical works often focus on abstracting textureless shape parts from images,
mostly through hierarchical unsupervised learning (Paschalidou et al., 2020), deep neural net-
work (Niu et al., 2018; Paschalidou et al., 2021; Michalkiewicz et al., 2021; Petrov et al., 2023),
generative models (Wu et al., 2020), contrastive learning (Liu et al., 2024) or primitives (Alaniz
et al., 2023). Recently, there have been two major lines of work in compositional reconstruction:
one is primitive-based, and the other is segment-based with advanced representation.
In general, primitive-based methods typically fit “geometry-suited” primitives into the scene. For
instance, Monnier et al. (Monnier et al., 2023) optimizes the superquadrics and corresponding tex-
ture map concurrently, while Alaniz et al. (Alaniz et al., 2023) iteratively feeds new superquadrics
to an area with high reconstruction error. Recently, DPA-Net (Yu et al., 2024) fuses convex quadrics
assembly into NeRF framework to generate an occupancy field. However, existing primitive-based
works neglect the semantic relationships and coherence between compositional parts, leading to
undesirable semantic overlap and unreasonable segmentation among the reconstructed primitives.
With the advent of large generalizable image segmentation models like SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), a
new line of segmentation-based methods that integrate with advanced 3D scene representations such
as NeRF and Gaussian Splatting has gained popularity. PartNeRF (Tertikas et al., 2023) learns inde-
pendent NeRF for each pre-segmented part. CompoNeRF (Bai et al., 2023) segments complex text
prompts and positions sub-texts within different bounding boxes, followed by the learning of a dis-
tinct NeRF for each box. In contrast, SA3D (Cen et al., 2023b) utilizes a 3D NeRF as input instead
of 2D images. It projects 2D pre-segmented masks onto 3D mask grids via density-guided inverse
rendering, thereby achieving a certain level of 3D disentanglement. GaussianGrouping (Ye et al.,
2023) aligns rendered Gaussians with their corresponding pre-segmented 2D masks and groups
Gaussians with similar meanings to achieve disentanglement. Similarly, SegAnyGaussians Cen
et al. (2023a) achieves Gaussian decomposition and segmentation by enforcing the correspondence
between Gaussian features and 2D pre-segmented masks. Omniseg3d (Ying et al., 2024) addresses
the labor intensity required to ensure that 2D masks are multi-view and fine-grained consistent by
introducing 3D hierarchical contrastive learning. Despite the impressive segmentation and decom-
position results achieved by the above methods, which rely on pre-segmented masks and advanced
3D representations, the reconstructed 3D assets still lack flexible editability and actionability.
3D Editing. Precise editing is a challenging task, especially when dealing with the entangled
3D underlying representations of reconstructed scenes. Recently, numerous advanced 3D editing
methods have been proposed, typically taking 3D scenes as input. These methods can function
as post-processing techniques to achieve visual editing effects relevant to our primary focus, i.e.,
compositional reconstruction. Therefore, we discuss several of these works here. Focaldreamer (Li
et al., 2024) takes 3D meshes as input and introduces geometry union and focal loss to achieve
text-prompted precise editing. SKED (Mikaeili et al., 2023) requires 3D NeRF, sketches, and text
prompt, where sketches guide the regions of the NeRF that should adhere to the specified modifica-
tions. LENeRF (Hyung et al., 2023) also employs NeRF as input and incorporates several add-on
modules, such as the latent residual mapper and attention field generation, to execute text prompts
that contain the desired local edits. GaussianEditor (Chen et al., 2024), a leading method in the field,
takes well-trained Gaussian scenes and text prompts as inputs, and enhances precise editing through
Gaussian semantic tracing, which traces the editing target throughout the training process. Unlike


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


these methods, our approach enables intuitive “drag-mode” physical and precise editing, similar to
building blocks, by reconstructing actionable and semantic compositional representations.

3     M ETHOD
Given a set of multi-view images I and their corresponding silhouettes Is , our goal is to recon-
struct the compositional 3D scene using semantic coherent compositional primitives combined with
Gaussians. The overall pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2.
In the first stage, we adopt parameterized superquadrics primitives ΘK , for their remarkable expres-
siveness, which could be achieved with a relatively small number of continuous parameters (Barr,
1981; Paschalidou et al., 2019). In order to query from 2D pretrained segmentaion model and obtain
semantic prior, we can derive the differential point Pk and box prompts Bk from parameterized ΘK
through soft dual-rasterization, as derived in Sec. 3.1. Subsequently, with the reference image I and
prompts, we can extract the corresponding attention maps Ak for each Pk through pretrained prompt
encoder P E, image encoder E and deconder D, and then apply clustering to Ak to derive a novel
AC loss, as described in Sec. 3.2, where outlier vertices of the superquadrics are encouraged to move
toward the centroid (indicated as star in Fig. 2). Additionally, splitting and fusion strategy, explained
in Sec. 3.3, is proposed to further strengthen the compactness and disentanglement, when applying
the AC loss and reconstruction loss between reconstructed image Ir and silhouette Is during the
supervised optimization. Through the first stage, semantic coherent part-aware superquadrics are
obtained. In the second stage, to leverage the capacity of 3D Gaussians, Gaussians are initialized
and bound to superquadric triangles with localized parameterization, and will be globally mapped to
world space during rasterization. Additionally, a regularization term Lpos will be applied together
with Lrgb , as introduced in Sec. 3.4, to enhance the connection between them.
3.1   D IFFERENTIAL R ENDERING
Superquadric Parameterization. Following the classic work (Barr, 1981), superquadrics can
be parameterized as ΘK = {αK , rK , tK , sK , ϵK }, where K, α ∈ R, r ∈ R6 , t ∈ R3 ,
s = {s1 , s2 , s3 } ∈ R3 , and ϵ = {ϵ1 , ϵ2 } ∈ R2 denote the number of superquadrics, transparency,
6D rotation vector, displacement vector, scaling factor, and continuous shape vector, respectively.
Specifically, superquadrics can be formulated as the following explicit surface function (Barr, 1981):
                                                    #T "
                                              x1            s1 cosϵ1 η cosϵ2 ω
                                          "                                      #
                            Φ(x; Θk ) =       x2                s2 sinϵ1 η           ,                 (1)
                                              x3            s3 cosϵ1 η sinϵ2 ω
                             where x = rot(rk )x + tk .                                                (2)

Here η ∈ [− π2 , π2 ] and ω ∈ [−π, π] are the spherical coordinates of the initial unit icosphere vertices,
and rot(·) is a rigid transformation (Zhou et al., 2019) mapping the 6-D rotation vector to a rotation
matrix.
Soft Dual Rasterization. In order to query the 2D pretrained segmentation model and obtain se-
mantic priors, we propose soft dual rasterization, which means we rasterize both rendered images
Ir and 2D prompts Pk derived from the superquadrics simultaneously.
To render the superqudaric, we adopt the occupancy function of (Chen et al., 2019) and attach the
superquadric surface Φ(x; Θk ) with transparency information αk (Monnier et al., 2023), which can
be summarized as:

                                                       ∆j (u)
                            Oj (u) = αkj exp min              ,0    .                          (3)
                                                         σ

Given the pixel u and projected face j, ∆j (u) < 0 indicates that pixel u is outside face j, and
vice versa; σ serves as a scalar modeling the extent of the soft mask. Based on the occupancy
function, we can associate L faces per pixel and obtain the rendered image Ir through the classic
alpha compositing (Porter & Duff, 1984):
                                                           
                                          L
                                          X    Y
                             Ir (O1:L ) =     (1 − Op ) ⊙ Ol .                              (4)
                                              l=1     p<l



                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            I. The first stage                                        𝐼"                                             𝐼'
                                                                                                  𝐿+,-



                                                                      𝑃*        𝐵*                          𝐴*

                        Splitting                                                                                …
                                                                                          PE
                           &
                         Fusion
                                                                           ,
                                                                      𝐼                            D
                                    Φ! = {𝛼! , 𝑟! , 𝑡! , 𝑠! , 𝜖! }                         E
           PE: Point Encoder
           E: Image Encoder
           D: Decoder
                                                                                          𝐿()

           II. The second stage


                                                                                Global Mapping
                                Initialization                                                           𝐿 "#$
                                                                                                         𝐿 %&'
                                                                                Density Control



Figure 2: The framework of our pipeline. In the first stage, the superquadrics blocks are optimized
guided by reconstruction loss Lrec and attention-guided centering loss LAC . With the point Pk and
bounding box Bk prompt obtained from soft dual rasterization, the attention maps Ak from the last
layer of pretrained decoder D are clustered, where outliers being encouraged to move towards the
centroid. Meanwhile, superquadric splitting and fusion strategy is proposed to further enhance the
semantic coherence and compactness during optimization. In the second stage, Gaussians are bound
to the triangles of superquadrics using localized parameterization and inheritance strategy duing
optimization and densification with global mapping transform.

Additionally, to obtain the reference points prompts as well, all superquadric vertices V can be
projected to screen coordinate using the following transformation:
                                                                   
                                                                V
                                     [K
                                               MP j · MV i · 1 
                           Ψ(V ) =       MN s                      ,                       (5)
                                                         ω̃        
                                                                k=1


where MP j and MV i are projection and view matrices derived from camera’s position and orien-
tation (Ravi et al., 2020), ω̃ is the resulting component from projection transformation, and MN s
accounts for the conversion from normalized device coordinates (NDC) space to screen coordinates.
Unfortunately, such an aggressive transformation incorporates undesirable vertices, whose positions
are occluded due to superquadric overlapping from various perspectives. Consequently, these invis-
ible vertices do not “contribute to” the final rendered image, causing them too ambiguous to serve
effectively as point prompts. To obtain valid point prompts, we randomly assign each superquadric
a unique representation color {Ck |k ∈ [1, K]}, and write the vertices rasterization equation as:
                              (                " L                         #)
                                                 X                  \
                                                     r
                       Pk = Ψ(Vk ) | Vk ∈          I (Ψ(Vk )) ⊙ Cl Ck          ,                  (6)
                                                                               l=1

where Vk denotes the k-th superquadric’s vertices and {Cl |l ∈ L} represents the color attribute
associated with the l-th intersecting face. Vertices are considered as point prompts only when they
are meaningful, i.e., when the representative color of a vertex is visible in the final outcome.
3.2   ATTENTION - GUIDED C ENTERING
Aiming for semantic coherence, we expect the superquadrics to be disentangled in alignment with
the semantic parts of the image I. In this work, we utilize SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) to provide
the semantic prior, given its advanced performance and generalizability. Based on this semantic
prior, we propose a novel Attention-guided Centering (AC) loss to ensure alignment. The overall
procedure for calculating the AC loss is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Firstly, to trigger the pre-trained SAM model, bounding boxes and point prompts are typically re-
quired along with the input images for localization and indication. To be specific, for each su-


                                                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Attention-guided Centering Loss
Input: a set of bounding boxes Bk and 2D point prompts Pk , image embedding h(I)
Output: the AC loss ℓk for superquadric θk
 1: Ak = ∅
 2: for pk,m ∈ Pk do
         (p)
 3:     hk,m ← f (p) ([pk,m , Bk ])                             ▷ encode point and box prompt
                                          (p)
 4:     Ak,m = CrossAttention(h(I) , hk,m )                                        ▷ get cross attention map
 5:     Ak ← Ak ∪ {Ak,m }
 6: end for
 7: Sk ← HDBSCAN(Ak )                                                                        ▷ cluster Ak
 8: Sk∗ = arg maxSk,n ∈Sk |Sk,n | and M∗k = {m|Ak,m ∈ Sk∗ }          ▷ find the major cluster Sk∗ ∈ S (k)
 9: Ā∗k ← M
           1
                                                                          ▷ weighted average among Sk∗
               P
                 m∈M∗ (Pr[ñk,m |Ak,m ] · Ak,m )
                    k
10: m∗k = arg minm∈M∗ d(Ak,m , Ā∗k )                                       ▷ localize the centroid of Sk∗
                         k
      †
         ∁Pk {pk,m |Ak,m ∈ Sk∗ }
11: Pk = P                                                                                 ▷ define outliers
12: ℓk ← pk,i ∈P † d(pk,i , pk,m∗k )                                                ▷ calculate the AC loss
                   k



perquadric θk , its rendering can be acquired through Eq. 5 as Ik , and corresponding box prompt
Bk can be inferred from the top-left and top-right vertices of Ik . Thus, the prompt set of θk can be
                                                                                      (p)
denoted as {[pk,m , Bk ]|pk,m ∈ Pk , k ∈ K}, and the embedding of each prompt hk,m is attained
                                          p
through the pre-trained prompt encoder f in SAM. Similarly, the embeddings of the input image
denoted as h(I) are obtained through the image encoder E.
                                                                       (p)
Subsequently, we retrieve the attention map Ak,m prompted by hk,m from the last cross attention
layer of pretrained decoder D. The overall attention map set of θk , denoted as Ak , is assembled
from all the prompts within {[pk,m , Bk ]}. Since we aim for each superquadric to be disentan-
gled and independent, we expect only one semantic cluster to be identified in each θk . Hence,
we leverage HDBSCAN (Campello et al., 2015) algorithm to cluster the sets of attention map Ak .
Let Sk = {Sk,n |n = 1, . . . , N } denote the cluster set associated with θk , and let Pr[n|Ak,m ]
denote the probability of assigning Ak,m to a specific cluster Sk,n . The corresponding cluster la-
bel for Ak,m , denoted as ñk,m , is determined by selecting the cluster with the highest probability:
ñk,m = arg maxn Pr[n|Ak,m ]. The major cluster, denoted as Sk∗ , is defined as the largest cluster
among Sk , where Sk∗ = arg maxSk,n |Sk,n |, and its counterpart is denoted as the ∁Sk Sk∗ . Likewise,
the centroid pk,m∗k represents the coordinate whose Ak,m is nearest to the weighted average attention
map Ā∗k among Sk∗ , while the outliers Pk† are those belonging to ∁Sk Sk∗ .
Finally, to promote disentanglement, outliers are motivated to move towards the centroid, which can
be expressed mathematically as:
                                             K
                                            X                       X
               LAC h, {Bk }K
                           k=1 , {P  } K
                                    k k=1  =   ℓk ;        ℓk =               d(pk,i , pk,m∗k ),         (7)
                                                k=1               pk,i ∈Pk†

where d stands for the L2 Euclidean distance function.
3.3 DYNAMIC F USION AND S PLITTING
To further enhance semantic coherence and compactness while preventing local minima, this section
introduces dynamic superquadric splitting and fusion, taking semantic and compact constraints into
account.
Splitting. We periodically check whether a single primitive contains multiple distinguishable se-
mantics, and for such primitives, we apply a splitting operation. Moreover, due to the centering
action motivated by LAC , superquadrics tend to cover toward containing single disentangled se-
mantic, occasionally resulting in local minima. Inspired by (Kerbl et al., 2023), we propose a
dynamic splitting algorithm tailored for superquadrics, informed by the attention-based centroids.
Based on the cluster set Sk , centroids mk,j can be localized following Algorithm 1, and the distances
                                                           k
between each pair of centroids can be denoted as {Di,j       |i, j ∈ [1, N ]}. If the furthest distance


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dik∗ ,j ∗ among Di,j   k
                           exceeds the threshold τs , which is set according to diagonal of Bk as β B̌k , then
this superquadric θk shall be split, anchored at 3D vertices vik∗ and vjk∗ . In other words, two new
superqudrics {θz |z ∈ [K + 1, K + 2]} will be initialized to replace θk , whose rz , αz , and ϵz are
inherited from θk , and sz = 0.4sk . Notably, to anchor the new superquadrics towards {vxk |x ∈
[i∗ , j ∗ ]}, tz is initialized as Eq. 8 such that their centers are positioned at vxk , where V̄k is the average
position of θk :
                                        tz = vxk − V̄k ◦ sz ⊙ rot(rz ) .

                                                                                                               (8)
Finally, the opacity αk is set to 0, indicating complete transparency.
Fusion. In addition to splitting, we enable dynamic superquadric fusion to enhance the compactness.
Assuming that superquadric θe and θg share the same semantic information, it is supposed that they
should be fused together. Particularly, when only one cluster appears in the attention map union
Ae ∪ Ag across all camera views, a new θK+1 will be initialized to represent the fused one.
Similar to the splitting process, rK+1 , tK+1 , ϵK+1 , αK+1 , and sK+1 are determined as the mean
corresponding values of θe and θg . Since the initial fused outcomes are quite coarse, this leads to
a sudden increase in reconstruction error and associated gradients, which heightens the instability
of the optimization and impacts convergence. Considering this, before proceeding with global opti-
mization, we temporarily freeze the gradients of ΘK and independently optimize θK+1 for ξ steps
to achieve a more precise fused geometry. Likewise, αe and αg are ultimately set to zero.
3.4 3D G AUSSIANS B INDING
To leverage the advantages of both the actionability of superquadric and the ability of 3D Gaussians
to reproduce high-quality scenes, this section establishes, enhances, and maintains connections be-
tween them.
Gaussian Binding and Inheritance. Our compositional superquadrics primarily focus on ob-
jects within the silhouette. To represent the remaining space, following the approach outlined
in (Monnier et al., 2023), we incorporate a centered icosphere primitive to model the background
dome and a plane primitive to represent the ground outside the reconstructed superquadrics, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 2. Subsequently, inspired by GaussianAvaters (Qian et al., 2024), we initialize
Gaussians G at each triangle face centers {Tkm |k ∈ K, m ∈ M } of the superquadrics, defined as
Gn∈N = {µ, q, s, α, c, idk , idt }. Here, N , M , and K represent the number of 3D Gaussians in
the scene, the primitives, and the faces within the primitives, respectively. The parameters µ, q,
s, α, and c denote the Gaussian’s position, quaternion, scaling factor, opacity, and spherical har-
monic (SH) coefficient, respectively. Additional parameters idk and idt are introduced to specify
the corresponding superquadric and face index to which each Gaussian is bound.
During rasterization, localized transformations are applied, where each Gaussian is transformed
according to the parameters of its bound triangle and superquadrics before rendering. Specifically,
we map these properties into the global space by:
                                   µ′ = µ + µt , r′ = r · Q(rt ),                                 (9)
where µt is the world position of each triangle center; rt is concatenated by the direction vector of
one of the edges, the normal vector of the triangle, and their cross product, describing the orienta-
tion of the triangle in global space as (Qian et al., 2024); Q(·) transform the rotation vector rt to
quaternions following the (Zhou et al., 2019).
Meanwhile, following the density control strategy in Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023), Gaus-
sians shall also be split or cloned within the primitive-based local space, while inheriting their iden-
tity parameters, idk and idt , to the new Gaussians. Based on the aforementioned designs, as prim-
itives undergo manipulation, each 3D Gaussian can be deleted, translated, and rotated according to
its corresponding binding triangle.
Gaussian Positional Regularization. Furthermore, a fundamental assumption behind binding is
that the Gaussian should roughly match the underlying primitives. For example, a Gaussian repre-
senting the body should not be rigged to a triangle on the cheek, as it may hinder disentanglement
and subsequent editing work. Therefore, to enhance the connection between Gaussians and primi-
tives, we implement a simple yet effective regularization loss to encourage a compact relationship
between the two throughout the optimization process, as

                              Lpos = max ∥µ∥2 , ϵpos − ϵpos 2 .                               (10)


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here ϵpos , set to 0.5, is a threshold that allows Gaussians a certain degree of freedom in their position,
enabling them to better refine the primitive-based 3D structure.
3.5   O PTIMIZATION D ETAILS
The first stage. The overall objective function for superquadric optimization is summarized as:
                                       Lf irst = Lrec + γLAC ,                                     (11)
                     s r                                                         r
where Lrec = d(I , I ) is the reconstruction loss between rendering outcome I and input silhouette
Is ; γ is the weight of LAC , which equals to 0 during first 2k warm-up iterations. Additionally,
splitting and fusion operations are performed every 1k iterations. Meanwhile, we automatically
filter out nearly transparent superquadrics, whose α is less than 0.1 following (Monnier et al., 2023).
The second stage. The overall objective function for 3D Gaussians binding and optimization is
summarized as:
                                   Lsecond = Lrgb + Lpos ,                               (12)
                           where Lrgb = (1 − λ)L1 + λLD−SSIM ,                           (13)
with λ = 0.2 following (Kerbl et al., 2023).
4     E XPERIMENT
The experimental setup is detailed in Sec.7.1 of the Appendix.
4.1   M AIN R ESULTS
Primitives Reconstruction. Experiments are conducted on DTU scenes to compare the reconstruc-
tion performance of our learnt primitives with SOTA 3D decomposition methods (Liu et al., 2022;
Monnier et al., 2023). Notably, EMS (Liu et al., 2022) is a decomposition method that utilizes the
ground truth point cloud during optimization, while DBW (Monnier et al., 2023) is the only pub-
lished primitive-based reconstruction method from 2D images that considers both decomposition
and texture.
Tab. 1 shows the CD comparison results for each scene of the DTU dataset, where our reconstructed
superquadric achieves the best performance among most scenes with the smallest Chamfer Distance.

                          Method              Input   S24    S31    S45    S59    S63    S83    S105   CD ↓
                   EMS (Liu et al., 2022)     3D GT   6.77   5.93   6.91   3.50   4.72   7.25   6.10   5.67
                 DBW (Monnier et al., 2023)   Image   4.90   3.13   3.86   4.52   5.02   4.12   6.48   4.78
                          Ours                Image   4.21   2.25   3.15   3.35   3.12   3.82   3.95   3.69

Table 1: Performance Comparison of Primitives Reconstruction Quality on DTU Scenes. Our prim-
itives achieve the best reconstruction quality in all scenes, despite relying only on 2D images.
Part-aware Semantic Coherent Decomposition. Fig. 3 shows the results of our method, Om-
niSeg3D (Ying et al., 2024) and DBW on the DTU (first 2 rows) and BlendedMVS (last 2 rows)
datasets. OmniSeg3D is a current SOTA method for part segmentation, capable of generating 3D
masks containing different semantic information (indicated by colors) from 2D inputs.
From the results, we observe that DBW exhibits unnatural decomposition and fails to segment the
scene into semantically coherent parts due to the lack of semantic guidance. For example, it incor-
rectly represents both the feet and hands of the Smurf using the same superquadric. Additionally,
without a self-adaptive splitting strategy like ours, it tends to fall into local minima, as seen with the
toy, where one ear is not represented. For the same reason, DBW is sensitive to the initial blocks
number K; in complex scenes like Gundam, it requires up to 50 initial blocks to achieve an accept-
able result. Compared to OmniSeg3D, our method achieves finer-grained semantic disentanglement.
For example, in the Smurf and Gundam scene, OmniSeg3D tends to assign a single semantic mask
to the entire instance, whereas our approach decomposes the scene into finer-grained parts.
Precise Editablity. In Fig. 4, we demonstrate the precise part-level editability of our method. For
each data, we provide visualized results in three columns: part-aware decomposition, primitives
editing (through MeshLab), and scene editing.
Reconstruction Fidelity. To evaluate the fidelity of our GaussianBlock, we compare it with one
of the current state-of-the-art reconstruction methods, Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023), and


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Dataset                         DTU                     BlendedMVS                   Truck                    Garden
           Se.   Edit
 Method                 SSIM↑   PSNR↑   LPIPS↓   SSIM↑     PSNR↑ LPIPS↓      SSIM↑   PSNR↑    LPIPS↓   SSIM↑   PSNR↑    LPIPS↓
  3DGS     ✗      ✗     98.3     35.7     8.8    94.4      33.8        9.2   84.7     25.0     17.3    86.2     27.0     10.1
 OmniSeg   ✓      ✗     97.7     33.6     9.4    93.2      29.4       10.4   82.6     23.4     18.0    85.8     25.9     13.0
  DBW      ✗      ✓     71.3     19.6    26.5    49.2      16.4       41.0    -        -        -       -        -        -
  Ours     ✓      ✓     94.3     30.7    10.3    90.8      28.8       11.2   81.3     22.0     20.7    84.8     23.1     16.9

                         Table 2: Quantitative Comparison on reconstruction fidelity.


Figure 3: Qualitative results. Our method demonstrates fine-grained, semantically coherent part-
aware decomposition.

the Gaussian-based OmniSeg3D, primtive-based DBW in the Tab. 2. Although our method does
not achieve the same or better fidelity as purely Gaussian-based approaches, it has made significant
improvements over the SOTA primitive-based DBW method, and has produced competitive results
compared to Gaussian-based approaches. However, the primary contribution of our method is not
to propose a fidelity-oriented reconstruction algorithm. Instead, our method enables semantically
coherent part-level decomposition and controllable actionability, with high but not the best fidelity.
4.2 A BLATION S TUDY
Attention-guided Centering Loss. In Tab. 3, we assess the importance of each key component of
our model by sequentially removing them and evaluating the average performance across the DTU
dataset. Additionally, the total number (#K) of effective superquadrics is presented for reference.
The #K can reflect the compactness of the decomposition performance; a common goal is to achieve
the highest compactness (the smallest #K) while maintaining the primitives performance.
Overall, LAC and splitting strategy consistently improve the primitives quality through semantic
guidance, while the fusion strategy successfully enhances the compactness decomposition with a
minor quality trade-off. An intuitive visual comparison is shown in Fig. 5 (a). While the model
without splitting aggressively uses a single superquadric to represent both the roof and the building,
the model without fusion redundantly uses multiple superquadrics to represent the same part. This
lack of compactness makes subsequent skeleton-based editing less intuitive and meaningful.
Loss Weight. In Tab. 4 and Fig. 5 (b), we assess the impact of the weight of LAC , denoted as γ, on
the DTU dataset. It is evident that with a lower γ, LAC is too weak to ensure that the superquadrics


    Figure 4: Editing Results. Our reconstructed scenes can be edited seamlessly and precisely.

                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Ablation studies on (a): Experiment settings, (b) AC-Loss weight γ, (c): Splitting thresh-
old β; (d): Regularization hyper-parameter ϵpos

can disentangle the semantic structural information in the input images. Conversely, when γ is too
high, the superquadrics tend to be small to ‘hack’ LAC , failing to meet reconstruction expectations.
Thus, in this work, γ is set to 0.2 by default.
Splitting Threshold. Additionally, given that the splitting threshold is β B̌k , where B̌k is the cor-
responding diagonal of superquadric θk reconstruction and is dynamically updated during the opti-
mization process, the impact of the weight β needs to be evaluated. As shown in Fig. 5 (c), with a
higher β, the splitting mechanism is less likely to be triggered. This results in the toy’s body and
ears in (c) not being effectively separated into individual superquadrics. Conversely, with a lower
threshold, the scene is divided more fine-grained, as seen with the arms and paws. In conclusion,
β is used to control the granularity of the deompositin and should be selected based on the desired
level of granularity for subsequent editing operations, which is set to 0.7 by default.

        Method        #K    CD↓    SSIM↑   PSNR↑   LPIPS↓            Method          #K    CD↓    SSIM↑   PSNR↑   LPIPS↓
                                                                     0.02            6.2   4.12   84.5     27.2    12.4
       Full model     5.8   3.69   94.3     30.7    10.3         γ   0.2 (default)   5.8   3.69   94.3     30.7    10.3
       w/o LAC        5.4   4.75   84.1     30.3    11.4             2               4.9   6.97   80.4     20.8    13.7
      w/o Splitting   4.3   4.24   88.6     25.7    16.5             0.5             9.1   3.56   90.4     31.7    10.1
                                                                 β   0.7 (default)   5.8   3.69   94.3     30.7    10.3
      w/o Fusion      9.2   3.46   92.5     31.0    10.1             0.9             4.4   4.85   84.3     32.9    14.8

    Table 3: Ablation studies on key components.                     Table 4: Ablation studies on βs and γs.
Positional Regularization Threshold. We also examined the impact of different thresholds ϵp os in
regularization in Fig. 5 (d). Given ϵ = 1.5, 1.0, 0.5, and 0.2, the PSNR of the reconstructed scenes
are 35.4, 33.7, 32.8, 27.3, respectively. However, during the “delete left ear” editing operation, we
observe that higher ϵ tends to perform better. This is because, with a larger threshold, the connection
between the primitives and Gaussians becomes weaker, leading to greater intertwinement between
Gaussians. For instance, the Gaussian points on the toy’s ear semantic component may become
entangled with those in the head region, causing the deletion of the ear to affect some undesired
parts. On the other hand, when ϵ is too low, the fidelity suffers, as stronger regularization constraints
prevent the Gaussians from fully refining the primitives’ structures.
5     C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose a novel part-aware compositional reconstruction method, called Gaussian-
Block, which enables semantically coherent and disentangled representations, allowing for precise
and physical editing akin to building blocks, while simultaneously maintaining high fidelity. How-
ever, our work has certain limitations. Currently, we can only perform decomposition for object-
centric entities based on their silhouette and are not yet able to handle backgrounds effectively. This
is due to the fact that backgrounds typically have more complex and detailed structures with richer
semantic information. In the future, beyond mid-level superquadrics, we plan to introduce more
diverse types of primitives, such as cuboids and curved surfaces, in combination with Gaussians.

6     ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its MOE Academic Re-
search Fund Tier 1 - SMU-SUTD Internal Research Grant (SMU-SUTD 2023 02 09), it is also
supported by the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) under its MTC Pro-
grammatic Funds (Grant No. M23L7b0021).



                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Stephan Alaniz, Massimiliano Mancini, and Zeynep Akata. Iterative superquadric recomposition of
  3d objects from multiple views. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 18013–18023, 2023.

Haotian Bai, Yuanhuiyi Lyu, Lutao Jiang, Sijia Li, Haonan Lu, Xiaodong Lin, and Lin Wang. Com-
  ponerf: Text-guided multi-object compositional nerf with editable 3d scene layout. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.13843, 2023.

Alan H Barr. Superquadrics and angle-preserving transformations. IEEE Computer graphics and
  Applications, 1(01):11–23, 1981.

Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and
  Pratul P Srinivasan. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance fields.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5855–5864,
  2021.

Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf
  360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5470–5479, 2022.

Ricardo JGB Campello, Davoud Moulavi, Arthur Zimek, and Jörg Sander. Hierarchical density es-
  timates for data clustering, visualization, and outlier detection. ACM Transactions on Knowledge
  Discovery from Data (TKDD), 10(1):1–51, 2015.

Jiazhong Cen, Jiemin Fang, Chen Yang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wei Shen, and Qi Tian.
   Segment any 3d gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00860, 2023a.

Jiazhong Cen, Zanwei Zhou, Jiemin Fang, Chen Yang, Wei Shen, Lingxi Xie, Dongsheng Jiang,
   Xiaopeng Zhang, and Qi Tian. Segment anything in 3d with nerfs. In NeurIPS, 2023b.

Wenzheng Chen, Huan Ling, Jun Gao, Edward Smith, Jaakko Lehtinen, Alec Jacobson, and Sanja
 Fidler. Learning to predict 3d objects with an interpolation-based differentiable renderer. Ad-
 vances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Yiwen Chen, Zilong Chen, Chi Zhang, Feng Wang, Xiaofeng Yang, Yikai Wang, Zhongang Cai, Lei
  Yang, Huaping Liu, and Guosheng Lin. Gaussianeditor: Swift and controllable 3d editing with
  gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 21476–21485, 2024.

Bin Dou, Tianyu Zhang, Yongjia Ma, Zhaohui Wang, and Zejian Yuan. Cosseggaussians: Compact
  and swift scene segmenting 3d gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05925, 2024.

Junha Hyung, Sungwon Hwang, Daejin Kim, Hyunji Lee, and Jaegul Choo. Local 3d editing via 3d
  distillation of clip knowledge. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12674–12684, 2023.

Rasmus Jensen, Anders Dahl, George Vogiatzis, Engil Tola, and Henrik Aanæs. Large scale multi-
  view stereopsis evaluation. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 406–413. IEEE, 2014.

Yingwenqi Jiang, Jiadong Tu, Yuan Liu, Xifeng Gao, Xiaoxiao Long, Wenping Wang, and Yuexin
  Ma. Gaussianshader: 3d gaussian splatting with shading functions for reflective surfaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.17977, 2023.

Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splat-
  ting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4), 2023.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Arno Knapitsch, Jaesik Park, Qian-Yi Zhou, and Vladlen Koltun. Tanks and temples: Benchmarking
  large-scale scene reconstruction. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 36(4), 2017.

Yuhan Li, Yishun Dou, Yue Shi, Yu Lei, Xuanhong Chen, Yi Zhang, Peng Zhou, and Bingbing
  Ni. Focaldreamer: Text-driven 3d editing via focal-fusion assembly. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 3279–3287, 2024.

Anran Liu, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Xiaoxiao Long, Zhiyang Dou, Hao-Xiang Guo, Ping Luo, and
  Wenping Wang. Part123: Part-aware 3d reconstruction from a single-view image. In ACM SIG-
  GRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, pp. 1–12, 2024.

Weixiao Liu, Yuwei Wu, Sipu Ruan, and Gregory S Chirikjian. Robust and accurate superquadric
 recovery: a probabilistic approach. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2676–2685, 2022.

Mateusz Michalkiewicz, Stavros Tsogkas, Sarah Parisot, Mahsa Baktashmotlagh, Anders Eriksson,
 and Eugene Belilovsky. Learning compositional shape priors for few-shot 3d reconstruction.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06440, 2021.

Aryan Mikaeili, Or Perel, Mehdi Safaee, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Ali Mahdavi-Amiri. Sked: Sketch-
  guided text-based 3d editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, pp. 14607–14619, 2023.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications
  of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.

Tom Monnier, Jake Austin, Angjoo Kanazawa, Alexei Efros, and Mathieu Aubry. Differentiable
  blocks world: Qualitative 3d decomposition by rendering primitives. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36:5791–5807, 2023.

Chengjie Niu, Jun Li, and Kai Xu. Im2struct: Recovering 3d shape structure from a single rgb
  image. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  4521–4529, 2018.

Despoina Paschalidou, Ali Osman Ulusoy, and Andreas Geiger. Superquadrics revisited: Learning
  3d shape parsing beyond cuboids. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10344–10353, 2019.

Despoina Paschalidou, Luc Van Gool, and Andreas Geiger. Learning unsupervised hierarchical
  part decomposition of 3d objects from a single rgb image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1060–1070, 2020.

Despoina Paschalidou, Angelos Katharopoulos, Andreas Geiger, and Sanja Fidler. Neural parts:
  Learning expressive 3d shape abstractions with invertible neural networks. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3204–3215, 2021.

Dmitry Petrov, Matheus Gadelha, Radomı́r Měch, and Evangelos Kalogerakis. Anise: Assembly-
 based neural implicit surface reconstruction. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
 Graphics, 2023.

Thomas Porter and Tom Duff. Compositing digital images. In Proceedings of the 11th annual
  conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 253–259, 1984.

Shenhan Qian, Tobias Kirschstein, Liam Schoneveld, Davide Davoli, Simon Giebenhain, and
  Matthias Nießner. Gaussianavatars: Photorealistic head avatars with rigged 3d gaussians. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20299–
  20309, 2024.

Xuebin Qin, Hang Dai, Xiaobin Hu, Deng-Ping Fan, Ling Shao, and Luc Van Gool. Highly accurate
  dichotomous image segmentation. In ECCV, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nikhila Ravi, Jeremy Reizenstein, David Novotny, Taylor Gordon, Wan-Yen Lo, Justin John-
  son, and Georgia Gkioxari. Accelerating 3d deep learning with pytorch3d. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.08501, 2020.
Matthew Tancik, Ethan Weber, Evonne Ng, Ruilong Li, Brent Yi, Terrance Wang, Alexander
 Kristoffersen, Jake Austin, Kamyar Salahi, Abhik Ahuja, et al. Nerfstudio: A modular frame-
 work for neural radiance field development. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings,
 pp. 1–12, 2023.
Konstantinos Tertikas, Despoina Paschalidou, Boxiao Pan, Jeong Joon Park, Mikaela Angelina Uy,
  Ioannis Emiris, Yannis Avrithis, and Leonidas Guibas. Generating part-aware editable 3d shapes
  without 3d supervision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 4466–4478, 2023.
Giulia Vezzani, Ugo Pattacini, and Lorenzo Natale. A grasping approach based on superquadric
  models. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1579–
  1586. IEEE, 2017.
Rundi Wu, Yixin Zhuang, Kai Xu, Hao Zhang, and Baoquan Chen. Pq-net: A generative part
  seq2seq network for 3d shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 829–838, 2020.
Yao Yao, Zixin Luo, Shiwei Li, Jingyang Zhang, Yufan Ren, Lei Zhou, Tian Fang, and Long Quan.
  Blendedmvs: A large-scale dataset for generalized multi-view stereo networks. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1790–1799, 2020.
Mingqiao Ye, Martin Danelljan, Fisher Yu, and Lei Ke. Gaussian grouping: Segment and edit
 anything in 3d scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00732, 2023.
Haiyang Ying, Yixuan Yin, Jinzhi Zhang, Fan Wang, Tao Yu, Ruqi Huang, and Lu Fang. Om-
  niseg3d: Omniversal 3d segmentation via hierarchical contrastive learning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20612–20622, 2024.
Fenggen Yu, Yimin Qian, Xu Zhang, Francisca Gil-Ureta, Brian Jackson, Eric Bennett, and Hao
  Zhang. Dpa-net: Structured 3d abstraction from sparse views via differentiable primitive assem-
  bly. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00875, 2024.
Jinyang Yuan, Tonglin Chen, Bin Li, and Xiangyang Xue. Compositional scene representation
   learning via reconstruction: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
   ligence, 45(10):11540–11560, 2023.
Yi Zhou, Connelly Barnes, Jingwan Lu, Jimei Yang, and Hao Li. On the continuity of rotation
  representations in neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5745–5753, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         Splitting


                        Input       Iter=0                Iter=4k                Iter=5k



                            Figure 6: Superquadric Splitting Visualization.

7     A PPENDIX
7.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Datasets. To explore the reconstruction quality as well as illustrate the compositional ability, several
benchmark datasets (Jensen et al., 2014; Tancik et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2020; Knapitsch et al.,
2017; Barron et al., 2022) are employed in evaluation. The DTU dataset (Jensen et al., 2014) and
BlendedMVS (Yao et al., 2020) are MVS benchmarks, encompasses diverse calibrated indoor and
outdoor scenes with annotated 3D ground truth. Nerfstudio (Tancik et al., 2023), Mip-360 (Barron
et al., 2021) and Tank&Temple (Knapitsch et al., 2017) offers a diverse collection of multi-view real
image data that spans dramatically different points in the image space.
Evaluation Metrics. Since the main challenges we focus on include part-level internal semantic
coherence, editability, and fidelity, we will primarily evaluate the performance in these aspects.
Firstly, due to the limited availability of part-annotated multi-view real datasets, we use Chamfer
Distance (CD) (Monnier et al., 2023; Jensen et al., 2014) as an auxiliary metric to quantitatively
evaluate the quality of the reconstructed primitives, answering the question of how well the primi-
tives fit the scenes. CD computes the Chamfer distance between the ground-truth points and points
sampled from the reconstructed primitives on selected DTU scenes, as our baseline DBW (Monnier
et al., 2023). Additionally, since semantic coherence and precise editablity are mainly subjective
aspects, we will present qualitative results from all five datasets for subjective evaluation. Finally,
to prove the competitive fidelity of our reconstructed scene, we will also use common metrics for
quantitative evaluation, including SSIM, PSNR and LPIPS.
Implementation Details. In the primitive optimization step, the initial K is set to 10, while the
input image is resized to 400 × 300 as (Monnier et al., 2023). Approximately 50k iterations are
performed for each scene. Besides, the splitting threshold β, the fusion warm up steps ξ and the
weight γ of the LAC are set to 0.7, 100 and 0.2, respectively. In terms of the silhouette settings, the
offline pre-trained model (Qin et al., 2022) is used to provide the instance masks.
For the Gaussian Splatting, we use Adam for parameter optimization (the same hyperparameter
values are used across all subjects). We set the learning rate to 5e-3 for the position and 1.7e-2
for the scaling of 3D Gaussians and keep the same learning rates as 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl
et al., 2023) for the rest of the parameters. We train for 20k iterations, and exponentially decay the
learning rate for the splat positions until the final iteration, where it reaches 0.01 × the initial value.
We enable adaptive density control with binding inheritance every 2,000 iterations. The overall
training time is around 6 hours on a single 4090Ti.
7.2   S PLITTING AND F USION A LGORITHM
Algorithm 2 is the specific algorithm we use for superquadric splitting, can be visualized as Fig. 6.
Additionally, Algorithm 3 is the specific algorithm we use for superquadric fusion.
7.3   FAILURE C ASES
We also include some failure cases in Fig. 7(a). As discussed in the Limitations section, our method
may encounter failure cases when fitting detailed structures, such as woods and leaves, due to the
relatively coarse and mid-level nature of the superquadric representation. In future work, we aim
to enhance our pipeline by augmenting superquadrics with a more diverse set of hybrid primitives,
such as cuboids and curved surfaces, to better address these limitations.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Split
Input: a set of clusters Sk , a set of vertices Vk , a threshold for split τ , max number of iterations T ,
    a norm factor γ
 1: if N ≥ 2 then
 2:     D ← 0N ×N
 3:     for i = 1 to N − 1 do
 4:           Mk,i = {m|A  P k,m ∈ Sk,i }
                         1
 5:           Āk,i ← M       m∈Mk,i (Pr[ñk,m |Ak,m ] · Ak,m )               ▷ weighted average among Sk,i
 6:           mk,i = arg minm∈Mk,i d(Ak,m , Āk,i )                                 ▷ find the centroid of Sk,i
 7:           for j = i + 1 to N do
 8:                Mk,j = {m|A  P k,m ∈ Sk,j }
                             1
 9:                Āk,j ← M        m∈Mk,j (Pr[ñk,m |Ak,m ] · Ak,m )         ▷ weighted average among Sk,j
10:                mk,j = arg minm∈Mk,j d(Ak,m , Āk,j )                            ▷ find the centroid of Sk,j
11:                Di,j ← d(pk,mk,i , pk,mk,j )             ▷ Calculate the distance between Sk,i and Sk,j
12:           end for
13:     end for
14:     i∗ , j ∗ ← arg maxi,j Di,j                              ▷ find the two clusters with largest distance
15:     if Di∗ ,j ∗ > τ then                                   ▷ split if distance is larger than the threshold
16:           α1′ ← αk and α2′ ← αk
17:           αk = 1
18:           ε′1 ← γεk and ε′2 ← γεk
19:           r1′ ← rk and r2′ ← rk
20:           s′1 ← 0.4sk and s′2 ← 0.4sk
                ∗                      ∗
21:           vk,1  ← Vk,mk,i∗ and vk,2    ← Vk,mk,j∗
              t1 = vk,1 − [(s1 · ( Vk )/|Vk |) · rot(r1′ )]
               ′      ∗        ′
                                     P
22:
              t′2 = vk,2
                      ∗
                          − [(s′2 · ( Vk )/|Vk |) · rot(r2′ )]
                                     P
23:
24:           freeze the parameters of other blocks
25:     end if
26: end if

Algorithm 3 Fuse
Input: all the vertices {Vk |k = 1, . . . , K}, all the bounding boxes {Bk |k = 1, . . . , K}, image
    embedding h(I)                P
 1: k ′ ← arg mink′ ∈{1,...,K} d ( vk ∈Vk vk )/|Vk |, ( v ′ ∈V ′ vk′ )/|Vk′ |
                                                        P
                                                           k   k
                                                                                      ▷ find the nearest
    neighbor
 2: B̄ = max(Bk , Bk′ )                                                       ▷ merge bounding boxes
 3: Ak = ∅
 4: for pi ∈ [Pk , Pk′ ] do
           (p)
 5:      hi ← f (p) ([pi , B̄])                                       ▷ encode point and box prompt
                                  (I)  (p)
 6:      Ai = CrossAttention(h , hi )                                         ▷ get cross attention map
 7:      Ak ← Ak ∪ {Ai }
 8: end for
 9: Sk ← HDBSCAN(Ak )                                                                      ▷ cluster Ak
10: if |Sk | = 1 then                                                 ▷ fuse if only one cluster found
11:      αk′ = 0.5αk + 0.5αk′
12:      αk = 1 and αk′ = 1
13:      ε′ = 0.5ε + 0.5εk′
14:      r′ = 0.5rk + 0.5rk′
15:      s′ = 0.5sk + 0.5sk′
16:      t′ = 0.5vk∗ + 0.5vk∗′
17:      freeze the parameters of other blocks
18:      for t = 1 to T do
19:           optimize the new fused block only
20:      end for
21: end if


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                             Level 1


                                                                             Level 2


       (a) Failure case: Unnatural decomposition under detailed structures      (b) Superquadric Resolution Comparison



                      Figure 7: Failure case and Superquadric Resolution Comparison.


                           Figure 8: Multi-view reconstrucion results.
         More multi-view reconstruction and editing results are shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9

7.4   S UPERQUADRIC R ESOLUTION C OMPARISON
As shown in Fig. 7, using a higher-resolution superquadric would enhance reconstruction quality.
However, higher resolution also implies unfair comparisons with the baseline and highly increases
the computational and memory overhead. In the future, we plan to further explore the integration
of higher-resolution and more detailed primitives into our pipeline to achieve better results while
maintaining efficiency.
7.5   M ULTI - VIEW R ESULTS


                                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Figure 9: Multi-view editing results.


                                               17
